The Project Gutenberg eBook of Leaves of Life, for Daily Inspiration
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Leaves of Life, for Daily Inspiration

Author: Margaret Bird Steinmetz

Release date: January 31, 2005 [eBook #14849]
                Most recently updated: December 19, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreaders Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF LIFE, FOR DAILY INSPIRATION ***




Produced by Stephen Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreaders Team







LEAVES OF LIFE

FOR DAILY INSPIRATION

BY

MARGARET BIRD STEINMETZ


1914


The Bible text used in this book is taken from the American Standard
Edition of the Revised Bible, copyright, 1901, by Thomas Nelson &
Sons, and is used by permission.


DEDICATED

TO THOSE WHO HAVE HELPED IN GATHERING THESE LEAVES--AND TO THOSE WHO
MAY GATHER SOMETHING FROM THEM.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Macmillan Company, New York, N.Y.
  Shailer Mathews, Jane Addams, Newell Dwight Hillis,
  Marion Crawford.

The Century Company, New York, N.Y.
  S. Weir Mitchell, Theodore Roosevelt, John Kendrick
  Bangs, Richard Watson Gilder, Edith Thomas.

Oxford University Press, London, E.C.
  Annie Matheson.

The Saalfield Publishing Company, Akron, Ohio.
  Joseph Jefferson.

Mitchell Kennerley, New York.
  Theodosia Garrison: My Litany.

Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York, N.Y.
  Charles W. Eliot: The Durable Satisfactions of Life.
  J.R. Miller.

The Pilgrim Press, Boston, Mass.
  Henry Ward Beecher.

Harper & Brothers, New York, N.Y.
  Will Carleton: Farm Legends.
  Margaret E. Sangster: Easter Bells.

Elbert Hubbard, Roycroft Shop, East Aurora, N.Y.
  Printed by special permission of the publishers.

W.B. Conkey, Hammond, Ind.
  Ella Wheeler Wilcox, copyrighted 1912.

National W.C.T.U., Evanston, Ill.
  Frances E. Willard.

American Baptist Publication Society, Philadelphia, Pa.
  W.E. Winks.

Rand, McNally & Company, Chicago, Ill.
  Marie Bashkirtseff.

Tennesseean and American, Nashville, Tenn.
  G. Rice.

Cosmopolitan Magazine, New York, N.Y.
  O. Henry.

The H.M. Rowe Company, Baltimore, Md.
  Edwin Leibfreed: Poems.

Permission from President Wilson for the excerpts from his speeches.

Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, Mass.
  Kate Douglas Wiggin, Richard Watson Gilder, Josephine
  Peabody, John Hay, Hugo Münsterberg, Edith Thomas,
  Lyman Abbott, John Burroughs, Elizabeth Stuart Phelps,
  Thomas Bailey Aldrich, Julia Ward Howe, Harriet
  Beecher Stowe, Joel Chandler Harris, Lucy Larcom,
  Bret Harte, Bayard Taylor, Alice Freeman Palmer,
  Thomas W. Higginson.

Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, N.Y.
  Henry van Dyke: Music and Other Poems.
  Maltbie D. Babcock: Thoughts for Every Day Living.
  Sidney Lanier: Poems of Sidney Lanier.
  Robert Bridges: Robert Bridges' Poems.
  George Meredith: Last Poems.
  James Anthony Froude: Short Studies on Great Subjects.
  Robert Louis Stevenson: Poems and Works.
  W.E. Henley: Poems.
  Eugene Field: Western Verse.

G.P. Putnam's Sons, New York and London.
  Arthur Christopher Benson: Along the Road, Silent Isle,
  From a College Window, Joyous Gard, Lord Vyet and Other Poems.

Little, Brown & Company, Boston, Mass.
  Emily Dickinson, Laura E. Richards, Edward Everett Hale.


George H. Doran Company, New York, N.Y.
  Sir Oliver Lodge, Arnold Bennett, J. Stalker, A.H. Begbie.

Fleming H. Revell Company, New York, N.Y.
  Percy C. Ainsworth, E.H. Divall, Margaret E. Sangster,
  J.H. Jowett, George Matheson.

Longmans, Green & Company, New York and London.
  William James.

Dodd, Mead & Company, New York, N.Y.
  Maurice Maeterlinck, Hamilton Mabie, Ian Maclaren,
  Jerome K. Jerome, G.K. Chesterton, Paul Laurence Dunbar.

Small, Maynard & Company, Boston, Mass.
  Mrs. Charlotte Perkins Gilman, John B. Tabb, Ernest Crosby.

Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Company, Boston, Mass.
  Paul Hamilton Hayne.

Doubleday, Page & Company, Garden City, New York
  Charles Wagner, Edwin Markham, Helen Keller.

E.P. Dutton Company, New York.
  George Macdonald.




JANUARY

    Janus am I; oldest of potentates;
      Forward I look, and backward, and below
    I count, as god of avenues and gates,
      The years that through my portals come and go.

    I block the roads, and drift the fields with snow;
      I chase the wild fowl from the frozen fen;
    My frosts congeal the rivers in their flow,
      My fires light up the hearths and hearts of men.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.




JANUARY FIRST

Bartolome Esteban Murillo, baptized 1618.

Paul Revere born 1735.

Betsy Ross born 1752.

Maria Edgeworth born 1767.

Arthur Hugh Clough born 1819.

    Old things need not be therefore true,
    O brother men, nor yet the new;
    Ah! still awhile the old thought retain,
    And yet consider it again!

    We! what do we see? each a space
    Of some few yards before his face;
    Does that the whole wide plan explain?
    Ah, yet consider it again!

    Alas! the great world goes its way,
    And takes its truth from each new day;
    They do not quit, nor can retain,
    Far less consider it again.

    --Arthur Hugh Clough.

    There are two sorts of content; one is connected with exertion, the
    other habits of indolence. The first is a virtue; the other a vice.

    --Maria Edgeworth.

    Oh send out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me:
    Let them bring me unto thy holy hill,
    And to thy tabernacles.

    --Psalm 43. 3.

Almighty God, lead me in the search for life. Teach me what is
important and what is unimportant; what is false, and what is true.
Remove the hindrances that keep me from the worthiest deeds, and grant
that I may have the peace that comes with surrender of self to thy
will. Amen.




JANUARY SECOND

General James Wolfe born 1727.

Colonial flag first raised 1776.

Mary Carey Thomas born 1857.

    To what profit we could use the time for our present task that we
    spend in impatient waiting and wondering over the future! So often
    the future is just one step up from the present, but some of us miss
    it by preferring to wait for an elevator.

    --M. B. S.

    Prepare to live by all means, but for heaven's sake do not forget to
    live. You will never have a better chance than you have at present.
    You may think you will have, but you are mistaken.

    --Arnold Bennett.

    He that riseth late must trot all day, and shall scarce overtake his
    business at night; while laziness travels so slowly that poverty
    soon overtakes him. He that lives on hope will die fasting.

    --Benjamin Franklin.

    Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might, for there
    is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Sheol, whither
    thou goest.

    --Ecclesiastes 9. 10.

Gracious Father, my heart burns with shame when I think how much I
claim, and how little I am. I pray that my body may not cast a shadow
to-day, and cloud the light of my life to-morrow. Cleanse the windows
of my soul that I may take in thy glory. Amen.




JANUARY THIRD

Marcus Tullius Cicero born B.C. 106.

Martin Luther excommunicated 1521.

Douglas Jerrold born 1803.

Charles Wagner (France) born 1852.

    To be continually advancing in the paths of knowledge is one of the
    most pleasing satisfactions of the human mind. These are pleasures
    perfect consistent with every degree of advanced years.

    --Cicero.

    Fidelity in small things is at the base of every great achievement.
    We too often forget this and yet no truth needs more to be kept in
    mind particularly in the troubled eras of history and in the crises
    of individual life. In shipwreck a splintered beam, an oar, any
    scrap of wreckage saves us. To despise the remnants is
    demoralization.

    --Charles Wagner.

    He that is faithful in a very little is faithful also in much and he
    that is unrighteous in a very little is unrighteous also in much.

    --Luke 16. 10

Almighty God, may I understand that thou art in everything and that I
cannot hide from thee, for thou boldest me though I know it not. Give
me the desire, and help me to learn of thy laws, that I may know that
even in the least of things, I have the liberty to obtain happiness by
obeying them. Amen.




JANUARY FOURTH

Archbishop Usher born 1580.

Jacob L. Carl Grimm born 1785.

Elizabeth Peabody died 1894.

    Years rush by us like the wind, we see not whence the eddy comes,
    nor whitherward it is tending, and we seem ourselves to witness
    their flight without a sense that we are changed: and yet time is
    beguiling man of his strength, as the winds rob the trees of their
    foliage.

    --Sir Walter Scott.

    The bell strikes one. We take no note of Time
    But from its loss. To give it, then a tongue
    Is wise in man; as if an angel spoke
    I feel the solemn sound. If heard aright
    It is the knell of my departed hours:
    Where are they?

    --Edward Young.

    Days should speak, And multitude of years should teach wisdom. And
    the breath of the Almighty giveth them understanding. It is not the
    great that are wise, Nor the aged that understand justice.

    --Job 32. 7, 9.

Lord God, help me to see my mistakes, and bring me to the realization
of my life. Grant that I may no longer use the time that thou gavest
me to learn in, heedlessly, but to give it my best thought and care.
Amen.




JANUARY FIFTH

Stephen Decatur born 1779.

Robert Morrison born 1782.

Thomas Pringle born 1789.

    Let me go where'er I will,
    I hear a sky-born music still:
    It sounds from all things old,
      It sounds from all things young,
    From all that's fair, from all that's foul,
      Peals out a cheerful song.

    It is not only in the rose,
      It is not only in the bird,
    Not only where the rainbow glows,
      Nor in the song of woman heard,
    But in the darkest, meanest things
    There alway, alway something sings.

    'Tis not in the high stars alone,
      Nor in the cup of budding flowers,
    Nor in the redbreast's mellow tone,
      Nor in the bow that smiles in showers,
    But in the mud and scum of things
    There alway, alway something sings.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    The heavens declare the glory of God; And the firmament showeth his
    handiwork.

    --Psalm 19. 1.

Almighty God, grant that my life may no longer be a noise, but be kept
in tune with the sublimest melodies, that wherever I am, there may be
no discords in the songs of my soul. Through thy loving-kindness may
my songs resound. Amen.




JANUARY SIXTH

Epiphany, or Twelfth-Day.

Joan d'Arc born 1412.

David Dale born 1739.

    'Twas even so! and thou the shepherd's child,
      Joanne, the lowly dreamer of the wild!
    Never before and never since that hour
      Hath woman, mantled with victorious power,
    Stood forth as thou beside the shrine didst stand,
      Holy amidst the knighthood of the land.

    --Mrs. Felicia Hemans.

    Every one must recognize the splendid work which has been done by
    women in social and educational fields. And it will, I believe, come
    more and more to be recognized that in some respects women are
    specially fitted for government and for official-municipal life.

    --Sir Oliver Lodge.

    Now Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, she judged Israel
    at that time. And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between
    Ramah and Bethel in the hill-country of Ephraim: and the children of
    Israel came up to her for judgment.

    --Judges 4. 4, 5.

My Father, help me to be thoughtful and just. May I consider the great
truths and broader visions that may not be seen from where I stand.
May I be willing to accept a better view. Grant that I may realize
that the battle of life is not a sham battle, but a struggle for the
advancement of life. Amen.




JANUARY SEVENTH

General Putnam born 1718.

Robert Nicholl born 1814.

T. DeWitt Talmage born 1832.

    Opportunities fly in a straight line, touch us but once and never
    return, but the wrongs we do others fly in a circle; they come back
    from the place they started.

    --T. DeWitt Talmage.

    Our share of night to bear,
      Our share of morning,
    Our blank is bliss to fill,
      Our blank is scorning.

    Here a star, and there a star,
      Some lose their way,
    Here a mist, and there a mist,
      Afterwards--day!

    --Emily Dickinson.

    Arise ye, and depart; for this is not your resting-place.

    --Micah 2. 10.

Lord God, give me the desire to be persistent in service, while I have
health and strength. May I experience the sweetness that comes in
doing the thing that I ought to have done, as well as that in which I
took the most pleasure. Help me to so live that my days may be useful,
and be recalled with bright and happy recollections. Amen.




JANUARY EIGHTH

John Earl of Stair died 1707.

Sir William Draper died 1787.

Alfred Russel Wallace born 1823.

William Wilkie Collins born 1824.

Sir Laurence Alma-Tadema born 1836.

        A blue bird built his nest
        Here in my breast.
    "O bird of Light! Whence comest thou?"
        Said he, "From God above:
        My name is Love."

        A mate he brought one day,
        Of plumage gray.
    "O bird of Night! Why comest thou?"
        Said she: "Seek no relief!
        My name is Grief."

    --Laurence Alma-Tadema.

    It is not so much resolution as renunciation, not so much courage as
    resignation, that we need. He that has once yielded thoroughly to
    God will yield to nothing but God.

    --John Ruskin.

    Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, Neither will he uphold
    the evildoers. He will yet fill thy mouth with laughter, And thy
    lips with shouting.

    --Job 8. 20, 21.

Almighty God, help me to understand that peace does not come in
rebellion or grieving, but is obtained through the calm of the soul.
Grant that if I may be perplexed or worried to-day, I may have the
power to control myself and wait in thy strength. Amen.




JANUARY NINTH

Dr. Thomas Brown born 1778.

Elizabeth O. Benger died 1822.

Caroline Lucretia Herschel died 1848, aged ninety-seven.

    Wondrous is the strength of cheerfulness altogether past calculation
    its powers of endurance. Efforts to be permanently useful must be
    uniformly joyous--a spirit of all sunshine.

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    Honest good humor is the oil and wine of a merry meeting.

    --Washington Irving.

    A laugh is worth a hundred groans in any market.

    --Charles Lamb.

    A glad heart maketh a cheerful countenance; But by sorrow of heart
    the spirit is broken.

    Better is a dinner of herbs, where love is, Than a stalled ox and
    hatred therewith.

    --Proverbs 15. 13, 17.

Gracious Father, if I am sorrowing over disappointment and am
forgetful, grant that I may see the things thou hast made, for which I
should be thankful. Help me to so live that I may have a right to
claim a cheerful heart. Amen.




JANUARY TENTH

Dr. George Birkbeck born 1776.

Michel or Marshal Ney born 1769.

Karl von Linné, Linnæus, died 1778.

Ethan Allen born 1737.

    Shall I hold on with both hands to every paltry possession? All I
    have teaches me to trust the Creator for all I have not seen.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    The practical weakness of the vast mass of modern pity for the poor
    and the oppressed is precisely that it is merely pity; the pity is
    pitiful but not respectful. Men feel that the cruelty to the poor is
    a kind of cruelty to animals. They never feel that it is injustice
    to equals; nay, it is treachery to comrades.

    --G.K. Chesterton.

    Be ye all like-minded, compassionate, loving as brethren,
    tender-hearted, humble-minded: not rendering evil for evil, or
    reviling for reviling; but contrariwise blessing.

    --1 Peter 3. 8, 9.

God of justice, may I pause to remember that while I may do a mean act
and keep it hidden from others, I cannot keep it hidden from myself,
nor from thee. Help me to have a nobler sense of the quality of life,
and less anxiety for the quantity, that I may avoid harshness and
selfishness, and be given to tenderness and justice. Amen.




JANUARY ELEVENTH

Alexander Hamilton born 1757.

Bayard Taylor born 1825.

William James born 1842.

Alice Caldwell Regan Rice born 1870.

    The paternal relation to man was the basis of that religion which
    appealed directly to the heart; so the fraternity of each man with
    his fellow was its practical application.

    --Bayard Taylor.

    It is indeed a remarkable fact that sufferings and hardships do not,
    as a rule, abate the love of life; they seem on the contrary,
    usually to give it a keener zest; and the sovereign source of
    melancholy is repletion. Need and struggle are what excite and
    inspire. Our hour of triumph is what brings the void.

    --William James.

    Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he hath been
    approved, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
    promised to them that love him.

    --James 1. 12.

Lord God, I come to thee for help that the small things may not force
themselves into my life, and keep me from pursuing the larger things
which are continually open to me. May I not be blind to what I may
have and be, through inspiration and work. Grant that I may not be
satisfied to remain in that in which I have triumphed, but climb to
greater endeavors. Amen.




JANUARY TWELFTH

Edmund Burke born 1729.

Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi born 1746.

François Coppée born 1842.

John S. Sargent born 1856.

    Show the thing you contend for to be reason; show it to be common
    sense; show it to be the means of attaining some useful end. The
    question with me is not whether you have a right to render your
    people miserable, but whether it is your interest to make them
    happy.

    --Edmund Burke.

            Like the star
            That shines afar,
            Without haste
            And without rest,
    Let each man wheel with steady sway
    Round the task that rules the day,
            And do his best.

    --Goethe.

    Love suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth
    not itself, is not puffed up.

    --1 Corinthians 13. 4.

Gracious Father, cause me to be critical of my life, that I may not be
deceived in myself. Help me to look into my soul and see what thou
dost find there; and with humility may I acknowledge what I am to
thee, and seek thy wisdom and love. Amen.




JANUARY THIRTEENTH

George Fox, founder Society of Friends, died 1691.

Samuel Woodworth (Old Oaken Bucket) born 1785.

Order of King's Daughters founded 1886.

    Have thy soul feel the universal breath
    With which all nature's quick, and learn to be
    Sharer in all that thou dost touch or see;
    Break from thy body's grasp thy spirit's trance;
    Give thy soul air, thy faculties expanse;
    Love, joy, even sorrow,--yield thyself to all!
    They make thy freedom, groveling, not thy thrall.
    Knock off the shackles which thy spirit bind
    To dust and sense, and set at large the mind!
    Then move in sympathy with God's great whole,
    And be like man at first, a _Living Soul_.

    --Richard Henry Dana.

    I was deeply impressed by what a gardener once said to me concerning
    his work. "I feel, sir," he said, "when I am growing the flowers or
    rearing the vegetables, that I am having a share in creation." I
    thought it a very noble way of regarding his work.

    --J.H. Jowett.

    For we are God's fellow workers: ye are God's husbandry, God's
    building.

    --1 Corinthians 3. 9.

Creator of all, help me to see what there is for me to do; and help me
to know that I cannot be productive if I am hovering in the choice of
my work. May I learn from thy great works of heaven and earth the ways
of selection and steadfastness. Give me the desire to work and the
confidence that is needed to carry on my work. Amen.




JANUARY FOURTEENTH

Madame de Sévigné died 1696.

Edmund Halley died 1742.

Pierre Loti born 1850.

    Are you in earnest? Seize this very minute
    What you can do, or dream you can; begin it;
    Boldness has genius, power magic in it.
    Only engage, and then the mind grows heated;
    Begin and then the work will be completed.

    --Goethe.

    Were half the power that fills the world with terror,
    Were half the wealth bestowed on camps and courts,
    Given to redeem the human mind from error,
      There were no need of arsenals or forts.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    Choose you this day whom ye will serve;... but as for me and my
    house, we will serve Jehovah.

    --Joshua 24. 15.

Almighty God, help me to appreciate the sacredness of work while I
have it to do. Grant that I may be spared the wretchedness that comes
from working with fragments from idleness. May I do my part, even if
it be in obscurity and the night overtakes me before it is done. Amen.




JANUARY FIFTEENTH

Molière born 1622.

Dr. Samuel Parr born 1747.

Edward Everett died 1865.

    The sun withholds his generous beam;
    Athwart my soul the shadows stream;
    The weird winds boisterously blow,
    And drift the melancholy snow.

    When I, in sorrow and despair,
    Expect the storm, with tender care
    He rends the clouds and through the blue
    The glorious sun breaks forth anew.

    --M.B.S.

    So with the wan waste grasses on my spear,
    I ride forever seeking after God.
    My hair grows whiter than my thistle plume
    And all my limbs are loose; but in my eyes
    The star of an unconquerable praise;
    For in my soul one hope forever sings,
    That at the next white corner of the road
    My eyes may look on Him.

    --G.K. Chesterton.

    He brought me forth also into a large place;
    He delivered me, because he delighted in me.

    --Psalm 18. 19.

Loving Father, if I may be discouraged to-day, strengthen my faith.
May I not weary of waiting for thee, but trust in thy promises. Amen.




JANUARY SIXTEENTH

Edmund Spenser died 1599.

Johann August Neander born 1789.

Edward Gibbon died 1794.

Sir John Moore died 1809.

    But lovely concord, and most sacred peace,
      Doth nourish vertue, and fast friendship breeds;
    Weake she makes strong, and strong thing does increase,
      Till it the pitch of highest praise exceeds.

    --Edmund Spenser.

    Perfect good-breeding is the result of nature and not of education;
    for it may be found in a cottage, and may be missed in a palace.
    'Tis the genial regard for the feeling of others that springs from
    an absence of selfishness.

    --Disraeli.

    Can a fig tree, my brethren, yield olives, or a vine figs? neither
    can salt water yield sweet.

    --James 3. 12.

Heavenly Father, help me to value my thoughts, words, and deeds. If at
the close of the day, there may be one who has been wounded by my
injustice, may I be willing to make quick atonement. May I avoid the
ways and words that hurt; and not only wish rightly and work rightly,
but speak to enrich others with tenderness. Amen.




JANUARY SEVENTEENTH

John Ray died 1705.

Benjamin Franklin born 1706.

George Bancroft died 1891.

    Employ thy time well if thou meanest to gain leisure; and since thou
    art not sure of a minute, throw not away an hour! Leisure is time
    for doing something useful; this leisure the diligent man will
    obtain, but the lazy man never; a life of leisure and a life of
    laziness are two things.

    --Benjamin Franklin.

    There is nothing to gain and everything to lose by despising the
    example of nature, and making arbitrary rules for oneself. Our
    liberty wisely understood is but a voluntary obedience to the
    universal laws of life.

    --Amiel.

    I will meditate on thy precepts,
    And have respect unto thy ways.

    --Psalm 119. 15.

My Father, help me to understand the power of nature, that I may be
willing to obey her laws. I pray that I may so live that my life will
proclaim itself without need of boasting or deception. Forbid that I
should spend my life in perfecting trifles, and have no leisure to
enjoy thy great gifts. Amen.




JANUARY EIGHTEENTH

Charles de Montesquieu born 1689.

John Gillies born 1747.

Daniel Webster born 1782.

    We would leave for the consideration of those who shall occupy our
    places some proof that we hold the blessings transmitted from our
    fathers in just estimation; some proof of our attachment to the
    cause of good government and of civil and religious liberty; some
    proof of a sincere and ardent desire to promote every thing which
    may enlarge the understanding and improve the hearts of men.

    --Daniel Webster.

    Brother and friend, the world is wide,
      But I care not whether there be
    The soothing song of a summer tide
      Or the thrash of a wintry sea,
    If but through shimmer and storm you bide,
      Brother and friend, with me.

    --Percy C. Ainsworth.

    Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.

    --1 Peter 2. 17.

Almighty God, I thank thee for all the tender influences of life; for
all the gentleness and strength that may be given and received through
friendship. Help me to be careful of what I do, for my sake, and for
the sake of those who may follow me. Amen.




JANUARY NINETEENTH

Hans Sachs died 1576.

William Congreve died 1729.

James Watt born 1736.

Robert E. Lee born 1807.

Edgar Allan Poe born 1809.

    I stand amid the roar
    Of a surf-tormented shore,
    And I hold within my hand
    Grains of the golden sand--
    How few! Yet how they creep
    Through my fingers to the deep,
    While I weep--while I weep!
    O God, can I not save
    One from the pitiless wave?
    Is all that we see or seem
    But a dream within a dream?

    --Edgar Allan Poe.

    Do not train up your children in hostility to the government of the
    United States. Remember that we are one country now. Dismiss from
    your mind all sectional feeling, and bring them up to be Americans.

    --Robert E. Lee.

    Wait for Jehovah: Be strong, and let thy heart take courage; Yea,
    wait thou for Jehovah.

    --Psalm 27. 14.

Lord God, I pray that if I have struggled for the wrong, and have
worked with weak hands, thou wilt forgive me for my lost strength.
Give me more light to shine upon my work, upon thy promises, and upon
my duties; and with thy wisdom may I search for the truth that is
behind every wrong, and for the purpose that is beyond all
journeyings. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTIETH

Eve of Saint Agnes.

David Garrick died 1779.

John Howard died 1790.

John Ruskin died 1900.

Nathaniel P. Willis born 1806.

    How like a mounting devil in the heart
    Rules the unreigned ambition! Let it once
    But play the monarch, and its haughty brow
    Glows with a beauty that bewilders thought
    And unthrones peace forever. Putting on
    The very pomp of Lucifer, it turns
    The heart to ashes.

    --Nathaniel P. Willis.

    Temperance, in the nobler sense, does not mean a subdued and
    imperfect energy; it does not mean a stopping short in any good
    thing, as love or in faith; but it means the power which governs the
    most intense energy, and prevents its acting in any way but as it
    ought.

    --John Ruskin.

    And thy gentleness hath made me great.

    --Psalm 18. 35.


Gracious Father, I pray that I may be willing to profit by the
experience of great teachers, and appreciate the value of strong
principles. May I too live for the higher ideals of life, and through
a sympathetic response add power and virtue to other lives, while
gaining strength for my own. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-FIRST

Miles Coverdale died 1568.

John Fitch born 1743.

John C. Fremont born 1813.

Thomas Erskine born 1750.

Thomas Jonathan (Stonewall) Jackson born 1824.

    So long as we love we serve; so long as we are loved by others I
    would almost say that we are indispensable; and no man is useless
    while he has a friend.

    --Robert L. Stevenson.

    So to the calmly gathered thought
    The innermost of life is taught,
    The mystery dimly understood,
    That love of God is love of good:
    That to be saved is only this--
    Salvation from our selfishness.

    --John Greenleaf Whittier.

    Love worketh no ill to his neighbor: love therefore is the
    fulfillment of the law. And this, knowing the season, that already
    it is time for you to awake out of sleep: for now is salvation
    nearer to us than when we first believed.

    --Romans 13. 10, 11.


Tender Father, may I not attempt to serve life for my own
gratification. May I not interpret love through vanity, but from
reality. Make me worth while, that I may be relied upon for my
pledges, and needed for my services. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-SECOND

Andrea del Sarto died 1531.

Francis Bacon born 1561.

Lord George Byron born 1788.

Queen Victoria died 1901.

    Father of light! to thee I call,
      My soul is dark within:
    Thou who canst mark the sparrow's fall,
      Avert the death of sin,
    Thou who canst guide the wandering star,
    Who calm'st the elemental war,
    Whose mantle is yon boundless sky,
      My thoughts, my words, my crimes forgive;
      And since I soon must cease to live,
    Instruct me how to die.

    --Lord Byron.

    Knowledge, whether it descend from divine inspiration or spring from
    human sense, would soon perish and vanish to oblivion if it were not
    preserved in books, traditions, conferences, and places appointed.

    --Francis Bacon.

    Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of the
    prophecy, and keep the things that are written therein.

    --Revelation 1. 3.

Almighty God, I would have thy counsel as I read the words and follow
the deeds of helpful lives, that I may be inspired to nobler
activities. Give me the desire to know more of thy holy word, that I
may have a better knowledge of life. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-THIRD

John Hancock born 1737.

William Pitt died 1806.

Charles Kingsley died 1875.

Paul Gustave Doré died 1883.

    Never lose an opportunity of seeing anything beautiful. Welcome it
    in every fair face, every fair sky, every fair flower, and thank Him
    for it, who is the fountain of all loveliness.

    --Charles Kingsley.

         Nature never did betray
    The heart that loved her; 'tis her privilege
    Through all the years of this life, to lead,
    From joy to joy; for she can so impress
    With quietness and beauty, and so feed
    With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
           *       *       *       *       *
    Nor all the dreary intercourse of daily life,
    Shall e'er prevail against us or disturb
    Our cheerful faith, that all which we behold
    Is full of blessings.

    --William Wordsworth.

    Is not God in the height of heaven?
    And behold the height of the stars, how high they are!
    And thou sayest, What doth God know?
    Can he judge through the thick darkness?

    --Job 22. 12, 13.

Lord God, I pray that I may not overlook thy blessings of beauty while
endeavoring to perform my duties. Guide me that I may not struggle to
be where thou wouldst not have me go. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-FOURTH

Charles Earl of Dorset born 1637.

Frederick the Great born 1712.

Charles James Fox born 1749.

    The great Gods pass through the great Time-hall,
      Stately and high;
    The little men climb the low clay wall
      To gape and spy;
    "We wait for the Gods," the little men cry,
      "But these are our brothers passing by."

    The great Gods pass through the great Time-hall;
      Who can see?
    The little men nod by the low clay wall,
      So tired they be;
    '"Tis weary waiting for Gods," they yawn,
      "There's a world o' men, but the Gods are gone."

    --A.H. Begbie.

    But their eyes were holden that they should not know him.

    --Luke 24. 16.

My Father, may I be careful of getting weary and missing the best
through the need of rest. Intensify my desire for the songs and
glorious ways, that I may not settle into dullness and slumber, while
others pass on in the light. I pray for a keener sense of the
possessions made possible by the deeds and cares of noble men and
women. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-FIFTH

Robert Burns born 1759.

Lord Frederick Leighton died 1896.

Daniel Maclise born 1811.

    When ranting round in pleasure's ring
      Religion may be blinded:
    Or if she gie a random sting,
      It may be little minded:
    But when on life we're Tempest-driv'n--
      A conscience but a canker,
    A correspondence fixed wi' Heav'n,
      Is sure a noble anchor.

    --Robert Burns.

    Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be clever;
      Do noble things, not dream them, all day long:
    And so make life, death, and that vast forever
      One grand sweet song.

    --Charles Kingsley.

    O Lord, by these things men live;
    And wholly therein is the life of my spirit:
    Wherefore recover thou me, and make me to live.

    --Isaiah 38. 16.

Gracious Father, grant that I may not be willing to spend my life for
trivial needs, for thou dost measure me for what I am, and boldest me
for what I lose in waste. Be with me in my judgment of what is best,
that I may make the most of my life. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-SIXTH

Lord George Sackville born 1716.

Benjamin Robert Haydon born 1786.

Mary Mapes Dodge born 1838.

General Gordon (Chinese Gordon) killed 1885.

    Ave Maria! blessed be the hour,
      That time, the clime, the spot, where I so oft
    Have felt that moment in its fullest power
      Sink o'er the earth so beautiful and soft,
    While swung the deep bell in the distant tower
      Or the faint dying day-hymn stole aloft,
    And not a breath crept through the rosy air,
    And yet the forest leaves seemed stirred with
          prayer.

    --Lord Byron.

    I am quite happy, thank God, and like Lawrence, I have tried to do
    my duty.

    --General Gordon (just before death).

    For in the day of trouble he will keep me secretly
      in his pavilion:
    In the covert of his tabernacle will he hide me;
    He will lift me up upon a rock.

    --Psalm 27. 5.

Heavenly Father, teach me how to breathe in the sweetness of life.
Reveal to me the life that will bring peace to the soul. May I not be
dismayed, but find the "Peace that passeth all understanding," the
perfect peace that comes from thee. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-SEVENTH

Johannes Wolfgang Mozart born 1756.

A.W. von Schlegel born 1767.

David Friedrich Strauss born 1808.

    To keep young, every day read a poem, hear a choice piece of music,
    view a fine painting, and, if possible, do a good action. Man's
    highest merit always is, as much as possible, to rule external
    circumstances, and as little as possible to let himself be ruled by
    them.

    --Goethe.

      Let us not always say,
      "Spite of this flesh to-day
    I strove, made head, gained ground upon the whole!"
      As the bird wings and sings,
      Let us cry, "All good things
    Are ours, nor soul helps flesh more now than flesh helps soul!"

    --Robert Browning.

    Surely goodness and loving-kindness shall follow me all the days of
    my life.

    --Psalm 23. 6.

Loving Father, help me to foresee that it is what I care for to-day
that determines how I will find old age. May I not bring my closing
years to weariness and lonesomeness, but may I have the restfulness
that comes with communing with thee. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-EIGHTH

Charlemagne died 814.

Sir Francis Drake died 1596.

Peter the Great died 1725.

Charles George Gordon (Chinese Gordon) born 1833.

    He only is advancing in life whose heart is getting softer, whose
    blood warmer, whose brain quicker, and whose spirit is entering into
    living peace. And the men who have this life in them are the true
    lords and kings of the earth--they, and they only.

    --John Ruskin.

    Just where you stand in the conflict,
      There is your place!
    Just where you think you are useless,
      Hide not your face!
    God placed you there for a purpose,
      What e'er it be;
    Think you he has chosen you for it:
      Work loyally.

    --Anonymous.

    O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of
    God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past tracing
    out!

    --Romans 11. 33.

My Father, I thank thee that thou hast endowed me with a will; help me
to use it aright. May I have the knowledge of what thou dost demand of
my soul, that I may do my best with what thou hast given me. Help me
that I may reach out for the highest ideals of life. Amen.




JANUARY TWENTY-NINTH

Emanuel Swedenborg born 1688.

Thomas Paine born 1737.

Adelaide Ristori born 1822.

William McKinley, Ohio, twenty-fourth President
United States, born 1843.

    God will keep no nation in supreme place that will not do supreme
    duty.

    --William McKinley.

    Reputation is what men and women think of us; character is what God
    and the angels know of us.

    --Thomas Paine.

    The reward of one duty is the power to fulfill another.

    --George Eliot.

    Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand,
    Upon the son of man whom thou madest strong for thyself.
    So shall we not go back from thee:
    Quicken thou us, and we will call upon thy name.

    --Psalm 80. 17, 18.

My Father, I pray that I may be just and be given to kindness. May I
be conscious of my virtues, and use them to overcome my faults. May I
hear clearly thy call that I may be sure of the way as I lead others
to duty and happiness. Amen.




JANUARY THIRTIETH

Archbishop Butler born 1774.

Walter Savage Landor born 1775.

Henri Rochefort born 1830.

    Why, why repine, my pensive friend,
      At pleasures slipped away?
    Some the stern fates will never lend,
      And all refuse to stay.
    I see the rainbow in the sky,
      The dew upon the grass;
    I see them and I ask not why
      They glimmer or they pass.
    With folded arms I linger not
      To call them back; 'twere vain;
    In this, or in some other spot,
      I know they'll shine again.

    --Walter Savage Landor.

    When disappointment comes meet it, but do not carry it along with
    you; nor fetter your spirit by changeless haste. "Memory will always
    pursue some precious instance of itself," which will bring either
    renewed confidence or resignation.

    --M. B. S.

    For thou shalt forget thy misery;
    Thou shalt remember it as waters that are passed away.

    --Job 11. 16.

Gracious Father, help me to "Lift mine eyes unto the hills" that
glorify the discouraging ways. May I appreciate thy great love, and
from my limitations find the possibilities that are limitless. Amen.




JANUARY THIRTY-FIRST

Cromwell dissolved Parliament 1655.

Charles Edward (Young Pretender) died 1788.

Franz Schubert born 1797.

James G. Elaine born 1830.

    Nature demands that man be ever at the top of his condition. He who
    violates her laws must pay the penalty, though he sit on a throne.

    --James G. Elaine.

    Dig channels for the streams of love,
      Where they may broadly run;
    And love has overflowing streams
      To fill them every one.

    For we must share if we must keep
      The good things from above;
    Ceasing to give, we cease to have--
      Such is the law of love.

    --R. C. Trench.

    And thy life shall be clearer than the noonday;
    Though there be darkness, it shall be as the morning.

    --Job 11. 17.

My Father, I would remember that it is mostly from my inspirations
that I conceive life. Take away hatred and vanity that keep me in
faults, and awake in me the thoughts that are responsible for visions
that lead to high ideals. Amen.




FEBRUARY


      Then came old February, sitting
    In an old wagon, for he could not ride,
      Drawn of two fishes for the season fitting,
    Which through the flood before did softly slide
    And swim away; yet he had by his side
    His plow and harness fit to till the ground,
    And tools to prune the trees, before the pride
    Of hasting prime did make them bourgeon wide.

    --Edmund Spenser.




FEBRUARY FIRST

Ben Jonson born 1574.

John Philip Kemble born 1757.

Arthur Henry Hallam born 1811.

George Cruikshank died 1878.

    It is not growing like a tree
    In bulk, doth make man better be;
    Or standing long an oak, three hundred year,
    To fall a log at last, dry, bald, and sere:
      A lily of a day
      Is fairer far in May,
    Although it fall and die that night--
    It was the plant and flower of Light.
    In small proportions we just beauties see;
    And in short measure life may perfect be.

    --Ben Jonson.

    There are four things which are little upon the earth,
    But they are exceeding wise:
    The ants are a people not strong,
    Yet they provide their food in the summer;
    The conies are but a feeble folk,
    Yet make they their houses in the rocks;
    The locusts have no king,
    Yet go they forth all of them by bands;
    The lizard taketh hold with her hands,
    Yet is she in king's palaces.

    --Proverbs 30. 24-28.

Creator of all, lead me to see the light, and instruct me that I may
be able to reason. Guard me against spectacular endeavors, that I may
be genuine. Amen.




FEBRUARY SECOND

Candlemas Day.

Nell Gwynn born 1650.

Hannah More born 1745.

William Henry Burleigh born 1812.

    'Twas doing nothing was his curse--
    Is there a vice can plague us worse?
    The wretch who digs the mine for bread,
    Or plows, that others may be fed,
    Feels less fatigue than that decreed
    To him who cannot think, or read.
    Not all the peril of temptations,
    Not all the conflict of the passions,
    Can quench the spark of Glory's flame,
    Or quite extinguish Virtue's name.

    --Hannah More.

    Sound, sound the clarion, fill the fife!
      To all the sensual world proclaim,
    One crowded hour of glorious life
      Is worth an age without a name.

    --Sir Walter Scott.

    He went out, and found others standing; and he saith unto them, Why
    stand ye here all the day idle? They say unto him, Because no man
    hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard.

    --Matthew 20. 6, 7.

Eternal God, who hath weighed the mountains and measured the seas, I
pray that I may not be satisfied to wait in idleness, and let thy
wisdom pass away from me as the days. Steady me in my weakness, and
reveal to me my strength as I draw near and ask of thee. Amen.




FEBRUARY THIRD

Felix Mendelssohn-Bartholdy born 1809.

Horace Greeley born 1811.

Frederick William Robertson born 1816.

Sidney Lanier born 1842.

    My soul is sailing through the sea,
    But the past is heavy and hindereth me.
    The past hath crusted cumbrous shells
    That hold the flesh of cold sea-mells
      About my soul.
    The huge waves wash, the high waves roll,
    Each barnacle clingeth and worketh dole
    And hindereth me from sailing.

    --Sidney Lanier.

    To stand with a smile upon your face, against a stake from which you
    cannot get away--that no doubt is heroic. True glory is resignation
    to the inevitable. But to stand unchained, with perfect liberty to
    go away held only by the higher chains of duty, and let the fire
    creep up to the heart--that is heroism.

    --F.W. Robertson.

    We are pressed on every side, yet not straitened; perplexed, yet not
    unto despair; pursued, yet not forsaken; smitten down, yet not
    destroyed.

    --2 Corinthians 4. 8, 9.

Gracious Father, thou knowest what I am and the condition of my life.
May I seek thy will for me. Grant that I may never struggle for
consolation through indulgence and indolence, but in my sorrow and
failure may I reach out for thy enduring comfort. Amen.




FEBRUARY FOURTH

Mark Hopkins born 1802.

W. Harrison Ainsworth born 1805.

Jean Richepin born 1849.

Thomas Carlyle died 1881.

    Life is not a May-game, but a battle and a march, a warfare with
    principalities and powers. No idle promenade through fragrant orange
    groves and green flowery spaces, waited on by coral muses, and the
    rosy hours; it is a stern pilgrimage through the rough, burning,
    sandy solitudes, through regions of thick-ribbed ice.

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    For all sweet and pleasant passages in the great story of life men
    may well thank God; for leisure and ease and health and friendship
    may God make us truly and humbly grateful; but our chief song of
    thanksgiving must be always for our kinship with him, with all that
    such divinity of greatness brings of peril, hardship, toil, and
    sacrifice.

    --Hamilton Mabie.

    Thy bars shall be iron and brass;
    And as thy days, so shall thy strength be.

    --Deuteronomy 33. 25.

My Father, help me to choose the road that leads to my work, and may I
not fail to reach it, by wandering away from it. Keep me in touch with
the human side of life, holding in mind that "Truth and honesty are
the noblest works of God." Amen.




FEBRUARY FIFTH

Sir Robert Peel born 1788.

Ole Boreman Bull born 1810.

John Muir born 1810.

Dwight L. Moody born 1837.

    When a great man dies, then has the time come for putting us in mind
    that he was alive!

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    If I practice one day, I can see the result. If I practice two days,
    my friends can see it. If I practice three days, the great public
    can see it.

    --Ole Bull.

    Those who say they will forgive but can't forget an injury simply
    bury the hatchet while they leave the handle out, ready for
    immediate use.

    --Dwight L. Moody.

    But I hold not my life of any account as dear unto myself, so that I
    may accomplish my course.

    --Acts 20. 24.

Almighty God, if I am uncertain, and tremble at the crossroads in
doubt of the right way, may I wait and be led by thee, and follow on,
even if the way be dark and rough. May I be faithful and have thy
presence as thou promised at the end. Amen.




FEBRUARY SIXTH

Queen Anne of England born 1665.

Aaron Burr born 1756.

Sir Henry Irving born 1838.

    Nothing earthly will make me give up my work in despair. I encourage
    myself in the Lord my God and go forward.

    --David Livingstone.

    To expect defeat is nine tenths of defeat itself.

    --Marion Crawford.

    I do not see how any man can afford, for the sake of his nerves and
    his nap, to spare any action in which he can partake.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Art is a jealous mistress, she requires the whole man.

    --Michael Angelo.

    Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.

    --1 Corinthians 16. 13.

Almighty God, help me to have true conceptions, that my life may not
be secured to needless purposes. May my soul be influenced by high
ideals, and my work be the production of truth and not of selfishness.
Protect me from evil that I may be kept pure and strong for my work.
Amen.




FEBRUARY SEVENTH

Millard Fillmore, New York, thirteenth President United States born 1800.

Sir Thomas More born 1478.

Charles Dickens born 1812.

Anne Radcliffe died 1823.

Sidney Cooper died 1902.

    Let no man turn aside ever so slightly, from the broad path of
    honor, on the plausible pretense that he is justified by the
    goodness of his end. All good ends can be worked out by good means.

    --Charles Dickens.

    If evils come not, then our fears are vain;
    And if they do, fear but augments the pain.

    --Sir Thomas More.

    A human heart knows aught of littleness,
      Suspects no man, compares with no one's ways,
      Hath in one hour most glorious length of days,
    A recompense, a joy, a loveliness;

    Like eaglet keen, shoots into azure far,
    And always dwelling nigh is the remotest star.

    --William Ellery Channing.

    Teach me thy way, O Jehovah;
    I will walk in thy truth:
    Unite my heart to fear thy name.

    --Psalm 86. 11.

Gracious Father, I pray that thou wilt control my impulses, and
protect me from false interpretations. May I have wisdom, and search
for the high and holy ways. Help me to be patient for thy purposes,
and may my relations to life be triumphant in thy standards. Amen.




FEBRUARY EIGHTH

Samuel Butler born 1612.

John Ruskin born 1819.

General Sherman born 1820.

Jules Verne born 1828.

Richard Watson Gilder born 1844.

    If you want knowledge, you must toil for it; and if pleasure, you
    must toil for it. Toil is the law. Pleasure comes through toil, and
    not by self-indulgence and indolence. When one gets to love work his
    life is a happy one.

    --John Ruskin.

    Whatever sceptic could inquire for,
    For every why he had a wherefore.

    --Samuel Butler.

    Through love to light! O wonderful the way,
    That leads from darkness to the perfect day!
    From darkness and from sorrow of the night
      To morning that comes singing o'er the sea.
      Through love to light! through light O God to Thee!
    Who art the love, the eternal light of light!

    --Richard Watson Gilder.

    We must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the
    night cometh, when no man can work.

    --John 9. 4.

My Father, I pray that I may not weight my life with worthless
efforts. May I be guided to the right work, and through the love of it
find strength for my soul. Amen.




FEBRUARY NINTH

C.F. Volney born 1757.

William Henry Harrison, Virginia, ninth President United States, born 1773.

Anthony Hope (Hawkins) born 1863.

George Ade born 1866.

    A man's own observation, what he finds good of, and what he finds
    hurt of, is the best physic to preserve health. But it is a safer
    conclusion to say, "This agreeth not well with me, therefore I will
    not continue it"; than to say, "I find no offense of this, therefore
    I may use it." For strength of nature in youth passeth over many
    excesses, which are owing a man till his age.

    --Francis Bacon.

    Though man a thinking being is defined,
    Few use the grand prerogative of mind.
    How few think justly of the thinking few!
    How many never think, who think they do!

    --Jane Taylor.

    Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he hath been
    approved, he shall receive the crown of life.

    --James 1. 12.

Almighty God, I would learn that while thou art a forgiving Lord,
nature has no mercy on them that break her laws. Forgive me for all my
neglect, and help me to see the way in which thou hast through mercy
led me. Give me the power to endure and the strength to resist
temptation. May I seek to understand thy laws, that I may not fail
through ignorance. Amen.




FEBRUARY TENTH

Rev. Henry Hart Milman born 1791.

Charles Lamb born 1775.

Sir William Napier died 1860.

    Never let the most well-intended falsehood escape your lips; for
    Heaven, which is entirely Truth, will make the seed which you have
    sown of untruth to yield miseries a thousandfold.

    --Charles Lamb.

    We cannot command veracity at will; the power of seeing and
    reporting truly is a form of health that has to be distinctly
    guarded, and as an ancient rabbi has solemnly said, "The penalty of
    untruth is untruth."

    --George Eliot.

    The bat hangs upside down and laughs at a topsy-turvy world.

    --Unknown.

    The lip of truth shall be established for ever;
    But a lying tongue is but for a moment.

    --Proverbs 12. 19.

Lord God, give me the will to hold to the truth and the strength to
help keep the world true; and may I help others to look up and catch
the truth from the purest light. Amen.




FEBRUARY ELEVENTH

Mary, Queen of England, born 1516.

Daniel Boone born 1735.

Lydia M. Child born 1802.

Washington Gladden born 1836.

Thomas A. Edison born 1847.

    Few, in the days of early youth,
    Trusted like me in love and truth.
    I've learned sad lessons from the years;
    But slowly and with many tears;
    For God made me to kindly view
    The world that I was passing through.

    And all who tempt a trusting heart
    From faith and hope to drift apart,
    May they themselves be spared the pain
    Of losing power to trust again!
    God help us all to kindly view
    The world that we are passing through!

    --Lydia M. Child.

    For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the
    mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing;
    and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.

    --Isaiah 55. 12.

Lord God, I pray that I may not rest my hope in self alone, but know
that the greatest joy is in the hope of the world. Help me to have
faith in mankind; and with a loyal heart and a brave spirit be as kind
to the world as I can. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWELFTH

Dr. Cotton Mather born 1663.

Peter Cooper born 1791.

Abraham Lincoln, Kentucky, sixteenth President United States, born 1809.

Robert Charles Darwin born 1809.

George Meredith born 1828.

    With malice towards none, with charity for all, with firmness in the
    right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish
    the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds, ... to do all
    which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among
    ourselves and with all nations.

    --Abraham Lincoln.

    The great moral combat between human life and each human soul must
    be single.... When a soul arms for battle she goes forth alone.

    --Owen Meredith.

    According to the grace of God which was given unto me, as a wise
    master builder I laid a foundation; and another buildeth thereon.

    --1 Corinthians 3. 10.

Almighty God, I thank thee for the courage that comes with a great
life. Help me to be brave, even if it is only that others may be
blest. May I lay a careful foundation and plan to build the best that
I can afford. Amen.




FEBRUARY THIRTEENTH

David Allan born 1744.

Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord born 1754.

Richard Wagner died 1883.

    A man is not his hope, nor yet his despair, nor yet his past deed.
    We know not yet what we have done; still less what we are doing.
    Wait till evening, and other parts of our work will shine than we
    had thought at noon, and we shall discover the real purport of our
    toil.

    --Henry D. Thoreau.

    When you make a mistake don't look back at it long. Take the reason
    of the thing into your mind, and look forward. Mistakes are lessons
    of wisdom.... The past cannot be changed. The future is yet in your
    power.

    --Hugh White.

    He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing seed for sowing,
    Shall doubtless come again with joy, bringing his sheaves with him.

    --Psalm 126. 6.

My Father, help me to survey my life. Make me compassionate and
considerate, that I may be qualified to promote that which is helpful.
May I appreciate that what is worth keeping I can obtain from thee.
Amen.




FEBRUARY FOURTEENTH

Saint Valentine's Day.

Captain James Cook killed 1779.

Jean Ernest Reynaud born 1808.

    Oh! little loveliest lady mine,
    What shall I send for your valentine?
    Summer and flowers are far away;
    Gloomy old Winter is king to-day;
    Buds will not blow, and sun will not shine:
    What shall I do for a valentine?

    I've searched the gardens all through and through
    For a bud to tell of my love so true;
    But buds are asleep and blossoms are dead,
    And the snow beats down on my poor little head:
    So, little loveliest lady mine,
    Here is my heart for your valentine.

    --Laura E. Richards.

    Oh rank is gold, and gold is fair,
      And high and low mate ill;
    But love has never known a law
      Beyond its own sweet will!

    --John G. Whittier.

    Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God.

    --1 John 4. 7.

Loving Father, may I not fall to nodding in the balmy air of luxury
and miss the messages of love. Arouse me, that I may give and take in
the treasures of love as they come my way, and that they may not pass
unnoticed. Amen.




FEBRUARY FIFTEENTH

Galileo Galilei born 1564.

Louis XV born 1710.

S. Weir Mitchell born 1829.

Sir Frederick Treves born 1853.

    The night I know is nigh at hand,
      The mists lie low on hill and bay,
    The autumn sheaves are brown and dry,
      But I have had the day.

    Yes, I have had, dear Lord, the day.
      When at thy call I have the night
    Brief be the twilight as I pass
      From light to dark, from dark to light.

    --S. Weir Mitchell.


    If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small--too
    small to be worth talking about, for the day of adversity is its
    first real opportunity.

    --Maltbie Babcock.

    Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him
    that loved us.

    --Romans 8. 37.

My Father, may my daily work not be the means of separating me from
thee, but may I have thee for my companion through my work. Forbid
that I should ever submit to despair from weakness of body, but that I
may be blest and grow strong as my spirit lives in thee. Amen.




FEBRUARY SIXTEENTH

Philip Melanchthon born 1497.

Gasper de Coligny born 1517.

Thomas Robert Malthus born 1766.

Ernst Heinrich Haeckel born 1834.

    Thy love shall chant its own beatitudes
    After its own life working. A child's kiss
    Set on thy sighing lips shall make thee glad.
    A poor man served by thee shall make thee rich;
    A sick man helped by thee shall make thee strong;
    Thou shalt be served thyself by every sense
    Of service which thou renderest.

    --Elizabeth B. Browning.

    Ask nothing more of me, sweet;
      All I can give you I give.
    Heart of my heart, were it more,
      More would be laid at your feet:
    Love that should help you to live,
      Song that should help you to soar.

    --Algernon Charles Swinburne.

    All things therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
    you, even so do ye also unto them.

    --Matthew 7. 12.

Lord God, I pray that I may not neglect the help and happiness that I
may give with compassion and love. Make me strong in all the senses
that answer to the call of humanity. Help me to guide and protect
little children, and to care for the comforts of the old. Amen.




FEBRUARY SEVENTEENTH

Kate Greenaway born 1846.

Michael Angelo Buonarroti died 1563.

Giordano Bruno burned at Rome 1600.

Molière died 1673.

Rose Terry Cooke born 1827.

Frances E. Willard died 1898.

    It is not much
    To give a gentle word or kindly touch
    To one gone down
    Beneath the world's cold frown,

    And yet who knows
    How great a thing from such a little grows?
    O, oftentimes,
    Some brother upward climbs
    And hope again
    Uplifts its head, that in the dust had lain,
    Gives place to morning's light.

    --E. H. Divall.

    I will seek that which was lost, and will bring back that which was
    driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
    strengthen that which was sick.

    --Ezekiel 34. 16.

My Father, may I not sorrow so that I fail to comfort the sorrowing,
and may I not be so happy that I fail to see that others need to be
glad. I thank thee for thy providences. May I serve thee in helping
others to brighter lives. Amen.




FEBRUARY EIGHTEENTH

Martin Luther died 1546.

George Peabody born 1795.

Wilson Barrett born 1846.

    A mighty fortress is our God,
      A bulwark never failing:
    Our helper he amid the flood
      Of mortal ills prevailing.
    For still our ancient foe
    Doth seek to work us woe;
    His craft and power are great:
    And, armed with cruel hate,
    On earth is not his equal.

    --Martin Luther.

    Let us stand by our duty fearlessly and effectively. I am not bound
    to win, but I am bound to be true. I am not bound to succeed, but I
    am bound to live up to the light that I have.

    --Abraham Lincoln.

    Jehovah is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;
    My God, my rock, in whom I will take refuge.

    --Psalm 18. 2.

Lord God, help me to lay my life in the rocks of thy foundation, and
not in moving sands which are tossed from shore to shore. May I cling
to the rock that was cleft for me and trust for thy care. Amen.




FEBRUARY NINETEENTH

Copernicus born 1473.

Leonard Bacon born 1802.

W.W. Story born 1819.

Adelina Patti born 1843.

    So mine are these new fruitings rich,
      The simple to the common brings;
    I keep the youth of souls who pitch
      Their joy in this old heart of things;

    Full lasting is the song, though he
      The singer passes; lasting too,
    For souls not lent in usury,
      The rapture of the forward view.

    --George Meredith.

    All deep things are Song. It seems, somehow, the very central
    essence of us, Song; as if all the rest were wrappages and hulls!
    the primal element of us; of us, and all things.

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    Ye shall have a song as in the night when a holy feast is kept; and
    gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come unto the
    mountain of Jehovah.

    --Isaiah 30. 29.

Lord God, help me to feel the power of praise. "As words without
thoughts never to heaven go," so the highest praises are never sung
alone, but rendered with service and love. May I have the heart to
sing thy praises far and near, and rejoice in him from whom all
blessings flow. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTIETH

J.H. Voss born 1828.

Joseph Jefferson born 1829.

Mihaly Munkacsy (Michael Lieb) born 1844.

    Who serves his country well has no need of ancestors.

    --Voltaire.

    Lo, Spring comes forth with all her warmth and
      love,
    She brings sweet justice from the realms above;
    She breaks the chrysalis, she resurrects the dead;
    Two butterflies ascend encircling her head.
    And so this emblem shall forever be
    A sign of immortality.

    --Joseph Jefferson.

    Thou wilt guide me with thy counsel,
    And afterward receive me to glory.

    --Psalm 73. 24.

Lord God, I pray that I may not neglect my soul in trying to fathom
immortal life. If I may be hesitating between comfort and work, remind
me of the greatness of the place which I started to reach. May I not
grow weary of climbing and falter on the stair. Breathe upon me thy
inspiration and love, that I may continue in faith all the way. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-FIRST

Edmund William Gosse born 1849.

Karl Czerny born 1791.

Cardinal John H. Newman born 1801.

Jean L.E. Meissonier born 1815.

Alice Freeman Palmer born 1855.

    Prune thou thy words, the thoughts control
      That o'er thee swell and throng;
    They will condense within thy soul,
      And change to purpose strong.

    --John H. Newman.

    Think truly, and thy thoughts
      Shall the world's famine feed;
    Speak truly, and each word of thine
      Shall be a fruitful seed;
    Live truly, and thy life shall be
      A great and noble creed.

    --Horatio Bonar.

    We ought to love everybody and make everybody love us. Then
    everything else is easy.

    --Alice Freeman Palmer.

    Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy healing
    shall spring forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before
    thee; the glory of Jehovah shall be thy rearward.

    --Isaiah 58. 8.

Almighty God, look upon me with pity; so often I have obeyed the
thoughts that have been misleading and profitless. Make me more
careful of what I think and say, and may I learn from my mistakes the
forbidden paths. Help me to keep my mind in unity with thy will. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-SECOND

George Washington, Virginia, first President United
States, born 1732.

James Russell Lowell born 1819.

Margaret E. Sangster born 1838.

    Labor to keep alive in your breast that little spark of celestial
    fire called conscience.

    --George Washington.

    Life is a sheet of paper white
    Whereon each one of us may write
    His word or two, and then comes night.
    Greatly begin! though thou hast time
    But for a line, be that sublime.
    Not failure, but low aim is crime.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    God keep us through the common days,
      The level stretches white with dust,
    When thought is tired, and hands upraise
      Their burdens feebly since they must;
    In days of slowly fretting care
    Then most we need the strength of prayer.

    --Margaret E. Sangster.

    Make level the path of thy feet,
    And let all thy ways be established.

    --Proverbs 4. 26.

Lord God, help me to realize the influence of the individual life. And
as I would care for my own, may I seek to do for others; and may I not
criticize, but help all who are trying to make the world better. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-THIRD

Samuel Pepys born 1633.

George F. Handel born 1685.

George Frederick Watts born 1817.

John Keats died 1821.

Margaret Deland born 1857.

    Labor is life! 'tis the still water faileth;
    Idleness ever despaireth, bewaileth:
    Keep the watch wound, or the dark rust assaileth;
      Flowers droop and die in the stillness of noon.
    Labor is glory! the flying cloud lightens;
    Only the waving wing changes and brightens,
    Idle hearts only the dark future frightens,
      Play the sweet keys, wouldst thou keep them in tune.

    --Frances S. Osgood.

    KEATS

    Palled death, with kisses ghostly,
      Wooed and won him while too young,
    And the world reveres him mostly,
      For the songs he might have sung.

    --Samuel A. Wood.

    Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
    curtains of thy habitations; spare not: lengthen thy cords, and
    strengthen thy stakes.

    --Isaiah 54. 2.

Almighty God, I pray for the will to do my finest work. Disclose to me
if I am being detained by serving selfishness in myself or in others.
Lead me to what is right for me to do; and may I diligently tarry in
it. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-FOURTH

Samuel Lover born 1797.

Robert Fulton died 1815.

George William Curtis born 1824.

    'Tis not to enjoy that we exist,
    For that end only; something must be done;
    I must not walk in unreproved delight
    These narrow bounds, and think of nothing more,
    No duty that looks further and no care.

    --William Wordsworth.

    We weave our thoughts into heart-spun plans,
      And weave secure for a fitful day,
    But lose in the web of earthly things
      The pattern of sublimity.

    Shall days spring up as wild vines grow,
      Unheeding where they climb or cling?
    Consider, child, before you sow,
      And wait not until harvesting.

    --M.B.S.

    Jehovah is my strength and my shield;
    My heart hath trusted in him, and I am helped:
    Therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth;
    And with my song will I praise him.

    --Psalm 28. 7.

Loving Father, command my judgment for the influences which I permit
to come into my life. Grant that I may not delay my purposes for the
lack of comforts which are so often made more than life. With thy
strength may I be steadfast in what I would achieve. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-FIFTH

William Seely died 1521.

Sir Christopher Wren died 1723.

Jane Goodwin Austin born 1831.

Camille Flammarion born 1842.

    In general, pride is at the bottom of all great mistakes. All other
    passions do occasionally good; but wherever pride puts in its word
    everything goes wrong.

    --John Ruskin.

    He that is proud eats up himself: pride is his own glass, his own
    trumpet, his own chronicle; and whatever praises itself but in the
    deed, devours the deed in the praise.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Save me alike from foolish pride
      Or impious discontent;
    At aught Thy wisdom hath denied,
      Or aught Thy wisdom lent.

    --Alexander Pope.

    A man's pride shall bring him low; But he that is of a lowly spirit
    shall obtain honor.

    --Proverbs 29. 23.

Heavenly Father, I pray that I may not let pride keep me down when it
may be mine to be carried to the heights. With tenderness take me out
of myself, that I may see how pride deceives, and destroys an humble
spirit. Help me to master both stubbornness and pride. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-SIXTH

Christopher Marlowe (baptized 1564).

Victor Hugo born 1802.

Lord Cromer born 1841.

Thomas Moore died 1852.

    When I go down to the grave I can say, like so many others, I have
    finished my work; but I cannot say I have finished my life; my day's
    work will begin again the next morning. My tomb is not a blind
    alley; it is a thoroughfare. It closes in the twilight to open in
    the dawn.

    --Victor Hugo.

    There's nothing bright above, below,
    From flowers that bloom to stars that glow,
    But in the light my soul can see
    Some feature of the Deity.

    There's nothing dark below, above,
    But in its gloom I trace God's love,
    And meekly wait that moment when
    His truth shall turn all bright again.

    --Thomas Moore.

    Jehovah redeemeth the soul of his servants;
    And none of them that take refuge in him shall be
    condemned.

    --Psalm 34. 22.

Lord God, may I not only feel the need of thee when I am burdened with
sorrow and care, but may I have need of thee in my pleasures and joys.
I thank thee for thy gracious kindness, thy mercy and thy protection.
Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-SEVENTH

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow born 1807.

Ellen Terry born 1848.

Mary F. Robinson born 1857.

    Lives of great men all remind us
      We can make our lives sublime,
    And, departing, leave behind us
      Footprints on the sands of time--

    Footprints that perhaps another,
      Sailing o'er life's wintry main,
    A forlorn and shipwrecked brother,
      Seeing, shall take heart again.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    They are slaves who fear to speak
    For the fallen and the weak;
    They are slaves who will not choose
    Hatred, scoffing, and abuse,
    Rather than in silence shrink
    From the truth they needs must think;
    They are slaves who dare not be
    In the right with two or three.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    Even so let your light shine before men; that they may see your good
    works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

    --Matthew 5. 16.

Merciful Father, help me to know that my shadow cannot fall without
me, and that my footprints cannot be found where I have never trodden.
I pray that thou wilt make me so familiar with the right path that it
may be mine to have the privilege of leading others to the right
places. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-EIGHTH

Montaigne born 1533.

Mary Lyon born 1797.

Sir John Tenniel born 1820.

    Soul, rule thyself; on passion, deed, desire,
    Lay thou the laws of thy deliberate will.
    Stand at thy chosen post, Faith's sentinel:
    Though Hell's lost legions ring thee round with fire,
    Learn to endure.

    --Arthur Symonds.

    The confidence in another man's virtue is no slight evidence of a
    man's own, and God willingly favors such a confidence.

    --Montaigne.

    Though a host should encamp against me,
    My heart shall not fear:
    Though war should rise against me,
    Even then will I be confident.

    --Psalm 27. 3.

My Father, may I ever be kept in remembrance of my virtue, and may I
be sensitive to its strength. As I go on my way, keep me within
control of the impetuous desires of my nature, and in call of the
duties and obligations of my daily life. Amen.




FEBRUARY TWENTY-NINTH

Anne Lee born 1736.

G.A. Rossini born 1792.

John Landseer died 1852.

    Happy is he and more than wise
      Who sees with wondrous eyes and clean
    This world through all the gray disguise
      Of sleep and custom in between.

    --G.K. Chesterton.

    In the morning, when thou findest thyself unwilling to rise,
    consider with thyself presently, if it is to go about a man's work
    that I am stirred up. Or was I made for this, to lay me down, and
    make much of myself in a warm bed.

    --Marcus Aurelius.

    Arise and be doing, and Jehovah be with thee.

    --1 Chronicles 22. 16.

Gracious Father, help me to take of the wealth of my day, while it is
in season, and accessible. May I not be ignorant of the abundance in
which I live, and be found in overwhelming regret. Forgive me for all
that I have missed in life, and make me more watchful of that which is
to come. Amen.




MARCH


    Spring still makes spring in the mind,
      When sixty years are told;
    Love makes anew this throbbing heart,
      And we are never old.
    Over the winter glaciers,
      I see the summer glow,
    And through the wild-piled snowdrift
      The warm rosebuds below.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.




MARCH FIRST

Alexander Balfour born 1767.

Frederick François Chopin born 1809.

Augustus Saint-Gaudens born 1848.

William Dean Howells born 1837.

    Thy soul shall enter on its heritage
    Of God's unuttered wisdom. Thou shalt sweep
    With hand assured the ringing lyre of life,
    Till the fierce anguish of its bitter strife,
    Its pain, death, discord, sorrow, and despair,
    Break into rhythmic music. Thou shalt share
    The prophet-joy that kept forever glad
    God's poet-souls when all a world was sad.
    Enter and live! Thou hast not lived before.

    --S. Weir Mitchell.

    Return unto thy rest, O my soul;
    For Jehovah hath dealt bountifully with thee.
    For thou hast delivered my soul from death,
    Mine eyes from tears,
    And my feet from falling.

    --Psalm 116. 7, 8.

Almighty God, grant that I may never be so discouraged that I feel my
life has been spent. Help me to so live, that I may not follow into
hopeless days, but look for the bright and beautiful in to-morrow.
Forgive me for all that I have asked for and accepted through willful
judgment, and make me more careful in selecting my needs. Amen.




MARCH SECOND

Juvenal born A.D. 40.

John Wesley died 1791.

Horace Walpole died 1797.

    Nature never says one thing, Wisdom another.

    --Juvenal.

    By all means, use some times to be alone;
      Salute thyself--see what thy soul doth wear;
    Dare to look in thy chest, for 'tis thine own,
      And tumble up and down what thou findest there.

    --William Wordsworth.

    Lonesomeness is part of the cost of power. The higher you climb, the
    less can you hope for companionship. The heavier and the more
    immediate the responsibility, the less can a man delegate his tasks
    or escape his own mistakes.

    --Shailer Mathews.

    But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thine inner chamber, and
    having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret, and thy
    Father who seeth in secret shall recompense thee.

    --Matthew 6. 6.

My Father, I pray that thou wilt take care of my thoughts when I am
alone and tired, and keep them strong and clean. Grant that while I
commune with thee I may yield to my needs and be restored with keener
energy for worthier deeds. May I ask of thy wisdom every day. Amen.




MARCH THIRD

Edmund Waller born 1605.

George Herbert died 1633.

Christine Nilsson born 1843.

    Pitch thy behaviour low, thy projects high,
      So shalt thou humble and magnanimous be;
    Sink not in spirit: who aimeth at the sky,
      Shoots higher than he that means a tree.

    --George Herbert.

    We and God have business with each other; and in opening ourselves
    to his influence our deepest destiny is fulfilled.

    --William James.

    While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
    which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal; but
    the things which are not seen are eternal.

    --2 Corinthians 4. 18.

Almighty God, help me to remember that "the power of character is the
highest point of success," and that thou hast put within reach of all
the choice ideals of life. May I have the desire to cultivate strong
purposes, and strive for high endeavors, that I may not aim for the
low. Amen.




MARCH FOURTH

Casimer Pulaski born 1748.

Sir Henry Raeburn born 1756.

E.W. Bull, originator Concord grape, born 1806.

Alexander Graham Bell born 1847.

    It is perfectly obvious that men do necessarily absorb, out of the
    influences in which they grow up, something which gives a complexion
    to their whole after-character.

    --Anthony Froude.

    All common things, each day's events
      That with the hour begin and end,
    Our pleasures and our discontents
      Are rounds by which we may ascend.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    Our doubts are traitors, and make us lose the good we oft might win
    by fearing to attempt. I

    --Shakespeare.

    And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
    slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead; and the stone
    sank into his forehead, and he fell upon his face to the earth.

    --1 Samuel 17. 49.

My Father, I would remember that my life may decline from the neglect
of small things; for as thou dost nourish the wheat from flakes of
snow, and supply the springs from drops of rain, so thou wilt
strengthen my soul from every little blessing. I pray that I may not
forget to watch my habits, and keep track of the hours that culture
and sustain my life. Amen.




MARCH FIFTH

Correggio died 1534.

Howard Pyle born 1853.

Arthur Foote born 1853.

    When I have the time so many things I'll do,
      To make life happier and more fair
      For those whose lives are crowded now with care,
      I'll help to lift them from their low despair
        When I have time.

    When I have time the friend I love so well
      Shall know no more the weary, toiling days;
      I'll lead his feet in pleasant paths always,
      And cheer his heart with words of sweetest praise,
        When I have time.

    Now is the time! Speed, friend; no longer wait
      To scatter loving smiles and words of cheer
      To those around whose lives are drear;
      They may not need you in the far-off year:
        Now is the time.

    --Unknown.

    Behold now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of
    salvation.

    --2 Corinthians 6. 2.

Lord God, teach me this day to know that the veriest trifle often
keeps happiness alive, and that the smallest trifle often may kill it.
I pray that now thou wilt put within my heart that touch of love,
which brings consideration for others, and the care that brings the
greatest happiness. Amen.




MARCH SIXTH

Michael Angelo Buonarroti born 1475.

Elizabeth Barrett Browning born 1806.

George du Maurier born 1831.

      Beloved, let us love so well
    Our work shall still be better for our love,
    And still our love be sweeter for our work:
    And both commended for the sake of each
      By all true workers and true lovers born.

    --Elizabeth B. Browning.

    Earth saddens, never shall remove,
      Affections purely given;
    And e'en that mortal grief shall prove
      The immortality of love,
    And heighten it with heaven.

    --Elizabeth B. Browning.

    And if I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and if I give my body
    to be burned, but have not love, it profiteth me nothing.

    --1 Corinthians 13. 3.

Loving Father, I pray that I may not try to change the standard of
love by grafting on my own selfishness and infirmities. May I remember
that it is mostly for gratification that love is held to the base in
life; may I follow it to the summits, where it is divine. Amen.




MARCH SEVENTH

Sir Thomas Wilson died 1755.

Sir Edwin Landseer born 1802.

Luther Burbank born 1849.

    Earth gets its price for what it gives us;
      The beggar is taxed for a corner to die in,
    The priest has his fee who comes and shrives us,
      We bargain for the graves we lie in;
    At the devil's booth are all things sold,
      Each ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold;
    For a cap and bells our lives we pay,
      Bubbles we buy with a whole soul's tasking;
    'Tis heaven alone that is given away,
    'Tis only God may be had for the asking.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    We are our own fates. Our own deeds
    Are our doomsmen. Man's life was made
    Not for men's creeds,
    But men's actions.

    --Owen Meredith.


    The free gift of God is eternal life.

    --Romans 6. 23.


Gracious Father, may the world speak to me of thy love, and of thy
gifts of peace and power, which it freely offers. May I not pass by
its great values, and prefer to purchase at a great cost my indolence
and dissipation.

--Amen.




MARCH EIGHTH

Dr. John Fothergill born 1712.

C.P. Cranch born 1813.

Anna Letitia Barbauld died 1825.

    O boundless self-contentment voiced
      In flying air-born bubbles!
    O joy that mocks our sad unrest,
      And frowns our earth-born troubles!

    The life that floods the happy fields
      With song and light and color,
    Will shape our lives to richer states
      And heap our measures fuller.

    --C.P. Cranch.

    One may secure and preserve that repose in the turbulence of a great
    city--as Shakespeare surely found and preserved it in the London of
    the sixteenth century. For repose does not depend on external
    conditions; it depends on sound adjustment to tasks, opportunities,
    pleasures, and the general order of life.

    --Hamilton Mabie.

    That we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in godliness and gravity.

    --1 Timothy 2.2.

Gracious Father, help me to understand that peace cannot abide in
misery, nor can it stay with every mood. May I be able to overcome the
depression that may keep me in sadness and isolation, and have delight
in the gladness of friends, and live in the peace of strong
resolutions. Amen.




MARCH NINTH

Americus Vespucius born 1451.

Lewis Gonzaga born 1568.

Comte de Mirabeau born 1749.

William Cobbett born 1762.

Edwin Forrest born 1806.

    Yet nerve thy spirit to the Proof, and blanch not at thy chosen lot;
    The timid good may stand aloof, the sage may frown--yet faint thou not;
    Nor heed the shaft too surely cast, the foul and hissing bolt of scorn;
    For with thy Side shall dwell, at last, the victory of endurance born.

    --William C. Bryant.

    You cannot dream yourself into a character; you must hammer and
    forge yourself into one.

    --James Anthony Froude.

    Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the days that I
    shall deal with thee?

    --Ezekiel 22.14.

Loving Father, search me, and if there be any evil ways in me, correct
them, and lead me into the ways everlasting. I pray that I may not be
deformed from selfishness, but with a lowly and expectant heart run
with patience and triumph the race that is set before me. Amen.




MARCH TENTH

Bishop Duppa born 1698.

Professor Playfair born 1748.

Charles Loyson (Père Hyacinthe) born 1827.

    So he died by his faith. That is fine--
      More than the most of us do.
    But stay. Can you add to that line
      That he lived for it too?

    It is easy to die. Men have died
      For a wish or a whim--
    From bravado or passion or pride.
      Was it hard for him?

    But to live: every day to live out
      All the truth that he dreamt,
    While his friends met his conduct with doubt,
      And the world with contempt.

    Was it thus that he plodded ahead,
      Never turning aside?
    Then we'll talk of the life that he led.
      Never mind how he died.

    --Ernest Crosby.

    For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the
    Lord Jehovah: wherefore turn yourselves, and live.

    --Ezekiel 18. 32.

Almighty God, help me to live an upright life. Give me courage to
abandon useless customs, and seeming duties that keep me from
perfecting my life. Amen.




MARCH ELEVENTH

Torquato Tasso born 1544.

Alexander Mackenzie died 1820.

Henry Drummond died 1897.

    There is nothing that is puerile in nature; and he who becomes
    impassioned of a flower, a blade of grass, a butterfly's wing, a
    nest, a shell, wraps around a small thing that always contains a
    great truth. To succeed in modifying the appearance of a flower is
    insignificant in itself, if you will; but reflect upon it for
    however short a while and it becomes gigantic.

    --Maurice Maeterlinck.

    O world, as God has made it! All is beauty:
    And knowing this, is love, and love is duty:
    What further may be sought for or declared?

    --Robert Browning.

    Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not,
    neither do they spin: yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all
    his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

    --Matthew 6. 28, 29.

Creator of all, I do know that if I may hold myself close enough, I
can hear restful music through the breeze, and find secrets in the
flowers and leaves. I rejoice that thou hast made the woods and rivers
that thou dost love, so I too might possess them, and not be a tenant
of them only. May I look and study deeper the things which bring me
closer to thee. Amen.




MARCH TWELFTH

Cesare Borgia killed 1507.

Bishop Buckley born 1684.

Simon Newcomb born 1835.

    Among the happiest and proudest possessions of a man is his
    character. It is a wreath, it is a bank in itself. What is the
    essence and life of character? Principle, integrity, independence.

    --Bulwer Lytton.

    No great genius was ever without some mixture of madness, nor can
    anything grand or superior to the voice of common mortals be spoken
    except by the agitated soul.

    --Aristotle.

    Handsome is that handsome does.

    --Oliver Goldsmith.

    Since thou hast been precious in my sight, and honorable, and I have
    loved thee; therefore will I give men in thy stead, and peoples
    instead of thy life.

    --Isaiah 43. 4.

Lord God, forbid that I should try to supplant character with manners
and worldly goods. May I remember that thou seest me, and knowest me,
and I need no shield from thee. Help me that I may be found acceptable
while thou dost search me to the depths of the soul. Amen.




MARCH THIRTEENTH

Joseph Priestley born 1733.

Esther Johnson (Stella) born 1681.

Regina Maria Roche died 1845.

    If stores of dry and learned lore we gain
    We keep them in the memory of the brain;
    Names, things, and facts--whate'er we knowledge call,
    There is the common ledger for them all;
    And images on this cold surface traced
    Make slight impressions and are soon effaced.
    But we've a page more glowing and more bright
    On which our friendship and our love to write;
    That these may never from the soul depart,
    We trust them to the memory of the heart.
    There is no dimming--no effacement here;
    Each pulsation keeps the record clear;
    Warm golden letters all the tablet fill,
    Nor lose their luster till the heart stands still.

    --Daniel Webster.

    I often wonder why it is that we are not all kinder than we are. How
    much the world needs it! How easily it is done! How instantaneously
    it acts! How infallibly it is remembered!

    --Henry Drummond.

    Cast thy bread upon the waters; for thou shalt find it after many
    days.

    --Ecclesiastes 11. 1.

My Father, thou hast taught me through the gifts of life, that there
is no labor or price too dear to pay for love. I pray to love thee
more that I may have more love to bestow on others. Amen.




MARCH FOURTEENTH

Thomas H. Benton born 1782.

Johann Strauss born 1804.

Victor Emmanuel born 1820.

    Rivers to the ocean run,
      Nor stay in all their course;
    Fire ascending seeks the sun;
      Both speed them to their source;
    So a soul that's born of God,
      Pants to view his glorious face,
    Upward tends to his abode,
      To rest in his embrace.

    --Robert Seagrave.

    As the bird trims her to the gale
      I trim myself to the storm of time;
    I man the rudder, reef the sail,
      Obey the voice at eve obeyed at prime;
    Lowly faithful, banish fear,
    The port well worth the cruise is near
      And every wave is charmed.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    As the hart panteth after the water brooks,
    So panteth my soul after thee, O God.

    --Psalm 42. 1.

My Father, I pray that if I meet with difficulty, I may not go
backward, nor stand still, and fear to go forward. Unfold to me the
depth and breadth of the ideal and beautiful, that I may not be
content to succeed in the shallowness of life: but may I aspire to the
height of the soul, even if I fail to acquire great things. Amen.




MARCH FIFTEENTH

Julius Cæsar killed B.C. 44.

Peasants War began 1512.

Andrew Jackson, North Carolina, seventh President
United States, born 1767.

John Davenport died 1670.

    I will take the responsibility!

    --Andrew Jackson.

    What ought to be possible for everyone is to arrive at a sort of
    harmony of life, to have definite things that they want to do....
    The people whom it is hard to fit into any scheme of benevolent
    creation are the vague, insignificant, drifting people, whose only
    rooted tendency is to do whatever is suggested to them.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    Heard are the voices,
      Heard are the sages,
      The worlds, and the ages;
    Choose well! your choice is
      Brief and endless.

    --Goethe.

    Only be strong and very courageous, to observe to do according to
    all the law....

    --Joshua 1. 7.

Gracious Father, I pray that thou wilt free me from evil thoughts
before they become a habit. Create in me that freedom which makes me
not ashamed to acknowledge the wrong, and which will enable me to
stand for the right. Quicken my thoughts, that they may keep my heart
inspired. Amen.




MARCH SIXTEENTH

James Madison, Virginia, fourth President United
States, born 1751.

Caroline Lucretia Herschel born 1750.

Alexander Watts born 1797.

    If we live truly we shall see truly. It is as easy for the strong
    man to be strong as it is for the weak to be weak. When we have new
    perception we shall gladly disburthen the memory of the hoarded
    treasures as old rubbish. When a man lives with God his voice shall
    be as sweet as the murmur of the brook and the rustle of the corn.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    The tissue of the life to be,
      We weave with colors all our own,
    And in the field of Destiny
      We reap as we have sown.

    --Raphael.

    Now when they beheld the boldness of Peter and John, and had
    perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marveled;
    and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus.

    --Acts 4. 13.

Lord God, quiet me if I am not calm, that my soul may be able to
contemplate and have an opportunity to grow. Help me, that I may be
able even in discouragements to have the true perception of life.
Amen.




MARCH SEVENTEENTH

Saint Patrick's Day.

Ebenezer Elliott born 1781.

Dr. Thomas Chalmers born 1780.

Moncure D. Conway born 1832.

Clara Morris born 1849.

What is really wanted is to light up the spirit
that is within a child. In some sense and in some
effectual degree there is in every child the material
of good work in the world; and in every child, not
only in those who are brilliant, not only in those
who are quick, but in those who are stolid, and even
in those who are dull.

--William Gladstone.

If you make children happy now, you will make
them happy twenty years hence by the memory of
it.

--Kate Douglas Wiggin.

And these words, which I command thee this day,
shall be upon thy heart; and thou shalt teach them
diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them
when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and
when thou risest up.

--Deuteronomy 6. 6, 7.

Lord God, may I be diligent for the progress of
little children. Show me how I may minister unto
them; and grant that I may be able to see the
necessity of giving, more than I do the pleasure of
receiving. Amen.




MARCH EIGHTEENTH

William Byrd died 1674.

John C. Calhoun born 1782.

Grover Cleveland, New Jersey, twenty-second President
United States, born 1837.

    My minde to me a kingdom is:
      Such perfect joy therein I finde
    As far exceeds all earthly blisse
      That God or nature hath assignede.

    --William Byrd.

    Teach your proud will to make those nobler choices
      Which bring to soul and heart enduring health.
    Deafen your ears to those contending voices,
      Look in your heart, learn your own being's wealth.
    Its resources vast, its undiscovered treasure
      Waiting for these same idle hands to mine.
    Learn that the grandest of Nature's creations
      May not be bounded by man's limitations.

    --Rose E. Cleveland.

    But he is in one mind, and who can turn him?
    And what his soul desireth, even that he doeth.

    --Job 23. 13.

Almighty God, grant that I may never succumb to the controlling
influences of the body, and lose the power of my mind. May I guard the
dictates of my heart and keep my mind in command to obey thy will.
Amen.




MARCH NINETEENTH

David Livingstone born 1813.

Alice French (Octave Thanet) born 1850.

William Jennings Bryan born 1860.

    Isn't it interesting to get blamed for everything? But I must be
    thankful in feeling that I would rather perish than blame another
    for my misdeeds and deficiencies.

    --David Livingstone.

    Criticism is helpful. If a man makes a mistake, criticism enables
    him to correct it; if he is unjustly criticized, the criticism helps
    him. I have had my share of criticism since I have been in public
    life, but it has not prevented me from doing what I thought proper
    to do.

    --William Jennings Bryan.

    For himself hath said, I will in no wise fail thee, neither will I
    in any wise forsake thee. So that with good courage we say, The Lord
    is my helper; I will not fear.

    --Hebrews 13. 5, 6.

Loving Father, I thank thee that thou art the same yesterday, to-day,
and forever; and I am glad I cannot receive from thee the slights and
wounds that I may give or receive from my friends. May I be
considerate and more forgiving, and by my sincerity be worthy of the
purpose which I pursue. Amen.




MARCH TWENTIETH

Publius Ovidius (Ovid) born B.C. 43.

Sir Isaac Newton died 1727.

Karl August Nicander born 1799.

Henrik Ibsen born 1828.

    Whoever is not with me in the essential things of life, him I no
    longer know--I owe him no consideration.

    --Henrik Ibsen.

    Only he who lives in truth finds it. The deepest truth is not born
    of conscious striving, but comes in the quiet hour when a noble
    nature gives itself into the keeping of life, to suffer, to feel, to
    think, and to act as it is moved by a wisdom not its own.

    --Hamilton Mabie.

    Forgetting the things which are behind, and stretching forward to
    the things which are before, I press on toward the goal unto the
    prize of the high calling of God.

    --Philippians 3. 13, 14.

Lord God, I thank thee for the silent ways of revelation which bring
hopeful communion with thee. Help me to be composed, that my life may
not create a noise and my soul miss the messages that come from the
depths of truth and love. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-FIRST

Johann Sebastian Bach born 1685.

Archbishop Cranmer burnt at Oxford 1556.

Jean Paul Richter born 1763.

Henry Kirke White born 1785.

    Go through life with soft influences breathing around thee. Keep thy
    heart high above the many-colored mist of earth and above its storm
    clouds.

    --Jean Paul Richter.

    Recollection is the only paradise from which we cannot be turned
    out.

    --Jean Paul Richter.

    Come, Disappointment, come!
      Thou art not stern to me;
    Sad monitress! I own thy sway,
    A votary sad in every day,
      I bend my knee to thee,
          From sun to sun
          My race will run;
    I only bow, and say, My God, thy will be done!

    --Henry Kirke White.

    If I say, I will forget my complaint,
    I will put off my sad countenance, and be of good cheer.

    --Job 9. 27.

Gracious Father, help me to respond cheerfully when called upon to
give. May I never repent of tenderness which others fail to
appreciate, but may I be glad of all that I give and for all I
receive. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-SECOND

Sir Anthony Vandyke born 1599.

Caroline Sheridan Norton born 1808.

Johann Goethe died 1832.

Dr. Farrar, Dean of Canterbury, died 1903.

Rosa Bonheur born 1822.

    Red Love still rules the day, white Faith enfolds the night,
    And hope, green-mantled, leads the way by the walls of the City of Light.
    Therefore I walk as one who sees the joy shine through
    Of the other Life behind our life, like the stars behind the blue.

    --Dean Farrar.

    There can be no greater delight than is experienced by a man who, by
    his own unaided resources, frees himself from the consequences of
    error: Heaven looks down with satisfaction upon such a spectacle.

    --Goethe.

    Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold a
    land that reacheth afar.

    --Isaiah 33. 17.

Lord God, help me to remember that I may not only be forgiven for my
transgression, but with thy help I may be led away from the wrong. May
I be content to follow where thou dost lead. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-THIRD

Pierre Savant La Place born 1749.

Schuyler Colfax born 1823.

Richard A. Proctor born 1837.

    Silence is the element in which great things fashion themselves
    together; that at length they may emerge, full-formed and majestic,
    into the daylight of life.... Nay, in thy own mean perplexities, do
    thou thyself but hold thy tongue for one day; on the morrow how much
    clearer are thy purposes and duties!

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    Deliberate much before you say and do anything; for it will not be
    in your power to recall what is said or done.

    --Epictetus.

    Set a watch, O Jehovah, before my mouth;
    Keep the door of my lips.

    --Psalm 141. 3.

My Lord, make me a lover of the truth. Make me careful of my thoughts,
and the words I would speak, that I may not think selfishly and speak
cruelly, but keep myself holy unto thee. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-FOURTH

Queen Elizabeth died 1603.

Fanny Crosby born 1820.

Henry W. Longfellow died 1882.

Sir Edwin Arnold died 1904.

Every quivering tongue of flame
Seems to murmur some great name,
  Seems to say to me "Aspire!"
No endeavor is in vain;
Its reward is in the doing,
And the rapture of pursuing
  Is the prize of vanquished gain.

--Henry W. Longfellow.

    Never be sad or desponding
      If thou hast faith to believe;
    Grace for the duties before thee
      Ask of thy God and receive.

    --Fanny Crosby.

    I spread forth my hands unto thee:
    My soul thirsteth after thee, as a weary land.

    --Psalm 143. 6.

Almighty God, make me conscious of my weaknesses, and make me ashamed
of my indulgences. Give me a victory over self; and may I consider
more what I put in my life. May I be eager for that which will inspire
me for greater aspirations. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-FIFTH

Archbishop John Williams born 1582.

Joachim Murat born 1771.

Anna Seward died 1809.

    How awful is the thought of the wonders underground,
    Of the mystic changes wrought in the silent, dark profound!
    How each thing upward tends by necessity decreed,
    And the world's support depends on the shooting of a seed!

    The summer's in her ark, and this sunny-pinioned day
    Is commissioned to remark whether Winter holds her sway:
    Go back, thou dove of peace, with myrtle on thy wing,
    Say that floods and tempests cease, and the world is ripe for Spring.

    --Horace Smith.

    I should never have made my success in life if I had not bestowed
    upon the least thing I have ever undertaken the same attention and
    care that I have bestowed upon the greatest.

    --Charles Dickens.

    Gather up the broken pieces which remain over, that nothing be lost.

    --John 6. 12.

Loving Father, cause me to learn from nature that to have perfection I
must be attentive at the beginning of growth. Help me to select with
care the soil wherein I plant; and to weed and cultivate my life that
it may grow to beauty and usefulness. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-SIXTH

Konrad von Gesner born 1516.

W. E. H. Lecky born 1838.

Gustave Guillaumet born 1840.

Walt Whitman died 1892.

    Every man takes care that his neighbor shall not cheat him, but a
    day comes when he begins to care that he do not cheat his neighbor.
    Then all goes well. He has changed his market-cart into a chariot of
    the sun.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    He that is unacquainted with the nature of the world must be at a
    loss to know where he is. And he that cannot tell the ends he was
    made for is ignorant both of himself and the world too.

    --Marcus Aurelius.

    Give diligence to present thyself approved unto God, a workman that
    needeth not to be ashamed, handling aright the word of truth.

    --2 Timothy 2. 15.

Almighty God, may I not only approve of justice and kindness, but
practice it. Grant that I may be attentive to the call of work and
steadfast in completing it. May I be sincere to those who are dear to
me, and never falter in my support to those who are dependent upon me.
Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-SEVENTH

Alfred Vigny born 1799.

General A. W. Greely born 1847.

Sir Gilbert Scott died 1878.

    It takes great strength to bring your life up square
    With your accepted thought and hold it there:
    Resisting the inertia that drags it back
    From new attempts, to the old habit's track.
    It is so easy to drift back, to sink.
    So hard to live abreast of what you think.

    --Charlotte Perkins Stetson.

    If a person had delivered up your body to anyone whom he met in his
    way, you would certainly be angry. And do you feel no shame in
    delivering up your own mind to be disconcerted and confounded by
    anyone who happens to give you ill language.

    --Epictetus.

    Wherefore, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly
    vision.

    --Acts 26. 19.

My Father, my soul sinks with shame when I think of the great moments
that I have given over to mean little things. Help me that I may
reckon more on the value of time, and live not to tolerate life, but
to have a great need for it, that day by day I may have a deeper
consciousness of its appropriate use. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-EIGHTH

Santi d'Urbino Raphael born 1483.

Sir Thomas Smith born 1514.

Margaret (Peg) Woffington died 1760.

    They may not need me,
      Yet they might;
    I'll let my heart be
      Just in sight--

    A smile so small
      As mine might be
    Precisely their
      Necessity.

    --Unknown.

    You hear that boy laughing?--you think he's all fun;
    But the angels laugh too at the good he has done;
    The children laugh loud as they troop to his call,
    And the poor man that knows him laughs loudest of all.

    --Oliver Wendell Holmes.

    Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and railing,
    be put away from you, with all malice: and be ye kind one to
    another, tender-hearted, forgiving each other.

    --Ephesians 4. 31.

Lord God, I pray that I may be fair, and not pass judgment on those
whom I like or those whom I dislike, and so bring unhappy regrets. May
I remember that, though hasty judgment often may be temporary, the
gain or loss of a friend may be permanent. Amen.




MARCH TWENTY-NINTH

Dr. John Lightfoot born 1602.

John Tyler, Virginia, tenth President United States,
born 1790.

Amelia Barr born 1831.

    The year's at the spring
    And the day's at the morn;
    The hillside's dew-pearled;
    The lark's on the wing:
    The snail's on the thorn;
    God's in his heaven:
    All's well with the world.

    --Robert Browning.

    Dear Lord and Father of mankinds
      Forgive our feverish ways;
    Reclothe us in our rightful mind;
    In purer lives thy service find,
      In deeper reverence praise.

    --John G. Whittier.

    In quietness and in confidence shall be your strength.

    --Isaiah 30. 15.

Lord God, I beseech thee to give me the strength which endures. Grant
that I may have the ceaseless content which is secured by choosing and
continuing in the right way. From the wealth of each day renew my
hope, and quiet my soul with the calm of thy peace. Amen.




MARCH THIRTIETH

Sir Henry Wotton born 1568.

Archbishop Somner born 1606.

John Fiske born 1842.

John Constable died 1837.

    I said, "Let us walk in the field."
      He said, "Nay walk in the town."
    I said, "There are no flowers there."
      He said, "No flowers but a crown."

    I said, "But the air is thick,
      And the fogs are veiling the sun."
    He answered, "Yet souls are sick
      And souls in the dark undone."

    I cast one look at the field,
      Then set my face to the town.
    He said: "My child, do you yield?
      Will ye leave the flowers for the crown?"

    Then into his hand went mine
      And into my heart came He,
    And I walked in a light divine
      The path I had feared to see.

    --George Macdonald.

    Now therefore amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of
    Jehovah your God.

    --Jeremiah 26. 13.

Eternal God, teach me the way of a complete and unbroken trust. In my
disappointments, and in my devotions, may my faith and hope be as
immortal as my soul. May I listen for thy voice and answer thy call.
Amen.




MARCH THIRTY-FIRST

Ludwig von Beethoven died 1827.

Joseph Francis Haydn born 1732.

Andrew Lang born 1844.

Charlotte Brontë died 1855.

    The Great Being unseen, but all-present, who in his beneficence
    desires only our welfare, watches the struggle between good and evil
    in our hearts, and waits to see whether we obey his voice, heard in
    the whispers of conscience, or lend an ear to the Spirit Evil, which
    seeks to lead us astray. Rough and steep is the path indicated by
    divine suggestion; mossy and declining the green way along which
    temptation strews flowers. Then conscience whispers, "Do what you
    feel is right, obey me, and I will plant for you firm footing."

    --Charlotte Brontë.

    God help us do our duty, and not shrink,
    And trust in heaven humbly for the rest.

    --Owen Meredith.

    I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that I have
    set before thee life and death, the blessing and the curse:
    therefore choose life.

    --Deuteronomy 30. 19.

My Father, as I review my life I am impressed how accurately my deeds
have copied my thoughts. And though I have failed the so often, yet I
pray that thou wilt accept my yearnings, to think and work for the
best in every day. Amen.




APRIL

    God's April is coming up the hill, and the noisy winds are quieting
    down, subdued by the fragrance of the wild flowers on the way. Lest
    we miss the richness of life, while pursuing the world, God
    continues to pour out precious fragrance from his storehouse, and
    unconsciously, our souls are lulled to peace through the sweetness
    of April days.

    --M.B.S.




APRIL FIRST

All Fools' Day.

William Harvey born 1578.

Prince von Bismarck born 1815.

Edwin A. Abbey born 1852.

Agnes Repplier born 1858.

    It is a peculiar quality of a fool to perceive the faults of others,
    and to forget his own.

    --Cicero.

    A man may be as much a fool from the want of sensibility as the want
    of sense.

    --Mrs. Jameson.

    He that knows not, and knows not that he knows not, is a fool: shun
    him.

    --Arabian Maxim.

    Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit?
    There is more hope of a fool than of him.

    --Proverbs 26. 12.

Almighty God, grant that I may be spared the allurements of deceptive
happiness which leaves weary days. I ask for wisdom that I may not
speak foolishly, think foolishly, or act foolishly; and may I not be
detained by the foolishness of others, but pursue my work, whether it
be far or near. Amen.




APRIL SECOND

Charlemagne born 742.

Thomas Jefferson, Virginia, third President United
States, born 1743.

Hans Andersen born 1805.

Frederic A. Bartholdi born 1834.

Emile Zola born 1840.

    When a man assumes a public trust he should consider himself public
    property.

    --Thomas Jefferson.

    We hold these truths to be self-evident--that all men are created
    equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain
    unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the
    pursuit of happiness.

    --Declaration of Independence.

    Breathes there the man with soul so dead
    Who never to himself hath said,
      This is my own, my native land!
    Whose heart hath ne'er within him burned
    As home his footsteps he hath turned
      From wandering on a foreign strand?

    --Sir Walter Scott.

    Render therefore unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's.

    --Matthew 22. 21.

My Lord, I thank thee for the wisdom and love that is spoken through
the lives of strong men and women. Grant that I may be willing to
learn of them, and gladly serve where I am needed, remembering that
thou art Lord of all. Amen.




APRIL THIRD

George Herbert born 1593.

Washington Irving born 1783.

Edward Everett Hale born 1822.

John Burroughs born 1837.

    Sum up at night what thou hast done by day
    And in the morning what thou hast to do:
    Dress and undress thy soul: mark the decay
    And growth of it; if with thy watch that too
    Be dowl, then wind up both; since we shall be
    Most surely judged, make thy accounts agree.

    --George Herbert.

    To look up and not down,
    To look forward and not back,
    To look out and not in, and
    To lend a hand.

    --Edward E. Hale.

    There is a healthy hardiness about real dignity that never dreads
    contact and communion with others, however humble.

    --Washington Irving.

    I put on righteousness, and it clothed me:
    My justice was as a robe and a diadem.

    --Job 29. 14.

My Lord, I pray that I may always be found clothed in love and
kindness. Make me worthy to minister to those who may be dependent on
me, and whether they be rich or poor, high or low, may I try to help
them. Amen.




APRIL FOURTH

Oliver Goldsmith died 1774.

Dorothea Dix born 1802.

James Freeman Clarke born 1810.

    "The greatest object in the universe," said a certain philosopher,
    "is a good man struggling with adversity"; yet there is still a
    greater, which is the good man who comes to relieve it.

    --Oliver Goldsmith.

    Yet I believe that somewhere, soon or late,
          A peace will fall
    Upon the angry reaches of my mind;
          A peace initiate
    In some heroic hour when I behold
    A friend's long-quested triumph, or unbind
          The tressed gold
    From a child's laughing face. I still believe--
          So much believe.

    --J. Drinkwater.

    But whoso hath the world's goods, and beholdeth his brother in need,
    and shutteth up his compassion from him, how doth the love of God
    abide in him?

    --1 John 3. 17.

Almighty God, may I have a liberal heart. Grant that I may feel the
needs of thy children in all lands; and may I be willing to give of
thy blessings, as I am ready to receive them. May my tribute be not
only of tender thoughts and kind words, but may I give of myself, and
of what I have, as thou hast through love and wisdom done for me.
Amen.




APRIL FIFTH

Elihu Yale born 1648.

Sir Henry Havelock born 1795.

Frank Stockton (Francis) born 1834.

Algernon Charles Swinburne born 1837.

    As morning hears before it run
    The music of the mounting sun,
    And laughs to watch his trophies won
    From darkness, and her hosts undone,
    And all the night becomes a breath,
    Nor dreams that fear should hear and flee
    The summer menace of the sea,
    So hear our hope what life may be,
    And know it not for death.

    --Algernon Charles Swinburne.

    I came from God, and I'm going back to God, and I won't have any
    gaps of death in the middle of my life.

    --George MacDonald.

    The hope of the righteous shall be gladness;
    But the expectation of the wicked shall perish.

    --Proverbs 10. 28.

Lord God, teach me the way and show me the light of the eternal day;
and may the vision fill my soul as I take courage and follow it. May I
not be fearful of what may be provided, but remember that before the
creation of life thou didst have a purpose in death. May I be
trustful. Amen.




APRIL SIXTH

Albert Dürer died 1528.

James Mill born 1773.

Jean Baptiste Rousseau born 1669.

    Even if the sacrifices which are made to duty and virtue are painful
    to make, they are well repaid by the sweet recollections which they
    leave at the bottom of the heart.

    --Jean B. Rousseau.

    I am the man of a thousand loves,
      A thousand loves have I;
    And all my loves are white-winged doves,
      That into my soul would fly.

    I am the man of a thousand friends
      Of tuneful memory;
    And each of them spends the delicate ends
      Of a brilliant day with me.

    And all my gifts are magical words
      That sing sweet songs to me;
    And the sensitive words are caroling birds
      In the garden of imagery.

    --Edwin Leibfreed.

    Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.

    --Revelation 2. 10.

Loving Father, I bless thee for thy love and ministry. May I enter
into a broader conception of sharing thy gifts. May I not seek thy
blessings to keep, but to use for renewed inspiration. Amen.




APRIL SEVENTH

Saint Francis Xavier born 1506.

William Wordsworth born 1770.

William Ellery Channing born 1780.

    My heart leaps up when I behold
      A rainbow in the sky:
    So was it when my life began;
    So is it now I am a man;
    So be it when I shall grow old,
      Or let me die!
    The child is Father of the Man;
    And I could wish my days to be
    Bound each to each by natural piety.

    --William Wordsworth.

    A self-controlled mind is a free mind, and freedom is power. I call
    that mind free which jealously guards its intellectual rights and
    powers. I call that mind free which resists the bondage of habit,
    which does not live on its old virtues, but forgets what is behind,
    and rejoices to pour itself forth in fresh and higher exertions.

    --William Ellery Channing.

    That ye be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new
    man, that after God hath been created in righteousness and holiness
    of truth.

    --Ephesians 4. 23, 24.

Lord God, give me the power to control my mind and heart, that I may
not be a slave to habits that may keep me from eternal love and
blessedness. May I have sympathy and compassion for others, and
cherish thy tenderness and mercy as I hold it in my daily life. Amen.




APRIL EIGHTH

Petrarch crowned 1341.

William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, born 1580.

David Rittenhouse born 1732.

    If I can stop one heart from breaking,
      I shall not live in vain;
    If I can ease one life from aching,
      Or cool one pain,
    Or help one fainting robin
      Unto his nest again,
    I shall not live in vain.

    --Emily Dickinson.

    The most solid comfort one can fall back upon is the thought that
    the business of one's life is to help in some small way to reduce
    the sum of ignorance, degradation, and misery on the face of this
    beautiful earth.

    --George Eliot.

    Make full my joy, that ye be of the same mind, having the same love,
    being of one accord, of one mind; doing nothing through faction or
    through vainglory, but in lowliness of mind each counting other
    better than himself.

    --Philippians 2. 2, 3.

My Father, take away the spirit, if I may be inclined to keep the
best, and to be always seeking my portion. May I have the desire to
share with those who have less, and to give to those who may have
more, whether it be of bread or love. Amen.




APRIL NINTH

Fisher Ames born 1758.

John Opie died 1807.

Dante Gabriel Rossetti died 1882.

    Gather a shell from the strown beach
      And listen at its lips; they sigh
      The same desire and mystery,
    The echo of the whole sea's speech.
      And all mankind is this at heart--
      Not anything but what thou art:
    And Earth, Sea, Man are all in each.

    --Dante Gabriel Rossetti.

    And as, in sparkling majesty, a star
      Gilds the bright summit of some glory cloud;
    Brightening the half-veil'd face of heaven afar;
      So when dark thoughts my boding spirit shroud,
    Sweet Hope! celestial influence round me shed,
    Waving the silver pinions o'er my head.

    --John Keats.

    Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
    that ye may abound in hope, in the power of the Holy Spirit.

    --Romans 15. 13.

Almighty God, may I ever know the generous glow that comes with an
overwhelming desire to cultivate the soul. With hope may I find the
way through the darkness that leads to immortality, even if I may have
to experience the weariness that may accompany it. Amen.




APRIL TENTH

Hugo Grotius born 1583.

William Hazlitt born 1778.

General Lew Wallace born 1827.

General William Booth born 1829.

    The essence of happy living is never to find life dull, never to
    feel the ugly weariness which comes of overstrain; to be fresh,
    cheerful, leisurely, sociable, unhurried, well-balanced. It seems to
    me impossible to be these things unless we have time to consider
    life a little, to deliberate, to select, to abstain.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    Four things come not back--the spoken word, the sped arrow, the past
    life, the neglected opportunity.

    --William Hazlitt.

    Wherefore, brethren, give the more diligence to make your calling
    and election sure.

    --2 Peter 1. 10.

My Father, may I not miss my work through indifference and feel it is
thy neglect of me. May I be reminded that the enrichment of life comes
through persistency and being consistent, and may not be found on the
idle paths of extravagant ways. Help me to take up my work with a
willing spirit and give my best to it. Amen.




APRIL ELEVENTH

George Canning born 1770.

Edward Everett born 1794.

Donald G. Mitchell (Ik Marvel) born 1822.

    The safe path to excellence and success in every calling, is that of
    appropriate preliminary education, diligent application to learn the
    art of assiduity and practicing it.

    --Edward Everett.

    That nothing walks with aimless feet;
      That not one life shall be destroyed,
      Or cast as rubbish to the void,
    When God hath made the pile complete.

    Behold, we know not anything:
      I can but trust that good shall fall
      At last--far off--at last, to all,
    And every winter change to spring.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    And we desire that each one of you may show the same diligence unto
    the fullness of hope even to the end: that ye be not sluggish, but
    imitators of them who through faith and patience inherit the
    promises.

    --Hebrews 6. 11, 12.

Lord God, help me in all my circumstances, and be with me in my daily
work. Help me in my efforts, as I endeavor to attain, and may my will
be hid in thine. Amen.




APRIL TWELFTH

Edward Young died 1765.

Edward Bird born 1772.

Henry Clay born 1777.

    I would rather be right than be President.

    --Henry Clay.


    Who does the best his circumstances allow
    Does well, acts nobly; angels could no more.

    --Edward Young.

    Pedigree haz no more to do in making a man aktually grater than he
    iz than a pekok's feather in his hat haz in making him aktually
    taller. When the world stands in need of an arestokrat, natur
    pitches one into it, and furnishes him papers without enny flaw in
    them.

    --Josh Billings.

    Cast not away therefore your boldness, which hath great recompense
    of reward. For ye have need of patience, that, having done the will
    of God, ye may receive the promise.

    --Hebrews 10. 35, 36.

Lord God, help me to select with care the site, the plans, and the
foundation of my life. May I use the best material; and may it be
worthy of a permanent home. Amen.




APRIL THIRTEENTH

Madame Jeanne Guyon born 1648.

Dr. Thomas Beddoes born 1760.

James Harper born 1795.

    If there were dreams to sell,
    Merry and sad to tell,
    And the crier rang the bell,
      What would you buy?

    A cottage lone and still
      With bowers nigh,
    Shadowy, my woes to still,
      Until I die.
    Such pearl from Life's fresh crown
    Fain would I shake me down,
    Were dreams to have at will
    This would best heal my ill,
      This would I buy.

    --Thomas Lovell Beddoes.

    I pray you, bear me hence From forth the noise and rumor of the
    field Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts In peace, and
    part this body and my soul With contemplation and devout desires.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest awhile.

    --Mark 6. 31.

Lord God, help me to bear in mind that to step aside and safeguard the
mind in contemplation is a safe guard to the soul. Amen.




APRIL FOURTEENTH

Dr. George Gregory born 1754.

George Frederic Handel died 1759.

Horace Bushnell born 1802.

    Flower in the crannied wall,
    I pluck you out of the crannies--
    Hold you here, root and all, in my hand,
    Little flower--but if I could understand
    What you are, root and all, and all in all,
    I should know what God and man is.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    So much is history stranger than fiction, and so true it is Nature
    has caprices which Art dares not imitate.

    --Thomas Macaulay.

    Nature is the face of God. He appears to us through it, and we can
    read his thoughts in it.

    --Victor Hugo.

    Many, O Jehovah my God, are the wonderful works
      which thou hast done,
    And thy thoughts which are to us-ward.

    --Psalm 40. 5.

Eternal God, I thank thee for the seasons which bring abundance and
beauty. I thank thee for thy loving care, which is over all and
forever. May I behold thy works and make thee a very present help for
all my needs, and perceive the joy of thy love through the greatness
of the earth. Amen.




APRIL FIFTEENTH

Emile Souvestre born 1806.

John Lothrop Motley born 1814.

Henry James born 1843.

Abraham Lincoln died 1865.

    Two thirds of human existence are wasted in hesitation, and the last
    third in repentance.

    --Emile Souvestre.

    And, having thus chosen our course, let us renew our trust in God
    and go forward without fear and with manly hearts.

    --Abraham Lincoln.

    The barriers are not erected which shall say to aspiring talent,
    "Thus far and no further."

    --Beethoven.

    Be strong and of good courage.

    --Joshua 1. 6.

Almighty God, I pray that I may always be alive to my opportunities,
but may I never leave others impoverished by taking advantage of them.
May my prosperity be conducted with my eyes open, guarding what I give
and receive, that my possessions may remain valuable through life.
Amen.




APRIL SIXTEENTH

Charles Montagu, Earl of Halifax, born 1661.

Charles W. Peale born 1741.

Sir John Franklin born 1786.

    Weary of myself and sick of asking
      What I am, and what I ought to be,
    At the vessel's prow I stand, which bears me
      Forward, forward, o'er the starlit sea

    O air-born voice! long since severely clear,
    A cry like thine in my own heart I hear.
    Resolve to be thyself: and know that he
    Who finds himself, loses his misery.

    --Matthew Arnold.

    This above all to thine own self be true,
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou can'st not then be false to any man.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Let thine eyes look right on,
    And let thine eyelids look straight before thee.
    Make level the path of thy feet,
    And let all thy ways be established.

    --Proverbs 4. 25, 26.

My Father, give me a sense of nearness to thee when I may be faltering
from weariness in well doing. May I hold to my determinations. Help me
to know what is useless, that I may not give unnecessary energy, and
to know what is worth while, that I may acquire strength through the
power of truth. Amen.




APRIL SEVENTEENTH

Bishop Benjamin Hoadley died 1761.

Benjamin Franklin died 1790.

William G. Simms born 1806.

    Shall I ask the brave soldier who fights at my side,
       In the cause of mankind, if our creeds agree?
    Shall I give up the friend I have valued and tried,
       If he kneel not before the same altar as me?

    --Thomas Moore.

    I met a little Elf-man once,
       Down where the lilies blow.
    I asked him why he was so small
       And why he didn't grow.

    He slightly frowned, and with his eye
       He looked me through and through.
    "I'm quite as big for me," said he
       "As you are big for you."

    --John Kendrick Bangs.

    Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their
    own sight!

    --Isaiah 5. 21.

Loving Father, grant that I may not barter love with formalities, nor
sacrifice love for customs. But, may I have a fellowship that is true
and sincere, and that may be counted on, though all and for all. Amen.




APRIL EIGHTEENTH

Lord Jeffreys died 1689.

George Henry Lewes born 1817.

Sir Francis Baring born 1740.

    Nor can I count him happiest who has never
    Been forced with his own hand his chains to sever,
       And for himself find out the way divine;
    He never knew the aspirer's glorious pains,
    He never earned the struggler's priceless gains.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    There is not time for hate, O wasteful friend.
    Put hate away until the ages end.
    Have you an ancient wound? Forget the wrong--
    Out in my West a forest loud with song
    Towers high and green over a field of snow,
    Over a glacier buried far below.

    --Edwin Markham.

    Fight the good fight of the faith, lay hold on the life eternal,
    whereunto thou wast called, and didst confess the good confession in
    the sight of many witnesses.

    --1 Timothy 6. 12.

Lord God, help me to realize the power of my life. I feel ashamed and
alarmed when I think of the grievous wrongs I may have done for greed.
May I have delight in the struggles I have made for the ways of
righteousness. Make me careful to avoid the things that debase life.
May I aspire for the highest and best. Amen.




APRIL NINETEENTH

Roger Sherman born 1721.

Lord Byron died 1824.

Lord Beaconsfield (Disraeli) died 1881.

Charles Darwin died 1882.

    The secret of success in life is for a man to be ready for his
    opportunity when it comes. --Disraeli.

    One sees, and the other does not see; one enjoys
    an unspeakable pleasure, and the other loses that
    pleasure which is as free to him as the air....
    The whole outward world is the kingdom of the
    observant eye. He who enters into any part of
    that kingdom to possess it has a store of pure enjoyment
    in life which is literally inexhaustible and
    immeasurable. His eyes alone will give him a life
    worth living.

    --Charles W. Eliot.

    Having eyes, see ye not?

    --Mark 8. 18.

My Father, help me to realize that I cannot feel the joy that breathes
through the early morning unless I am with it. May I see distinctly
the glory of to-day. Help me to be watchful and keep my spirit awake,
that I may receive thy revelations. Amen.




APRIL TWENTIETH

Marcus Aurelius born 121.

Elizabeth Barton (Maid of Kent) executed 1534

Sir Francis T. Baring born 1796.

Alice Cary born 1820.

    Do not act as if you had ten thousand years to throw away. Death
    stands at your elbow. Be good for something while you live and it is
    in your power.

    --Marcus Aurelius.

           And O, my heart, my heart,
    Be careful to go strewing in and out
    The way with good deeds, lest it come about
           That when thou shalt depart,
    No low lamenting tongue be found to say,
    The world is poorer since thou went'st away

    --Alice Cary.

    A good man prolongs his life; to be able to enjoy one's past life is
    to live twice.

    --Martial.

    The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

    --Psalm 112. 6.

Heavenly Father, thou hast made my life dear; forgive me if I have
made dearer the things that I have put around it. Many days have been
used for costly things that have faded and are laid aside. May I
realize the meaning of days that have been lost. Make me more
concerned for what I put in the days to come. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-FIRST

Peter F. Abelard died 1142.

Friedrich Fröbel born 1782.

Reginald Heber born 1783.

James Martineau born 1805.

Charlotte Brontë born 1816.

Henry Shaw (Josh Billings) born 1818.

    Education should lead and guide man to clearness concerning himself
    and in himself, to peace with nature, and to unity with God.

    --Friedrich Fröbel.

    When spring unlocks the flowers, to paint the
      laughing soil;
    When summer's balmy showers refresh the mower's
      toil;
    When winter binds in frosty chains the fallow and
      the flood,
    In God the earth rejoiceth still, and owns its maker
      good.

    --Reginald Heber.

    A memory without a blot or contamination must be an inexhaustible
    source of pure refreshment.

    --Charlotte Brontë.

    For ye are all sons of light, and sons of the day: we are not of the
    night, nor of darkness.

    --1 Thessalonians 5. 5.

Lord of light, thou art the light of my life. May I make thee the joy
and light of my soul. Call me to where it is clear and high, that I
may see above the mist. May I not weary in climbing to reach thee in
the high places. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-SECOND

Henry Fielding born 1707.

Immanuel Kant born 1724.

Philip James Bailey born 1816.

    We live in deeds, not years: in thoughts, not breaths:
    In feelings, not in figures on a dial.
    We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives
    Who thinks most, feels the noblest, acts the best.

    --Philip James Bailey.

    Men cease to interest us when we find their limitations. The only
    sin is limitation. As soon as you once come up with a man's
    limitations it is all over with him.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    But he that looketh into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and so
    continueth, being not a hearer that forgeteth but a doer that
    worketh, this man shall be blessed in his doing.

    --James 1. 25.

Lord God, help me to break away from habits that fasten me in the ruts
of life. Draw me out to thy broad way, where there are no limits to
thy wonderful works, that I may expand my life. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-THIRD

William Shakespeare born 1564, died 1616.

Cervantes died 1616.

J.M.W. Turner born 1775.

James Buchanan, Pennsylvania, fifteenth President
United States, born 1791.

James Anthony Froude born 1818.

Thomas Nelson Page born 1853.

Edwin Markham born 1852.

    My crown is in my heart, not on my head:
    Not decked with diamonds and Indian Stones,
    Nor to be seen. My crown is called content.
    A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.

    --William Shakespeare.

    At the heart of the cyclone tearing the sky
    And flinging the clouds and the towers by
      Is a place of central calm:
    So here in the roar of mortal things,
    I have a place where my spirit sings,
      In the hollow of God's Palm.

    --Edwin Markham.

    Rest in Jehovah, and wait patiently for him:
    Fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way.

    --Psalm 37. 7.

Almighty God, my heart beats quicker and the desire for thy care grows
stronger when I remember thy promises are given for all eternity. May
I be grateful and contented with thy love and care. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-FOURTH

Edmund Cartwright born 1743.

Anthony Trollope born 1815.

Arthur Christopher Benson born 1862.

    By religion I mean the power, whatever it be, which makes a man
    choose what is hard rather than what is easy; what is lofty and
    noble rather than what is mean and selfish; that puts courage into
    timorous hearts and gladness into clouded spirits.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    For all noble things the time is long and the way rude.... For every
    start and struggle of impatience there shall be so much attendant
    failure.... But the fire which Patience carries in her own hand is
    that truly stolen from heaven--unquenchable incense of life.

    --John Ruskin.

    But they that wait for Jehovah shall renew their strength; they
    shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run and not be
    weary; they shall walk, and not faint.

    --Isaiah 40. 31.

My Father, I pray that I may not be indifferent to the call of my
soul. May I not seek to serve the disappearing and neglect to make
life worthy. Acquaint me with the permanent values of life. Make clear
the way of strength, that I may not be misled by ease and carried to
weakness. May my life be ennobled by the power of my possessions.
Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-FIFTH

Oliver Cromwell born 1599.

John Keble born 1792.

Alexander Duff born 1806.

Guglielmo Marconi born 1874.

Mrs. Burton Harrison (Constance Cary) born 1846.

Samuel Wesley died 1735.

    Truly God follows us with encouragements: let him not lose his
    blessing upon us! They come in season, and with all the advantages
    of heartening, as if God should say, "Up and be doing, and I will
    stand by you and help you!" There is nothing to be feared but our
    own sin and sloth.

    --Oliver Cromwell.

    Sun of my soul, thou Saviour dear,
    It is not night if thou be near;
    O may no earthborn cloud arise
    To hide thee from thy servants' eyes.

    --John Keble.

    For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield:
    Jehovah will give grace and glory;
    No good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

    --Psalm 84. 11.

My Father, may I not err in choosing thy benefits, nor fail from the
neglect to use them. Make me appreciative of all thy gifts, and,
through thy wisdom and power, may I find the best use for them. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-SIXTH

David Hume born 1711.

Daniel Defoe died 1791.

Charles F. Browne (Artemus Ward) born 1834.

    How strange a chequer-work of Providence is the life of man! and by
    what secret different springs are the affections hurried about, as
    different circumstances present! To-day we love what to-morrow we
    hate; to-day we seek what to-morrow we shun; to-day we desire what
    to-morrow we fear; nay, even tremble at the apprehension of.

    --Daniel Defoe.

    Now don't do nothin' which isn't your Fort, for ef you do you'll
    find yourself splashin' round in the Kanawl, figgeratively speakin'.

    --Artemus Ward.

    Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And there
    are diversities of ministrations, and the same Lord. And there are
    diversities of workings, but the same God, who worketh all things in
    all.

    --1 Corinthians 12. 4-6.

Lord forbid that I should fear to change for the better or be so
pleased with myself and the things which surround me that I feel no
need for a higher life. Make me dissatisfied if I am not trying to
grow in truth and to live in noble deeds. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-SEVENTH

Samuel Morse born 1791.

Lajos Kossuth born 1802.

Herbert Spencer born 1820.

Ulysses S. Grant, Ohio, eighteenth President United
States, born 1822.

Ralph Waldo Emerson died 1882.

    People who are dishonest, or rash, or stupid will inevitably suffer
    the penalties of dishonesty, or rashness, or stupidity.

    --Herbert Spencer.

    Abide in the simple and noble regions of thy life; obey thy heart.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Well, then, we must cut our way out.

    --General Grant.

    Wherefore take up the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
    withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand.

    --Ephesians 6. 13.

Loving Father, help me to live a simple and noble life. Grant that I
may have the blessedness that comes through peace, and escape the
misery that comes from cruelty and untruth. Through my life may what I
reap show that I have been careful in choosing and cultivating what I
have sown. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-EIGHTH

Charles Cotton born 1630.

James Monroe, Virginia, fifth President United
States, born 1758.

Anthony Ashley, Earl of Shaftesbury, born 1801.

    During a long life I have proved that not one kind word ever spoken,
    not one kind deed ever done, but sooner or later returns to bless
    the giver, and becomes a chain, binding men with golden bands to the
    throne of God.

    --Earl of Shaftesbury.

    There's many a time when the bitterest thing
      Is said without reason, and God knows
    The courage it takes to suffer the sting,
      By hiding the wounds that the heart shows.

    There's many a sob we bravely keep down
      For the sake of old times revered so,
    There's many a head with thorns for a crown
      Where kisses would soon make the heart glow.

    --Edwin Leibfreed.

    So shalt thou know wisdom to be unto thy soul;
    If thou hast found it, then shall there be a reward,
    And thy hope shall not be cut off.

    --Proverbs 24. 14.

My Father, if I am to-day without happiness, may I go in search of it.
Help me to remember that the will thou hast given me to overcome evil
with good I may use to overcome misery with happiness. Make me careful
that I may not be trapped by selfishness as I look for joy. May I
delight in the sweet sensations that are felt in having consideration
for others, and may I make kindness a daily habit. Amen.




APRIL TWENTY-NINTH

Michel Ruyter died 1676.

Abbe Charles de St. Pierre died 1743.

Matthew Vassar born 1792.

Edward Rowland Sill born 1841.

    Never yet was a springtime,
      Late though lingered the snow,
    That the sap stirred not at the whisper
      Of the south wind, sweet and low;
    Never yet was a springtime
      When the buds forgot to blow.

    Ever the wings of the summer
      Are folded under the mold;
    Life that has known no dying,
      Is Love's, to have and to hold,
    Till, sudden, the burgeoning Easter!
      The song! the green and the gold![1]

    --Margaret E. Sangster.

    In tracing the shade, I shall find out the sun.

    --Owen Meredith.

    All chastening seemeth for the present to be not joyous but
    grievous; yet afterward it yieldeth peaceable fruit unto them that
    have been exercised thereby, even the fruit of righteousness.

    --Hebrews 12. 11.

Almighty God, grant that as the fulfillment of the green comes to the
withered grass, so thy restoring may come to me with the glory of life
that comes in the resurrection of the soul. I trust thee to bring me
out of winter's seal, that I may help make the spring. Amen.

[Footnote 1: From Easter Bells. Copyright, 1897, by Harper &
Brothers.]




APRIL THIRTIETH

Chevalier de Bayard killed 1524.

Sir John Lubbock born 1834.

James Montgomery died 1854.

David Livingstone died 1873.

    We scatter seeds with careless hands,
    And dream we ne'er shall see them more;
      But for a thousand years
      Their fruit appears
    In weeds that mar the land.

    --John Keble

    And there came up a sweet perfume
      From the unseen flowers below,
    Like the savor of virtuous deeds,
      Of deeds done long ago.

    --Mrs. Southey.

    Mary therefore took a pound of ointment of pure nard, very precious,
    and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair:
    and the house was filled with the odor of the ointment.

    --John 12. 3.

My Father, I pray that it may be mine to have the recollection of
happy deeds, and not the memory of unkept promises. Help me to
remember that one act is worth a thousand intentions, and that memory
is the storehouse that supplies old age. Make me careful of my memory,
that it may not be burdened. Amen.




MAY


    I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,
      Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,
    But, in the embalmed darkness, guess each sweet
      Wherewith the seasonable month endows
    The grass, the thicket, and the fruit tree wild;
      White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;
    Fast-fading violets covered up in leaves;
        And mid-May's wildest child,
      The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,
    The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.

    --John Keats.

    Such a starved bank of moss
      Till that May morn,
    Blue ran the flash across:
      Violets were born.

    --Robert Browning.




MAY FIRST

Arbor Day.

Joseph Addison born 1672.

Arthur, Duke of Wellington, born 1769.

    If you wish to succeed in life, make perseverance your bosom friend,
    experience your wise counselor, caution your elder brother, and hope
    your guardian genius.

    --Joseph Addison.

    He who plants a tree, he plants love;
    Tents of coolness spreading out above
    Wayfarers, he may not live to see.
      Gifts that grow are best;
      Hands that bless are blest;
      Plant-life does the rest!
    Heaven and earth help him who plants a tree,
    And his work his own reward shall be.

    --Lucy Larcom.

    And he shall be like a tree planted by the streams of water,
    That bringeth forth its fruit in its season,
    Whose leaf also doth not wither;
    And whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

    --Psalm 1. 3.

My Creator, give me joyful eyes for joyful nature. May I be alive to
the gentle influences of a May day which bring new experiences to all
who may receive them: and may I serve thee by unfolding to others the
love of truth, the love of good, and the love of beauty. Amen.




MAY SECOND

Leonardo da Vinci died 1519.

Robert Hall born 1764.

Jerome K. Jerome born 1859.

William Henry Hudson born 1862.

    Without a false humility;
    For this is love's nobility,--
    Not to scatter bread and gold,
    Goods and raiment bought and sold;
    But to hold fast his simple sense,
    And speak the speech of innocence,
    And with hand and body and blood,
    To make his bosom-counsel good.
    He that feeds man serveth few;
    He serves all who dares be true.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Small service is true service while it lasts:
      Of humblest friends scorn not one:
    The daisy, by the shadow it casts,
      Protects the lingering dewdrop from the sun.

    --William Wordsworth.

    Surely then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot;
    Yea, thou shalt be steadfast, and shalt not fear.

    --Job 11. 15.

Heavenly Father, I would be thankful for the blessings I am inclined
to forget. Give me a heart of gratitude, and forbid that I should hold
my friends for material gain or selfish ends. May I through the
truthfulness of my lips, and the honor of my acts, be a necessary
friend. Amen.




MAY THIRD

Niccolo Machiavelli born 1469.

Thomas Hood died 1845.

Jacob Riis born 1849.

    The longing for ignoble things;
      The strife for triumph more than truth;
    The hardening of the heart that brings
      Irreverence for the dreams of youth;

    All these must first be trampled down
      Beneath our feet, if we would gain
    In the bright fields of fair renown
      The right of eminent domain.

    --John Keble.

    One lesson, and only one, history may be said to repeat with
    distinctness; that the world is built somehow on moral foundations;
    that in the long run, it is well with the good; in the long run it
    is ill with the wicked.

    --James Anthony Froude.

    No soldier on service entangleth himself in the affairs of this
    life; that he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier. And if
    also a man contend in the games, he is not crowned, except he have
    contended lawfully.

    --2 Timothy 2. 4, 5.

Gracious Father, may my heart be mindful of thee, that I may discover
the truth and possess it. Steady me in my affections and save me from
wandering impulses; and may I help to put wrong down and uplift
humanity. Amen.




MAY FOURTH

Frederick Edwin Church born 1826.

Isaac Barrow died 1677.

John James Audubon born 1780.

Horace Mann born 1796.

Thomas Henry Huxley born 1825.

    The chess board is the world, the pieces are the phenomena of the
    universe, the rules of the game we call the laws of nature. My
    metaphor will remind some of you of the famous picture in which
    Retzsch has depicted Satan playing chess with man for his soul.
    Substitute for the mocking fiend in that picture a calm, strong
    angel, who is playing "for love," as we say, and would rather lose
    than win, and I should accept it as an image of human life.

    --Thomas Henry Huxley.

    Riches and nobility fade together. O, my God! be thou praised for
    having made love for all time, and immortal as thyself.

    --George Sand.

    He hath given food unto them that fear him:
    He will ever be mindful of his covenant.
    The works of his hands are truth and justice;
    All his precepts are sure.

    --Psalm 111. 5, 7.

Father of life, I know I cannot hold youth. I may have prosperity or
poverty. I thank thee that thou hast taught me that love may be kept
changeless through all. Amen.




MAY FIFTH

Napoleon Bonaparte died 1821.

Empress Eugenie born 1826.

Bret Harte died 1902.

    As I stand by the cross, on the lone mountain's crest,
      Looking over the ultimate sea,
    In the gloom of the mountain a ship lies at rest,
      And one sails away from the lea;
    One spreads its white wings on the far-reaching track,
      With pennant and sheet flowing free;
    One hides in the shadow with sails laid aback--
      The ship that is waiting for me.

    But lo! in the distance the clouds break away,
      The gate's glowing portals I see,
    And I hear from the outgoing ship in the bay
      The song of the sailors in glee.
    So I think of the luminous footprints that bore
      The comfort o'er dark Galilee,
    And wait for the signal to go to the shore
      To the ship that is waiting for me.

    --Bret Harte.

    Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
    I will fear no evil; for thou art with me;
    Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.

    --Psalm 23. 4.

Eternal God, I praise thee, that "thy love is broader than the measure
of man's mind," and that through all my years I may hide myself in
thee, trusting thee to the end. Amen.




MAY SIXTH

Plato born B.C. 427.

Robespierre born 1758.

General Andrea Messena born 1758.

    Hard ye may be in the tumult,
      Red to your battle hilts;
    Blow give blow in the foray,
      Cunningly ride in the tilts.
    But tenderly, unbeguiled--
    Turn to a woman a woman's
    Heart, and a child's to a child.

    Test of the man if his worth be
      In accord with the ultimate plan
    That he be not, to his marring,
      Always and utterly man.
    That he may bring out of the tumult,
      Fetter and undefiled,
    To woman the heart of a woman--
    To children the heart of a child.[1]

    --O. Henry.

    A man's concern is only whether in doing anything he is doing right
    or wrong--acting the part of a good man or a bad.

    --Plato.

    A faithful man shall abound with blessings.

    --Proverbs 28. 20.

Almighty God, I pray that I may seek sincerely those whom I approach
with sympathy, and by my honor may they feel the same sincerity for
me. Amen.

[Footnote 1: Special permission Cosmopolitan Magazine, New York.]




MAY SEVENTH

Correggio born 1494.

Robert Browning born 1812.

Johannes Brahms born 1833.

Lord Rosebery (Archibald Primrose) born 1847.

    So, take and use thy work: amend what flaws may lurk,
      What strain o' the stuff, what warpings past the aim!
    My times be in Thy hand! perfect the cup as planned!
    Let age approve of youth, and death complete the same!

    --Robert Browning.

    No matter how often defeated, you are born to victory. The reward of
    a thing well done is to have done it.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    When I hear a young man spoken of as giving promise of high genius,
    the first question I ask about him is always--Does he work?

    --John Ruskin.

    Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.

    --Matthew 5. 48.

O God, I pray that thou wilt search me, and in the silent moments show
me myself without obstruction. Breathe upon me thy awakening breath,
that I may be revived to nobler activities. Amen.




MAY EIGHTH

Rev. William Jay born 1769.

François Mignet born 1796.

Louis Gottschalk born 1829.

John Stuart Mill died 1873.

    A profound conviction raises a man above the feeling of ridicule.

    --John Stuart Mill.

    A garden is a lonesome thing, God wot!
          Rose plot,
          Fringed pool,
          Ferned grot--
          The veriest school
          Of peace; and yet the fool
    Contends that God is not--
    Not God! in the gardens! when the eve is cool?
          Nay but I have a sign;
          'Tis very sure God walks in mine.

    --Thomas E. Brown.

    Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee:
    Jehovah make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee:
    Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.

    --Numbers 6. 24, 25, 26.

My Father, may this be a day of usefulness. Make me sure of myself,
that I may not spend my days in questioning, but accept with
gratefulness thy love and tender care. Make me worthy to be called thy
child. Amen.




MAY NINTH

John Brown (Ossawattomie) born 1800.

Johann Schiller died 1805.

J.M. Barrie born 1860.

    Have love! not love alone for one,
      But man as man thy brother call:
    And scatter like the circling sun
      Thy charities on all.

    --Johann Schiller.

    He spoke, and words more soft than rain
    Brought the Age of Gold again:
    His action won such reverence sweet,
    As hid all measure of the feat.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    That their hearts might be comforted, they being knit together in
    love.

    --Colossians 2. 2.

Gracious Lord, I pray that I may not only be known to those who are my
own, but may I consider all mankind. May those who need me find me
through my gentleness, and may they be assured by quiet confidence and
faith. Amen.




MAY TENTH

Rouget de l'Isle born 1760.

Jared Sparks born 1789.

James Bryce born 1838.

Sir Henry Stanley died 1904.

    For four months and four days I lived with David Livingstone in the
    same house, or in the same boat, or in the same tent, and I never
    found a fault in him. I am a man of quick temper, and often without
    sufficient cause, I dare say, have broken the ties of friendship;
    but with Livingstone I never had cause for resentment, but each
    day's life with him added to my admiration for him.

    --Sir Henry Stanley.

    In speech right gentle, yet so wise: princely of mien,
    Yet softly mannered; modest, deferent,
    And tender-hearted, though of a fearless blood.

    --Edwin Arnold.

    Ye are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hid.

    --Matthew 5. 14.

Almighty God, help me to aspire, that my life may tend toward the
ideal. May I be persuaded that I cannot be that which I do not
possess, nor can I live in that which I do not know. Help me to put
the best in what I do, that I may not feel I have failed, even though
it may not seem to be a success. Amen.




MAY ELEVENTH

Baron Münchhausen born 1720.

William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, died 1778.

Jean Léon Gérôme born 1824.

    And methought that beauty and terror are only one, not two;
    And the world has room for love, and death, and thunder and dew;
    And all the sinews of hell slumber in the summer air;
    And the face of God is a rock, but the face of the rock is fair.
    Beneficent streams of tears flow at the finger of pain;
    And out of the cloud that smites, beneficent rivers of rain.

    --Robert Louis Stevenson.

    It is more shameful to be distrustful of our friends than to be
    deceived by them.

    --La Rochefoucauld.

    Thou shalt rejoice in all the good which Jehovah thy God hath given
    unto thee.

    --Deuteronomy 26. 11.

Lord God, may I comprehend the sacredness of friendship. I thank thee
for my friends, and for all the beautiful influences which they bring
to my life. May I never hold friendship without the sincerity to
return it. Correct my faults, and cause me to learn the secret of
cheerful endurance, that I may be steadfast. Amen.




MAY TWELFTH

Robert Fielding died 1712.

James Sheridan Knowles born 1784.

Dante Gabriel Rossetti born 1828.

Jules Massenet born 1842.

    Look in my face; my name is Might-have-been;
      I am also called No-more, Too-late, Farewell;
      Unto thine ear I hold the dead sea-shell
    Cast up thy Life's foam-fretted feet between;
    Unto thine eyes the glass where that is seen
      Which had Life's form and Love's, but by my spell
      Is now a shaken shadow intolerable,
    Of ultimate things unuttered the frail screen.

    --Dante Gabriel Rossetti.

    Let me not pass my work at morn
      And then at eve,
    Find for what purpose I was born--
      Just as I leave.

    --M.B.S.

    We must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the
    night cometh, when no man can work.

    --John 9. 4.

Lord God, I do earnestly pray that thou wilt give me strength to break
away, if I may be trying to free myself from habits that mar my
character. May I not lose courage and fall back in the old ways, but
by faith be led where I should go. Amen.




MAY THIRTEENTH

Carolus Linnæus (Karl von Linné) born 1707.

Alphonse Daudet born 1840.

Sir Arthur Sullivan born 1842.

    I heard a voice in the darkness singing
      (That was a valiant soul I knew),
    And the joy of his song was a wild bird winging
      Swift to his mate through a sky of blue.

    And his song was of love and all its bringing
      And of certain day when the night was through;
    I raised my eyes where the hope was springing,
      And I think in his heaven God smiled too
      (That was a valiant soul I knew).

    --J. Stalker.

    The soul aids the body, and at certain moments raises it. It is the
    only bird which bears upward its own cage.

    --Victor Hugo.

    But desire earnestly the greater gifts.

    --1 Corinthians 12. 31.

Gracious Lord, I rejoice that thou dost know the depths of my soul,
and that I may call upon thee to supply its needs. Make me worthy that
I may not be kept from the springs of joy where my soul may be
refreshed, and where I may gather hope and encouragement for the
greater loves of life. Amen.




MAY FOURTEENTH

John Dutton born 1659.

Gabriel D. Fahrenheit born 1686.

Robert Owen born 1771.

Henry Grattan died 1820.

    They that wander at will where the
      Works of the Lord are revealed,
    Little guess what joy can be got
      From a cowslip out of the field.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Move onward serenely, cast aside regret, cleanse and purify life,
    only be undismayed and hopeful, as you turn page after page of the
    revelation of God.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    Thou wilt show me the path of life:
    In thy presence is fullness of joy;
    In thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

    --Psalm 16. 11.

My Father, I thank thee that nature reveals thy power as she unfolds
her beauty and wonder to the searching eye. Guide me that I may see in
the little flower the smile of welcome, the look of kindness, and the
beauty of hope which it renders to all; and may I learn from it thy
protection in the smallest things of life. Amen.




MAY FIFTEENTH

Ephraim Chambers died 1740.

Florence Nightingale born 1820.

Michael W. Balfe born 1808.

Edmund Keane died 1833.

Daniel O'Connell died 1847.

    Light human nature is too lightly lost
    And ruffled without cause, complaining on,
    Restless with rest, until being overthrown,
    It learneth to lie quiet.

    --Elizabeth Barrett Browning.

            Was the trial sore?
    Temptation sharp? Thank God a second time!
    Why comes temptation but for a man to meet
    And master and make crouch beneath his foot,
    And so be pedestaled in triumph? Pray
    "Lead us into no such temptations, Lord!"
    Yea, but, O thou whose servants are the bold,
    Lead such temptations by the head and hair,
    Reluctant dragons, up to who dares fight
    That so he may do battle and have praise.

    --Robert Browning.

    Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things that
    were heard, lest haply we drift away from them.

    --Hebrews 2. 1.

Almighty God, if I am overwhelmed by the tides of temptation and
discouragement, let me not drift away to sea, but anchor and take
harbor in thee. May I not be afraid to trust in thy protection, but
calmly wait and watch for thy deliverance. Amen.




MAY SIXTEENTH

Sir William Patty born 1623.

Honore de Balzac born 1799.

William H. Seward born 1801.

Felicia Hemans died 1835.

    Favored of Heaven! O Genius! are they thine,
    When round thy brow the wreaths of glory shine;
    While rapture gazes on thy radiant way,
    'Midst the bright realms of clear mental day?
    No! sacred joys! 'tis yours to dwell enshrined,
    Most fondly cherished, in the purest mind.

    --Felicia Hemans.

    Genius is intensity.

    --Honore Balzac.

    But what if I fail of my purpose here?
    It is but to keep the nerves at strain,
      To dry one's eyes and laugh at a fall,
    And, baffled, get up and begin again--
      So the chase takes up one's life, that's all.

    --Robert Browning.

    Be urgent in season, out of season.

    --2 Timothy 4. 2.

My Lord, my life makes me conscious of weakness, and my memory brings
regret; forgive me for the lost strength I neglected to develop. In
thy compassion encourage me to be more watchful of my power, that I
may usefully increase it, and not willfully deplete it. May I learn
the need of constancy in well-doing. Amen.




MAY SEVENTEENTH

Heloise died 1163.

Matthew Parker died 1575.

Edwin Jenner born 1749.

    The weakest among us has a gift, however seemingly trivial, which is
    peculiar to him, and which worthily used, will be a gift to his race
    forever.

    --John Ruskin.

      Not in entire forgetfulness,
      And not in utter nakedness,
    But trailing clouds of glory do we come
      From God who is our home.

    --William Wordsworth.

    A weak mind sinks under prosperity as well as under adversity. A
    strong and deep mind has two highest tides--when the moon is at
    full, and when there is no moon.

    --Julius Hare.

    Thou hast granted me life and lovingkindness; And thy visitation
    hath preserved my spirit.

    --Job 10. 12.

Almighty God, I pray that I may have a true appreciation of the
quality of life. Reveal to me my responsibilities and help me to make
them my opportunities. Keep me in search of thoughts and deeds that
will increase the delight of my soul. Amen.




MAY EIGHTEENTH

Francis Mahony (Father Prout) died 1866.

Mrs. Johnson (Stella) born 1735.

John Wilson (Christopher North) born 1785.

    Longing is God's fresh heavenward will,
      With our poor earthly striving;
    We quench it, that we may be still
      Content with merely living.

    But would we learn that heart's full scope
      Which we are hourly wronging,
    Our lives must climb from hope to hope,
      And realize our longing.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    Pretexts are not wanted when one wishes a thing.

    --Goldoni.

    Friendship is for all aid and comfort through all the relations of
    life and death--for serene days and graceful gifts and country
    rambles; but also for rough roads, and hard fare, shipwreck,
    poverty, and persecution.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Strive to enter in by the narrow door.

    --Luke 13. 24.

Eternal God, I pray that thou wilt graciously restore my spirits if I
may have settled into despondency over my disappointments. May I have
the will to rise above them, and patiently strive for renewed hope.
Amen.




MAY NINETEENTH

James Boswell died 1795.

Johann Gottlieb Fichte born 1762.

William E. Gladstone died 1898.

    Tired! Well, what of that?
    Didst fancy life was spent on beds of ease,
    Fluttering the rose-leaves scattered by the breeze?
    Come! rouse thee, work while it is called to-day!
    Coward, arise--go forth upon the way!

    Lonely! And what of that?
    Some one must be lonely; 'tis not given to all
    To feel a heart responsive rise and fall,
    To blend another life into its own;
    Work may be done in loneliness; work on.

    Dark! Well, what of that?
    Didst fondly dream the sun would never set?
    Dost fear to lose thy way? Take courage yet,
    Learn thou to walk by faith and not by sight,
    Thy steps will be guided, and guided right.

    --Unknown.

    And let us not be weary in well-doing: for in due season we shall
    reap, if we faint not.

    --Galatians 6. 9.

My Father, if thou wert far off I could not reach thee in time, for I
falter so much and need thee so often. I pray that thou wilt keep so
near that I can feel thy love and strength breathing within me. Amen.




MAY TWENTIETH

Elizabeth G. Fry born 1780.

John Stuart Mill born 1806.

Alfred Domett born 1811.

Rudolf H. Lotze born 1817.

Marquis de Lafayette died 1834.

    Nature has written a letter of credit upon some men's faces which is
    honored wherever presented. You cannot help trusting such men; their
    very presence gives confidence. There is a "promise to pay" in their
    faces which gives confidence, and you prefer it to another man's
    indorsement. Character is credit.

    --William M. Thackeray.

Henry Drummond has told us how in the heart of Africa he came across
men and women who remembered the only white man they ever saw
before--David Livingstone; and as you cross his footsteps in the dark
continent men's faces light up as they speak of the kind doctor who
passed there years ago. They could not understand him; but they felt
the love that beat in his heart.

    Who is wise and understanding among you? let him show by his good
    life his works in meekness of wisdom.

    --James 3. 13.

My Lord, inspire me with kind words and thoughtful deeds, that I may
share the yearnings and sympathy of others. May my life show that I am
dependable, and may none be left lonely to-day because of my
forgetfulness. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-FIRST

Albrecht Dürer born 1471.

Fernando de Soto died 1542.

Alexander Pope born 1688.

    Self-love but serves the virtuous mind to wake
    As the small pebble stirs the peaceful lake;
    The center moved, a circle straight succeeds,
    Another still, and still another spreads;
    Friend, parent, neighbor, first it will embrace,
    Its country next, and next, the human race.

    --Alexander Pope.

    A gentleman is one who understands and shows every mark of deference
    to the claim of self-love in others, and exacts it in return from
    them.

    --William Hazlitt.

    But he knoweth the way that I take;
    When he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
    My foot hath held fast to his steps;
    His way have I kept, and turned not aside.

    --Job 23. 10.

Lord God, teach me how secret actions make or destroy my life. Show me
the deep lines made by sorrow and discontent that cannot be effaced.
May I look toward the corrections of life and not on my imperfections,
that my life may be a helpful influence. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-SECOND

Newman Hall born 1816.

Wilhelm Richard Wagner born 1813.

Maria Edgeworth died 1849.

Victor Hugo died 1885.

    Who cares for the burden, the night, and the rain,
      And the long, steep, lonesome road,
    When at last through the darkness a light shines plain,
    When a voice calls "Hail," and a friend draws rein,
      With an arm for the stubborn load?

    For life is the chance of a friend or two
      This side of the journey's goal.
    Though the world be a desert the long night through,
    Yet the gay flowers bloom and the sky shows blue
      When a soul salutes a soul.

    --Unknown.

    In all misfortune the greatest consolation is a sympathizing friend.

    --Cervantes.

    They help every one his neighbor; and every one saith to his
    brother, Be of good courage.

    --Isaiah 41. 6.

Loving Father, may I lay hold upon the highest standards of friendship
and so be qualified to be a friend. May those who call and lean on me
feel secure in my support. May none ever be ashamed to call me friend.
Grant that those whom I love may keep faith with me. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-THIRD

Thomas Hood born 1798.

Margaret Fuller Ossoli born 1810.

Henrik Ibsen died 1896.

Dr. John Campbell died 1861.

    Chance cannot touch me! Time cannot hush me!
    Fear, Hope, and longing, at strife;
    Sink as I rise, on, on, upward forever,
    Gathering strength, gaining breath--
    Naught can sever
    Me from the Spirit of Life.

    --Margaret Fuller.

    But evil is wrought by want of thought, as well as want of heart.

    --Thomas Hood.

    For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy
    to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed to us-ward.

    --Romans 8. 18.

Heavenly Father, cause the newness of life to continue to flow through
my heart, that I may not be fatigued, as I struggle with
discouragements. Release me from hopeless cares that I have made mine,
thinking they were thine. May I trust in the boundless limit of thy
mercy, and rejoice in the world of living light. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-FOURTH

Jean Paul Marat born 1744.

Stephen Girard born 1750.

Sir Robert Adair born 1763.

Queen Victoria born 1819.

Caroline Fox born 1819.

    I see my way as birds their trackless way.
    I shall arrive! what time, what circuit first,
    I ask not: but unless God send his hail
    Or blinding fireballs, sleet, or stifling snow,
    In some time, his good time, I shall arrive:
    He guides me and the bird.

    --Robert Browning.

    To live in the presence of great truths and eternal laws--that is
    what keeps a man patient when the world ignores him, and calm and
    unspoiled when the world praises him.

    --Honore Balzac.

    But whoso putteth his trust in Jehovah shall be safe.

    --Proverbs 29. 25.

Lord Jehovah, all goodness, tenderness, and forbearance that are in my
life have come from thee. May I not lose them in self, but by them
make possible happiness and endurance for others. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-FIFTH

Ralph Waldo Emerson born 1803.

Edward Bulwer-Lytton (George) born 1803.

Dr. William Paley died 1805.

William Henry Channing born 1810.

    Hast thou named all the birds without a gun?
    Loved the wild rose, and left it on the stalk?
    At rich men's tables eaten bread and pulse?
    Unarmed faced danger with a heart of trust?
    And loved so well a high behavior,
    In man or maid, that thou from speech refrained,
    Nobility more noble to repay?
    O, be my friend and teach me to be thine!

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    What the superior man seeks is in himself;
    What the small man seeks is in others.

    --Confucius.

    Make no friendship with a man that is given to anger;
    And with a wrathful man thou shalt not go.

    --Proverbs 22. 24.

Lord God, may I live for the pure and upright, and have the
blessedness of a rejoicing heart. May I yearn for the secrets of
nature. Grant that my life may not seek destruction, but tenderly find
and protect life. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-SIXTH

The Venerable Bede died 735.

Count Nicolas Ludwig Zinzendorf born 1800.

Capel Lofft died 1821.

    Let us disengage ourselves from care about the passing things of
    time; let us soar above our worldly possessions. The bee does not
    less need its wings when it has gathered an abundant store, for if
    it sink in the honey, it dies.

    --Saint Augustine.

    Perhaps if we could penetrate nature's secrets, we should find that
    what we call needs are more essential to the well-being of the world
    than the most precious grain or fruit.

    --Nathaniel Hawthorne.

    We trust the Lord in faith serene,
      A ladder he hath given;
    The lower rounds in earth are seen,
      The higher reach to heaven.

    --Thomas Brevior.

    Is not the life more than the food, and the body than the raiment?

    --Matthew 6. 25.

Almighty God, I bless thee for the privilege of a great life. May I
not be satisfied to rest with idle hands in youth and make age
regretful because I have lived a useless life: but with a clear eye
and an exalted mind may I choose the "durable satisfactions" that may
be mine. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-SEVENTH

Alighieri Dante born 1265.

John Calvin died 1564.

Julia Ward Howe born 1819.

Noah Webster died 1843.

John Kendrick Bangs born 1862.

    To your judgments give ye not the reins
    With too much eagerness, like him who ere
    The corn be ripe, is fain to count the grains:
    For I have seen the briar through the winter snows
    Look sharp and stiff--yet on a future day
    High on its summit bear the tender rose:
      And ship I've seen, that through the storm hath passed,
    Securely bounding o'er the watery way,
      At entrance of the harbor wrecked at last.

    --Dante, translated by Wright.

    In the beauty of the lilies Christ was born across the sea,
    With a glory in his bosom that transfigures you and me:
    As he died to make men holy, let us die to make them free,
      While God is marching on.

    --Julia Ward Howe.

    Trust in Jehovah with all thy heart,
    And lean not upon thine own understanding.

    --Proverbs 3. 5.

Lord God, help me to know my ability, that I may not attempt with
weakness that which requires strength to undertake; and make me stable
that I may not relax vigilance even though victory seems assured.
Amen.




MAY TWENTY-EIGHTH

William Pitt born 1759.

Thomas Moore born 1779.

Louis Agassiz born 1807.

    The bird let loose in eastern skies,
      When hastening fondly home,
    Ne'er stoops to earth her wing, nor flies
      Where idle warblers roam;
    But high she shoots through air and light,
      Above all low delay,
    Where nothing earthly bounds her flight,
      Nor shadow dims her way.

    --Thomas Moore.

    Remember, the essence of religion is, a heart void of offense toward
    God and man; not subtle speculative opinions, but an active
    principle of faith.

    --William Pitt.

    And hope putteth not to shame; because the love of God hath been
    shed abroad in our hearts.

    --Romans 5. 5.

God of mercy, reveal to me the hallowed life. May I be reminded that,
while I may save and keep the dust from things that perish, my life,
though unkept and undeveloped, tells in itself the value and need of
the most watchful care. Amen.




MAY TWENTY-NINTH

Patrick Henry born 1736.

Joseph Fouche born 1763.

Josephine died 1814.

Gerald Massey born 1829.

    Is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of
    chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God. I know not what course
    others may take, but as for me, give me liberty or give me death.

    --Patrick Henry.

    Though hearts brood o'er the past, our eyes
      With smiling features glisten;
    For lo! our day bursts up the skies,
      Lean out your souls and listen!
    The world is following freedom's way,
      And ripening with her sorrow;
    Take heart! Who bears the cross to-day
      Shall wear the crown to-morrow.

    --Gerald Massey.

    For God gave us not a spirit of fearfulness; but of power and love
    and discipline.

    --2 Timothy 1. 7.

Lord God, may I never feel that I have a right to sell thy joys, nor
the privilege of giving away my burdens. Grant that I may not forsake
my principles, but may I keep the way clear that memory may find an
unruffled rest. Amen.




MAY THIRTIETH

Decoration Day.

Joan d'Arc burned at Rouen 1431.

Alexander Pope died 1744.

Voltaire died 1778.

Alfred Austin born 1835.

    Here is the nation God has builded by our hands. What shall we do
    with it? Who stands ready to act again and always in the spirit of
    this day of reunion and hope and patriotic fervor? The day of our
    country's life has but broadened into morning. Do not put uniforms
    by. Put the harness of the present on. Lift your eyes to the great
    tracts of life yet to be conquered in the interest of righteous
    peace, of that prosperity which lies in a people's hearts and
    outlasts all wars and errors of men.

    --Woodrow Wilson.

    Cover them over with beautiful flowers:
    Deck them with garlands these brothers of ours;
    Lying so silent, by night and by day,
    Sleeping the years of their manhood away;

           *       *       *       *       *

    Give them the laurels they lost with their life.

    --Will Carleton.

    Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
    his friends.

    --John 15. 13.

My Father, as I pause this day to think of the brave men and women who
have given their lives for the sake of others, may I be thankful for
them. May I remember that noble deeds and kind words are never lost,
but that self may block the way to justice. O Father, make war to
cease! and lead us to victories that are won through peace. Amen.




MAY THIRTY-FIRST

Ludwig Tieck born 1773.

Joseph Haydn died 1809.

Walt Whitman born 1819.

    Passage, immediate passage! the blood burns in my veins!
    Away, O soul! hoist instantly the anchor!
    Out the hawser--haul out--shake out every sail!
    Have we not stood here like trees in the ground long enough?
    Have we not groveled here long enough eating and drinking like mere brutes?
    Have we not darkened and dazed ourselves with books long enough?
    Sail forth--steer for the deep waters only,
    Reckless, O soul, exploring, I with thee, and thou with me,
    For we are bound where mariner has not dared to go,
    And we will risk the ship, ourselves and all.

    --Walt Whitman.

    Be strong and of good courage, fear not, nor be affrighted at them:
    for Jehovah thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
    fail thee, nor forsake thee.

    --Deuteronomy 31. 6.

My Father, give me joyful courage to squarely face my life. Help me to
know that I cannot vanquish life by evading duties, nor encircling
myself with indulgences. If I may be blind to my situation, restore my
sight that I may make ready a worthy passage with thee. Amen.




JUNE


    There lives a glory in these sweet June days
      Such as I found not in the days gone by,
      A kindlier meaning in the unclouded sky,
    A tenderer whisper in the woodland ways;
    And I have understanding of the lays,
      The birds are singing, forasmuch as I
      Have learned how love avails to satisfy
    A man's whole heart, and fills his lips with praise.

    --Percy C. Ainsworth




JUNE FIRST

Nicolas Poussin born 1594.

Sir Christopher Marlowe died 1593.

Sir David Wilkie died 1841.

Hugo Münsterberg born 1863.

    In every act of ours, in every feeling and every volition and every
    thought, we are conscious of a self which expresses its aims and
    meanings. Every idea of ours points beyond itself, every volition
    binds us in decision, and every experience gets meaning by our
    attitudes. The most immediate task which life demands from us in the
    understanding of ourselves and of others is, therefore, to interpret
    our ideas, to draw the consequences of our will, to appreciate the
    attitudes, to measure them by higher standards.

    --Hugo Münsterberg.

    And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.

    --Genesis 1. 26.

My Creator, I pray that I may not only have the desire to know life,
but the assurance to live it. Help me to understand that my earthly
possessions are not the measure of my life, nor my body the boundary
of my living. May I reach for the high standards that are free,
without limit, to all. Amen.




JUNE SECOND

Ethelbert baptized 597.

John Randolph born 1773.

Thomas Hardy born 1840.

    In battle or business, whatever the game,
    In law or in love, it is ever the same:
    In the struggle for power, or scramble for pelf,
    Let this be your motto: "Rely on yourself."

    --John G. Saxe.

    Labor is necessary to excellence. This is an eternal truth, although
    vanity cannot be taught to believe or indolence to heed it.

    --John Randolph.

    But let each man prove his own work, and then shall he have his
    glorying in regard of himself alone, and not of his neighbor.

    --Galatians 6. 4.

Almighty God, I regret the hours of indiscretion and waste; through
thy forgiveness may I have thy help over past wrongs. May I have a
deeper conception of a profitable life, that I may hereafter live by
it. Amen.




JUNE THIRD

Sydney Smith born 1771.

Dr. John Gregory born 1724.

Richard Cobden born 1804.

Jefferson Davis born 1808.

Norman Macleod born 1812.

    Certainly, let the board be spread and let the bed be dressed for
    the traveler; but let not the emphasis of hospitality lie in these
    things. Honor to the house where they are simple to the verge of
    hardship, so that there the intellect is awake and reads the law of
    the universe, the soul worships truth and love, honor and courtesy
    flow into all deeds.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Kind actions, and good wishes, and pure thoughts
    No mystery is here: Here is no boon
    For high--yet not for low: The smoke ascends
    To heaven as lightly from the cottage hearth
    As from the haughtiest palace.

    --William Wordsworth.

    Given to hospitality.

    --Romans 12. 13.

Gracious Father, I beseech thee to give me wisdom for kind thoughts
and deeds. Teach me true hospitality, that I may be gracious in my own
home and appreciative in the home of others. May I not temper my
hospitality for certain reasons, but have a genuine welcome for all.
Amen.




JUNE FOURTH

George III born 1738.

Lord Edward Fitzgerald died 1798.

General Garnet Wolseley born 1833.

    This is the gospel of labor--ring it,
      Ye bells of the kirk--
    The Lord of Love came down from above
      To live with the men who work.
    This is the rose he planted, here
      In the thorn-cursed soil;
    Heaven is blest with perfect rest, but
      The blessing of earth is toil.

    --Henry van Dyke

    No man is born into the world whose work
    Is not born with him. There is always work
    And tools to work withal, for those who will;
    And blessed are the horny hands of toil.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt
    rest.

    --Exodus 23. 12.

My Father, I pray for the love of work, and the desire to cultivate
life. Stir me, that I may be ambitious. May I not stare at life in an
everyday way and forget that others are watching for the surprises.
Help me to be considerate and kind in all that I do. Amen.




JUNE FIFTH

Socrates born B.C. 469.

Dr. Adam Smith born 1723.

Karl Maria von Weber died 1826.

O. Henry died 1910.

    You think that upon the score of foreknowledge and divining I am
    infinitely inferior to the swans. When they perceive approaching
    death they sing more merrily than before, because of the joy they
    have in going to the God they serve.

    --Socrates.

    O yet we trust that somehow good
      Will be the final goal of ill,
      To pangs of nature, sins of will,
    Defects of doubt, and taints of blood;

    That nothing walks with aimless feet;
      That not one life shall be destroyed,
      Or cast as rubbish to the void,
    When God hath made the pile complete.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    How precious is thy lovingkindness, O God! And the children of men
    take refuge under the shadow of thy wings.

    --Psalm 36. 7.

Eternal God, forbid that I should try to set up thy judgment-seat in
so small a place as self, and attempt to render decisions for thee. My
soul lives anew as I think of thy love, and that there is no place
where thy mercy can be withheld from me. Amen.




JUNE SIXTH

Diego R. Velasquez born 1599.

Pierre Corneille born 1606.

Nathan Hale born 1755.

Sir John Stainer born 1840.

    These stones that make the meadow brooklet murmur
      Are the keys on which it plays.
    O'er every shelving rock its touch grows firmer,
      Resounding notes to raise.

    If every path o'er which footsteps wander,
      Were smooth as ocean strand,
    There were no theme for gratitude and wonder
      At God's delivering hand.

    --W. E. Winks.

    We also rejoice in our tribulations: knowing that tribulation
    worketh steadfastness; and steadfastness, approvedness; and
    approvedness, hope.

    --Romans 5. 3, 4.

My Father, if rain may come to-day, may I realize its help, with the
power of the sun, to increase life; and may its influence be sweet and
wholesome to me, as I learn that sadness is temporary and will
disappear with the coming of gladness. May I go search for the joy
that may be mine to-day. Amen.




JUNE SEVENTH

Robert Bruce died 1329.

George Bryan (Beau Brummel) born 1778.

Rev. W.D. Conybeare born 1787.

    When the lamp is shattered
      The light in the dust lies dead--
    When the cloud is scattered
      The rainbow's glory is shed.
    When the lute is broken
      Sweet tones are remembered not;
    When the lips have spoken
      Loved accents are soon forgot.

    --Percy Bysshe Shelley.

    A slip of the rose may take root, and bring forth a bloom to give
    peace to the soul. A slip of the tongue may take root, and bring
    forth a thorn that will torture the soul.

    --M.B.S.

    Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
    itself, except it abide in the vine; so neither can ye, except ye
    abide in me.

    --John 15. 4.

Many of us, O Father, overlook the fragrance of the rose while we are
being pierced by its thorn. Increase my faith in life and in thee,
that I may not be dismayed over mysteries, but sincerely wait for
deliverance. Amen.




JUNE EIGHTH

Mohammed died 632.

Thomas Rickman born 1776.

Charles Reade born 1814.

John Everett Millais born 1829.

    If one touch of nature makes the whole world kin, methinks that
    sweet and wonderful thing sympathy is not less powerful. What golden
    barriers, what ice of centuries, it can melt in a moment!

    --Charles Reade.

    If I had two loaves of bread, I would sell one to buy white
    hyacinths to feed my soul.

    --Mohammed.

    What do you live for if it is not to make life less difficult for
    each other?

    --George Eliot.

    Pure religion and undefiled before our God and Father is this, to
    visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
    oneself unspotted from the world.

    --James 1. 27.

My Father, help me to understand that kind hearts and willing hands
are made possible by the depth and greatness of thy love. May I
possess the spirit of forgiveness and consideration, that I may not
hold prejudice and revenge, but help with sympathy and tenderness.
Amen.




JUNE NINTH

George Stephenson born 1781.

John Howard Payne born 1791.

Richard D. Blackmore born 1825.

Charles Dickens died 1870.

    Reflect upon your present blessings of which every man has many; not
    upon your past misfortunes, of which all have some.

    --Charles Dickens.

    'Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,
    Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home!
    A charm from the skies seems to hallow us there,
    Which, sought through the world, is ne'er met with elsewhere.
      Home! home! sweet, sweet home!
      There's no place like home!

    --John Howard Payne.

    For thou shalt forget thy misery;
    Thou shalt remember it as waters that are passed away.

    --Job 11. 16.

Lord God, my soul fills with gratitude for the blessings which I have
received and enjoyed. Help me to conform to thy will concerning my
duties. May I not try to resist thy providence. I pray that thou wilt
bless my daily life, and make my home a place to dispense kindness and
cheerfulness. Amen.




JUNE TENTH

Sir Edwin Arnold born 1832.

Henry M. Stanley born 1840.

Edward Everett Hale died 1809.

Robert Schumann born 1810.

    What have you done with your soul, my friend?
    Where is the ray you were wont to send,
    Glancing bright through the outer night,
      Touching with hope what was dark before,
      Glimmering on to the further shore?

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    God suffers the light to know eclipse,
    Dashes the cup from the eager lips;
    You perchance would have drunk too deep.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    Lift where you stand.

    --Edward Everett Hale.

    A friend is the first person who comes in when the whole world has
    gone out.

    --Unknown.

    Who comforteth us in all our affliction, that we may be able to
    comfort them that are in any affliction, through the comfort
    wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.

    --2 Corinthians 1.4.

Almighty God, help me to correct my mistakes, and to be more careful
of what I take in my life. May I always stretch out a hand of love to
inspire others with confidence to care more for themselves and more
for thee. Amen.




JUNE ELEVENTH

Roger Bacon died 1292.

George Wither born 1588.

John Constable born 1776.

    Exceeding gifts from God are not blessings, they are duties. They do
    not always increase a man's happiness; they always increase his
    responsibilities.

    --Charles Kingsley.

    Make a rule and pray for help to keep it. Once a day spare room for
    a thought that will pursue a strong purpose. Help in some way the
    progress of a weary soul who cannot repay you.

    --M. B. S.

    There is no true potency, remember, but that of help; nor true
    ambition, but ambition to save.

    --John Ruskin.

    And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the
    afflicted soul: then shall thy light rise in darkness, and thine
    obscurity be as the noon day.

    --Isaiah 58. 10.

Heavenly Father, when I think of how little I have given away my heart
burns with shame, as I recall what thou hast given to me. May I from
this day be more thoughtful of thy tender compassion by being less
selfish with what I have. Amen.




JUNE TWELFTH

Harriet Martineau born 1802.

Charles Kingsley born 1819.

Dr. Thomas Arnold (Arnold of Rugby) died 1842.

Sir Oliver Lodge born 1851.

    Do to-day's duty, fight to-day's temptation, and do not weaken and
    distract yourself by looking-forward to things which you cannot see,
    and could not understand if you saw them.

    --Charles Kingsley.

    Genuine religion has its roots deep down in the heart of
    humanity.... The actions of the Deity make no appeal to any special
    sense. We are deaf and blind, therefore, to the imminent grandeur
    around us unless we have insight enough to appreciate the whole and
    to recognize the woven fabric of existence flowing steadily from the
    loom of an infinite progress toward perfection.

    --Sir Oliver Lodge.

    Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down
    from the Father of lights, with whom can be no variation, neither
    shadow that is cast by turning.

    --James 1. 17.

Gracious Father, forbid that I should make thee regret thy gifts to
me; and if I have failed to appreciate them, look upon me with pity,
for I have cheated myself more than I have thee. Give me a deeper
appreciation, that I may be strengthened day by day in the veriest
duties of life. Amen.




JUNE THIRTEENTH

Dr. Thomas Young born 1773.

General Winfield Scott born 1786.

Dr. Thomas Arnold (Arnold of Rugby) born 1795.

William Butler Yeats born 1865.

    Beyond all wealth, honor, or even health, is the attachment we form
    to noble souls, because to become one with the good, generous, and
    true is to become, in a measure, good, generous, and true ourselves.

    --Thomas Arnold.

    Open thy bosom, set thy wishes wide, and let in manhood--let in
    happiness; admit the boundless theater of thought from nothing up to
    God ... which makes a man.

    --Thomas Young.

    Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their
    labor. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to
    him that is alone when he falleth, and hath not another to lift him
    up.

    --Ecclesiastes 4. 9, 10.

Heavenly Father, I thank thee for good friends, and for the delight
that dwells in fellowship. Give me the power to apprehend love, and
guard me against the ways to lose it. May I look to my friends to help
me to be pure, and to help me live my truest life. Amen.




JUNE FOURTEENTH

Carlo Guidi born 1650.

Harriet Beecher Stowe born 1812.

Mary Carpenter died 1877.

    When you get into a tight place, and everything goes against you
    till it seems as if you couldn't hold on a minute longer, never give
    up then, for that's just the time and place that the tide will turn.

    --Harriet Beecher Stowe.

    I cannot do it alone,
      The waves run fast and high,
    And the fogs close chill around,
      And the light goes out in the sky;
    But I know that we two
    Shall win in the end--
      God and I.

    --Unknown.

    Let us hold fast the confession of our hope that it waver not.

    --Hebrews 10. 23.

Almighty God, I pray that thou wilt sustain me when I may be enduring
for a purpose, and to accomplish it seems beyond my strength. Renew me
with courage, and give me unceasing hope, and faith that is able to
hold out to the end. Amen.




JUNE FIFTEENTH

Thomas Randolph born 1605.

Edward Grieg born 1843.

Thomas Campbell died 1844.

    What is rightly done stays with us, to support another right beyond,
    or higher up; whatever is wrongly done vanishes; and by the blank,
    betrays what we would have built above.

    --John Ruskin.

    The seed ye sow another reaps,
    The wealth ye find another keeps,
    The robe ye weave another wears,
    The arms ye forge another bears.

    --Percy Bysshe Shelley.

    Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon
      thee; thou saidst, Fear not.
    O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul;
      thou hast redeemed my life.

    --Lamentations 3. 57, 58.

Lord God, reveal to me my selfishness if I am receiving much and
giving little to satisfy life. May I be grateful and considerate of
all those who labor to give me comfort and happiness. Amen.




JUNE SIXTEENTH

Hugh Capet succeeds to throne of father 956.

Sir Richard Fanshawe died 1666.

Sir John Cheke born 1514.

    When to the sessions of sweet, solemn thought
      I summon up remembrance of things past,
    I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought.
      But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
      All losses are restored and sorrows end.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Seldom can the heart be lonely
      If it seek a lonelier still--
    Self-forgetting, seeking only
      Emptier cups of love to fill.

    --F. R. Havergal.

    The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of them that are taught,
    that I may know how to sustain with words him that is weary.

    --Isaiah 50. 4.

Gracious Father, keep within me that cheer and courage which never has
a place for weary murmurings; and with peace make the hours of
solitude profitable as they pass. Help me to seek those who are in
need of sympathy and encouragement, that I may help them to have a
tranquil life. Amen.




JUNE SEVENTEENTH

Joseph Addison died 1719.

Charles François Gounod born 1818.

Sir E. C. Burne-Jones died 1898.

      He who plants a tree
      Plants a hope.
    Rootlets up through fibers blindly grope,
      Leaves unfold unto horizons free.
      So man's life must climb
      From the clods of time
      Unto heavens sublime.
    Canst thou prophesy, thou little tree,
    What the glory of the boughs shall be?

    --Lucy Larcom.

    Very early, I perceived that the object of life is to grow.

    --Margaret Fuller.

    Many a genius has been slow of growth. Oaks that flourish for a
    thousand years do not spring up into beauty like a reed.

    --George Henry Lewes.

    And Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and
    men.

    --Luke 2. 52.

Almighty God, thy power is so great I cannot express it; help me to
comprehend the meaning of it, that I may feel more profoundly thy
expectations of my life. May I remember that to forget that life is
eternal may make me to lose all it has grown. Amen.




JUNE EIGHTEENTH

Robert Stewart born 1769.

Battle of Waterloo 1815.

William Cobbett died 1835.

    Not he the threatening texts who deals
      Is highest 'mong the preachers,
    But he who feels the woes and weals
      Of all God's wandering creatures.
    He doth good work whose heart can find
      The spirit 'neath the letter;
    Who makes his kind of happier mind,
      Leaves wiser men and better.

    Dear Bard and Brother! let who may
      Against thy faults be railing,
    (Though far, I pray, from us be they
      That never had a failing!)

    --James Russell Lowell.

    Avenge not yourselves, beloved, but give place unto the wrath of
    God: for it is written, Vengeance belongeth unto me; I will
    recompense, saith the Lord.

    --Romans 12. 19.

Heavenly Father, I pray that I may not be so occupied in expressing my
judgment of others, that I will forget to live in thy judgment myself.
May I have the compassion for others that I hope to receive from thee.
Amen.




JUNE NINETEENTH

Magna Charta signed, Runnymede, 1215.

Blaise Pascal born 1623.

Charles H. Spurgeon born 1834.

    Find your niche and fill it. If it is ever so little, if it is only
    a hewer of wood or a drawer of water, do something in the great
    battle for God and truth.

    --Charles Spurgeon.

    If I do what I may in earnest, I need not mourn if I work no great
    work on earth. To help the growth of a thought that struggles toward
    the light; to brush with gentle hand the stain from the white of one
    snowdrop--such be my ambition.

    --George Macdonald.

    Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all thy work, and in all that
    thou puttest thy hand unto.

    --Deuteronomy 15. 10.

Lord God, I pray that I may not through conceit be betrayed into
slacking my work, or through visions of greatness lose it. Teach me
how to obtain the secret wealth in the smallest thing; and may I
recognize thy treasures, and fill my life with the finest that may be
given me. Amen.




JUNE TWENTIETH

John of Lancaster born 1389.

Dr. Adam Ferguson born 1723.

Anna Letitia Aiken (Mrs. Barbauld) born 1743.

    If the soft hand of winning Pleasure leads
    By living waters, and through flowery meads,
    Where all is smiling, tranquil, and serene,
    Oh! teach me to elude each latent snare,
    And whisper to my sliding heart, "Beware!"
    With caution let me hear the Syren's voice,
    And doubtful, with a trembling heart rejoice.
    If friendless in a vale of tears I stray,
    Where briars wound, and thorns perplex my way,
    Still let my steady soul thy goodness see,
    And, with a strong confidence, lay hold on Thee.

    --Anna Letitia Barbauld.

    For thou, O God, hast proved us:
    Thou hast tried us, as silver is tried.

    --Psalm 66. 10.

O Lord, teach me to select my pleasures with care, that I may not
plunge into joyful moments that are irretrievable. May I indulge in
the pleasures that bring happiness and not weariness. Grant that I may
have the honor to protect others from harm and loss, as I engage in my
pleasures and in my work. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-FIRST

Captain John Smith died 1631.

Anthony Collins born 1676.

Jacques Offenbach born 1819.

    In our eagerness to solve life we start out to trace its mysteries
    and trample God's truths as we search. As we return we discover the
    shattered treasures, and gladly stoop to gather up the fragments,
    and with them translate the revelations of the soul.

    --M.B.S.

    I stretch my hands out in the empty air;
      I strain my eyes into the heavy night;
    Blackness of darkness!--Father, hear my prayer;
      Grant me to see the light!

    --George Arnold.

    But when he came to himself he said, How many hired servants of my
    father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish here with
    hunger! I will arise and go to my father.

    --Luke 15. 17, 18.

Heavenly Father, I pray that as I search for the truth I will not be
so eager to seek thy mysteries as I am to extend thy ministries. Grant
that by thy love I will be guided in comprehending and exalting thy
kingdom. May my service bring me wisdom as I obey thy laws. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-SECOND

Matthew Henry died 1714.

Karl Wilhelm von Humboldt born 1767.

H. Rider Haggard born 1856.

    The safe and general antidote against sorrow is employment. Sorrow
    is a kind of rust in the soul, which every new idea contributes in
    its passage to scour away.

    --Dr. Johnson.

    We may be sure that one principle will hold throughout the whole
    pursuit of thoughtful happiness--the principle that the best way to
    secure future happiness is to be as happy as is rightfully possible
    to-day. To secure any desirable capacity for the future, near or
    remote, cultivate it to-day. What would be the use of immortality
    for a person who cannot use well half an hour? asks Emerson.

    --Charles W. Eliot.

    Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say to
    them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not.

    --Isaiah 35. 3, 4.

Loving Father, help me that I may realize the depth of thy love. If I
may be discouraged over my failures, speak to me hopefully and lead me
out where I may find the right way to succeed. May I not be kept in
sorrow, but find each day the happiness that brings a thankful heart.
Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-THIRD

Mark Akenside died 1770.

John Fill born 1625.

Josephine born 1763

              Could we by a wish
    Have what we will and get the future now,
    Would we wish aught done undone in the past?
    So, let him wait God's instant men call years;
    Meantime hold hard by truth and his great soul,
    Do out the duty! Through such souls alone
    God stooping shows sufficient of his light
    For us i' the dark to rise by. And I rise.

    --Robert Browning.

    Press not thy purpose on thy Lord,
      Urge not thy erring will,
    Nor dictate to the Eternal mind
      Nor doubt thy Maker's skill.

    --Lydia H. Sigourney.

    Cause me to hear thy loving-kindness in the morning;
    For in thee do I trust:
    Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk;
    For I lift up my soul unto thee.

    --Psalm 143. 8.

My Father, help me to see that in my portion of work thou hast
entrusted me to help further thy kingdom. Correct me if I am wrong in
interpreting thy way. May I concentrate my mind and make my heart and
hands do the work which thou hast given for me to do. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-FOURTH

Jean Baptiste Massillon born 1663.

Alexandre Dumas born 1803.

Henry Ward Beecher born 1813.

General Lord Kitchener born 1850.

    All the world cries, "Where is the man who will save us?" Don't look
    so far for this man, you have him at hand. This man--it is you, it
    is I, it is each one of us! How to constitute oneself a man? Nothing
    harder if one knows not how to will it; nothing easier if one wills
    it.

    --Alexandre Dumas.

    Many of our troubles are God dragging us, and they would end if we
    would stand upon our feet and go whither he would have us.

    --Henry Ward Beecher.

    Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and mine ordinances; which if a
    man do, he shall live in them.

    --Leviticus 18. 5.

Gracious Lord, I pray that I may have reverence for that which is pure
and holy, and that my soul may delight in the presence of the good.
Help me to so live that I may have the memory of precious deeds, and
that I may not have to depend on the service of others to supply
contentment for my closing days. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-FIFTH

William Smellie died 1795.

Antoine Jean Gros died 1835.

Lucy Webb Hayes died 1889.

    In every feast remember there are two guests to be entertained--the
    body and the soul; and what you give the body you presently lose,
    but what you give the soul remains forever.

    --Epictetus.

    We take pains and weary to faultlessly clothe the body. We
    persevere, and often struggle, to adorn the mind. As we pass through
    the rays of truth, sometimes we find, after all we have put on, we
    have left bare the soul.

    --M.B.S.

    For what shall a man be profited, if he shall gain the whole world,
    and forfeit his life?

    --Matthew 16. 26.

Lord God, help me to understand that thou hast made the principle of
truth so that I cannot add to it, nor take from it, lest in altering
it I might destroy it. May I never try to make my purpose cover the
truth, but without fear, face the light where truth shines the
brightest. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-SIXTH

Archbishop Robert Leighton died 1684.

Dr. Philip Doddridge born 1702.

George Morland born 1763.

    Why are we so glad to talk and take our turns to prattle, when so
    rarely we get back to the stronghold of our silence with an
    unwounded conscience?

    --Thomas a Kempis.

    I have read that those who listened to Lord Chatham felt that there
    was something finer in the man than anything which he said.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Speech is like the cloth of Arras opened and put abroad, whereby the
    imagery doth appear in figure; whereas in thoughts they lie but as
    in packs.

    --Plutarch.

    Keep thy tongue from evil,
    And thy lips from speaking guile.

    --Psalm 34. 13.

Tender Father, make me more watchful of the time that I give to
useless thoughts and words, and save me from cutting words, which make
deeper impressions than can be cut with sharp tools. Forgive me for
the hours that have not been profitable; I would I had them back, for
my heart and mind have need of them. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-SEVENTH

Paul Laurence Dunbar born 1872.

Lafcadio Hearne born 1850.

Helen Keller born 1880.

    Of course, it was not easy at first to fly. The speech wings were
    weak and broken; nothing was left save the impulse to fly, but that
    was something. One can never consent to creep when one has an
    impulse to soar. There are so many difficulties in the way, so many
    discouragements; but I kept on trying, knowing that perseverance and
    patience win in the end.

    --Helen Keller.

    De da'kest hour, dey allus say,
      Is des' befo' de dawn,
    But it's moughty ha'd a-waitin'
      Were de night goes frownin' on;
    An' it's moughty ha'd a-hopin'
      When de clouds is big and black,
    An' all de t'ings you's waited fu'
      Has failed, er gone to wrack--
    But des' keep on a joggin' ind a little bit o song.
    De moon is allus brightah w'en de night's been long.

    --Paul Laurence Dunbar.

    Weeping may tarry for the night,
    But joy cometh in the morning.

    --Psalm 30. 5.

My Father, I thank thee for life and its faculties. May I not be
deceived by gratification and miss the permanent satisfactions. Make
me brave that I may be courageous in affliction, and not be dismayed
over humiliations and disappointments. May I be kept in harmony with
thy will. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-EIGHTH

Henry VIII born 1491.

Jean Jacques Rousseau born 1712.

John Wesley born 1703.

Frederick William Faber born 1814.

    Workman of God! O lose not heart,
      But learn what God is like;
    And in the darkest battlefield
      Thou shalt know where to strike.

    For right is right, since God is God;
      And right the day must win;
    To doubt would be disloyalty,
      To falter would be sin.

    --F. W. Faber.

    Leisure and I have parted company.
    I look upon the world as my parish.
    The best of all is, God is with us.
    To overdo is to undo.

    --John Wesley.

    But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only.

    --James 1. 22.

Lord God, I pray for a desire to work. May I not be deceived in my
convictions, and work for that of which I may afterward be ashamed.
Lead me into a clear conception of right and wrong. Help me to see as
thou dost see, that I may walk with confidence in thy steps. Amen.




JUNE TWENTY-NINTH

Paul Rubens born 1577.

Baron John De Kalb born 1721.

Elizabeth Barrett Browning died 1861.

    Do ye hear the children weeping, O my brothers,
      Ere the sorrow comes with years?
    They are leaning their young heads against their mothers,
      And they cannot stop their tears.
    The young lambs are bleating in the meadows;
      The young birds are chirping in the nests;
    The young fawns are playing with the shadows;
      The young flowers are blowing toward the west:
    But the young, young children, O my brothers!
      They are weeping bitterly.
    They are weeping in the playtime of the others,
      In the country of the free.

    --Elizabeth B. Browning.

    Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast
    borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be
    devoured.

    --Ezekiel 16. 20.

Father of all, I pray that I may always love children. May I never
forget that I wanted things and needed things when I was a child, and
that the help and neglect which I received then told in my life. Make
me interested in the purposes that will help the progress of the child
to-day, and may I realize that the child does not need my casual
charity as much as it needs my permanent justice. Amen.




JUNE THIRTIETH

Alexander Brome died 1666.

Archibald Campbell beheaded 1685.

Sir Thomas Pope Blount died 1697.

    Be useful where thou livest, that they may
      Both want and wish thy pleasing presence still;
    Kindness, good parts, great places are the way
      To compass this. Find out men's wants and will,
    And meet them there. All worldly joys go less
    To the one joy of doing kindnesses.

    --George Herbert.

    Thrice happy he, who by some shady grove,
      Far from the clamorous world, doth live his own;
      Though solitary, who is not alone,
    But doth converse with that eternal love

    --William Drummond.

    Seek, and ye shall find.

    --Matthew 7. 7.

My Father, help me to draw from the wisdom of life, that my soul may
grow in knowledge and power. May I have the quiet confidence that
comes in trusting thee. May I help others to think on the uplifting
things of life. Amen.




JULY


    Then came hot July, boiling like to fire,
      That all his garments he had cast away;
    Upon a lion raging yet with ire
      He boldly rode, and made him to obey.

    --Edmund Spenser.

    A pleasing land of drowsyhead it was,
      Of dreams that wave before the half-shut eye;
    And of gay castles in the clouds that pass,
      For ever flushing round a summer sky.

    --James Thomson.




JULY FIRST

Comte de Rochambeau born 1725.

Gideon Welles born 1802.

George Frederick Watts died 1904.

            There is no unbelief!
    Whoever plants a seed beneath a sod,
    And waits to see it push away the clod,
            He trusts in God.

            There is no unbelief!
    And day by day, and night, unconsciously,
    The heart lives by that faith the lips deny--
            God knoweth why.

    --Bulwer Lytton.

    More and more I see that nothing is so necessary for the religious
    condition of the mind as absolute simplicity. We know what we have
    got to do, and the only thing is to ask ourselves whether we are
    doing it as well as we can.

    --George Frederick Watts.

    Being therefore justified by faith, we have peace with God.

    --Romans 5. 1.

My Creator, I praise thee for the knowledge of life, and the hope of
immortality. Help me to express my belief, and to give my utmost for
the divinest, that I may be worthy of life eternal. Amen.




JULY SECOND

Archbishop Cranmer born 1489.

Christopher W. Gluck born 1714.

Richard Henry Stoddard born 1825.

Sir Robert Peel died 1850.

    One step more, and the race is ended;
    One word more, and the lesson's done;
    One toil more, and a long rest follows
        At set of sun.

    Who would fail, for one step withholden?
    Who would fail, for one word unsaid?
    Who would fail, for a pause too early?
        Sound sleep the dead.

    --Christina G. Rossetti.

    One who never turned his back, but marched breast forward,
      Never doubted clouds would break,
    Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
    Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better, Sleep to wake.

    --Robert Browning.

    He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved.

    --Matthew 10. 22.

My Father, thou hast proven the strength of thy promises by thy tender
love and mercy through the darkest hours. Help me always to cling to
the hope that thou hast provided for my soul. May I be trustful, and
be thankful to "see so much as one side of a celestial idea, one side
of the rainbow, and the sunset sky." Amen.




JULY THIRD

John S. Copley born 1737.

Henry Grattan born 1746.

Eugene Sue died 1857.

    Not from the dangers that beset our path
    From storm or sudden death, or pain or wrath,
          We pray deliverance;
    But from the envious eye, the narrowed mind
    Of those that are the vultures of mankind
           Thy aid advance.

    Not at the strong man's righteous rage or hate,
    But at the ambushed malice laid in wait
           Thy strength arise;
    At those who ever seek to spot the fair
    White garments of a neighbor's character
           With mud of lies.

    --Theodosia P. Garrison.[1]

    Putting away therefore all wickedness, and all guile, and
    hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings.

    --1 Peter 2. 1.


My Lord, may I remember that to protect the character of others is to
add virtue to my own. Grant that I may see the good and not be looking
for the evil. Cause me to know that peace will not abide in deceit or
revenge, but may be found in a happy and charitable spirit. Help me to
earn thy peace. Amen.

[Footnote 1: Special permission by Mitchell Kennerly, New York.]




JULY FOURTH

Independence Day.

Colonel William Byrd died 1704.

Nathaniel Hawthorne born 1804.

Thomas Jefferson died 1826.

    By the rude bridge that arched the flood,
      Their flag to April's breeze unfurled,
    Here once the embattled farmers stood,
      And fired the shot heard round the world.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,
      And this be our motto, "In God is our trust";
    And the star-spangled banner in triumph shall wave
      O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!

    --Francis Scott Key.

    Seek not to keep your soul perpetually in the unwholesome region of
    remorse. It was needful to pass through that dark valley, but it is
    infinitely dangerous to linger there too long.

    --Nathaniel Hawthorne.

    And this city shall be to me for a name of joy, for a praise and for
    a glory, before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all
    the good that I do unto them.

    --Jeremiah 33. 9.

Lord of justice and peace, may I not pause at the marked stones of the
brave to learn of liberty, but may I look for the opportunities that I
may measure up to because of them, and do my part to keep the peace
and spread the blessings of our land. Amen.




JULY FIFTH

Mrs. Sarah Siddons born 1755.

David G. Farragut born 1801.

George Sand born 1804.

Cecil Rhodes born 1853.

    Nature alone can speak to our intelligence an imperishable language,
    never changing, because it remains within the bounds of eternal
    truth and of what is absolutely noble and beautiful.

    --George Sand.

    Say, dost thou understand the whispered token,
      The promise breathed from every leaf and flower?
    And dost thou hear the word ere it be spoken,
      And apprehend love's presence by its power?

    --Unknown.

    But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; And the birds of
    the heavens, and they shall tell thee: Or speak to the earth, and it
    shall teach thee; And the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee.
    Who knoweth not in all these, That the hand of Jehovah hath wrought
    this?

    --Job 12. 7-9.

Lord God, direct me away from self, that I may learn of thy wisdom,
and help further thy kingdom. Give me patience to search for thy
truths, that I may obtain the noblest to use for thy service. Amen.




JULY SIXTH

John Huss burned at Constance, Baden, 1369.

Baron Wilhelm Leibnitz born 1646.

John Paul Jones born 1747.

John Flaxman born 1755.

    No man likes to acknowledge that he has made a mistake in the choice
    of his profession, and every man worthy of the name will row long
    against wind and tide before he allows himself to cry out, "I'm
    baffled!" and submit to be floated passively back to land.

    --Charlotte Brontë.

    There is nothing so small but that we honor God by asking his
    guidance of it, or insult him by taking it into our hands.

    --John Ruskin.

    If I take the wings of the morning,
    And dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;
    Even there shall thy hand lead me,
    And thy right hand shall hold me.

    --Psalm 139. 9, 10.

My Father, I pray that I may have wise judgment and use discretion in
the choice of my work. May I remember that only that is genuine which
is received and used for thee. Amen.




JULY SEVENTH

Alexis, son of Peter the Great, died in prison 1718.

Thomas Blacklock died 1791.

Richard Brinsley Sheridan died 1816.

    The surest way not to fail is to determine to succeed.

    --Richard B. Sheridan.

    I felt my hot blood a-tingling flow;
    With thrill of the fight my soul did glow;
      And when, braced and pure,
      I emerged secure
    From the strife that had tried my courage so,
      I said, "Let heaven send me sun or rain,
      I'll never know flinching fear again."

    --Thomas Crawford.

    For the Lord Jehovah will help me; therefore have I not been
    confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know
    that I shall not be put to shame.

    --Isaiah 50. 7.

Lord Jehovah, help me to learn how to be strong and brave, that I may
not remain in fear and weakness. Help me to conquer unworthiness, and
to overcome discouragements, that I may be spared the needless battles
that are brought on through impatience and selfishness. Keep my soul
in repose, that I may add to my conquering strength. Amen.




JULY EIGHTH

Jean de La Fontaine born 1621.

Dr. Samuel D. Gross born 1805.

Joseph Chamberlain born 1836.

    Neither gold nor grandeur can render us happy.

    --La Fontaine.

    Spirit of God! descend upon my heart;
      Wean it from earth; through all its pulses move;
    Stoop to my weakness, mighty as thou art,
      And make me love thee as I ought to love.

    I ask no dream, no prophet ecstasies,
      No sudden rending of the veil of clay:
    No angel visitant, no opening skies--
    But take the dimness of my soul away.

    --George Croly.

    For a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which
    he possesseth.

    --Luke 12. 15.

Eternal God, help me to honor my life; and may I realize, whether I
select good or bad, much or little, the harvesting is for eternity.
Grant that I may not make my life accumulate gold and grandeur, and
laden it with much spending; but may I strive and love what thou dost
love, and make my life worthy of my labor. Amen.




JULY NINTH

Henry Hallam born 1777.

Edmund Burke died 1797.

Elias Howe born 1819.

    Discretion of speech is more than eloquence; and to speak agreeably
    to him with whom we deal is more than to speak in good words or in
    good order.

    --Francis Bacon.

    When anyone provokes you, be assured it is your opinion which
    provokes you. Try therefore, in the first place, not to be hurried
    away with appearance. For if you once gain time and respite, you
    will more easily command yourself.

    --Epictetus.

    Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye
    may know how ye ought to answer each one.

    --Colossians 4. 6.

My Father, help me to learn through kindness and tenderness the value
of self-control. Help me in the moods of jealousy and impatience, that
I may not cause others unhappiness by words or deeds. Teach me how to
overcome the ways that keep me discontented, that I may have a
brighter speech. Amen.




JULY TENTH

John Calvin born 1509.

Sir William Blackstone born 1723.

Frederick Marryat born 1792.

    The quality of mercy is not strained;
    It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
    Upon the place beneath. It is twice blessed;
    It blesseth him that gives, and him that takes.
    'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
    The throned monarch better than his crown;

           *       *       *       *       *

    It is enthroned in the hearts of kings;
    It is an attribute to God himself.

    --William Shakespeare.

    His gain is loss; for he that wrongs his friend
    Wrongs himself more, and ever has about
    A silent court and jury, and himself
    The prisoner at the bar, ever condemned.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Brethren, even if a man be overtaken in any trespass, ye who are
    spiritual, restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness; looking to
    thyself, lest thou also be tempted.

    --Galatians 6. 1.

My Father, help me to avoid the critical spirit that leans toward
injustice. Grant that none may be made despondent waiting for my
mercy; but through forgiveness may I inspire confidence in those who
have made mistakes, and influence them to a better life. Amen.




JULY ELEVENTH

Robert de Bruce born 1274.

Jean Marmontel born 1723.

John Quincy Adams, Massachusetts, sixth President
United States, born 1767.

Susan Warner (E. Wetherell) born 1819.

    A friend to chide me when I'm wrong,
      My inmost soul to see:
    And that my friendship prove as strong
      For him as his for me.

    --John Quincy Adams.

    Our chief want in life is somebody who shall make us do what we can:
    this is the service of a friend.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear
    the song of fools. For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is
    the laughter of the fool.

    --Ecclesiastes 7. 5, 6.

My Father and Friend, who calleth me to check the progress of the
wrong, make me submissive and eager for what is right, that I may
learn and uphold to others thy purposes and desires. Amen.




JULY TWELFTH

Caius Julius Cæsar born B.C. 100.

Josiah Wedgwood born 1730.

Alexander Hamilton killed 1804.

Henry David Thoreau born 1817.

Clara Louise Kellogg born 1842.

    Each reaching and aspiration is an instinct with which all nature
    consists and cooperates, and therefore it is not in vain. If a man
    believes and expects great things of himself it makes no odds where
    you put him, he will be surrounded by grandeur.

    --Henry David Thoreau.

    If you have built castles in the air, your work need not be
    lost--that is where they should be: now put foundations under them.

    --Henry David Thoreau.

    He is like a man building a house, who digged and went deep, and
    laid a foundation upon the rock: and when a flood arose, the stream
    brake against that house, and could not shake it: because it had
    been well builded.

    --Luke 6. 48.

Lord of strength, I pray that while I may lay a strong foundation for
my life, I may remember that I should not delay the building by
neglecting to complete the plans. May I look to-day and see if I am
making my words stronger than my life. With thy wisdom help me to
realize that the test of life is made with the soul. Amen.




JULY THIRTEENTH

Richard Cromwell died 1712.

Elijah Fenton died 1730.

Jean Paul Marat killed by Charlotte Corday 1793.

    Let each day take thought for what concerns it, liquidate its own
    affairs, and respect the day which is to follow, and then it shall
    be ready.

    --Amiel.

    What does your anxiety do? It does not empty to-morrow, brother, of
    its sorrow; but ah! it empties to-day of its strength. It does not
    make you escape the evil; it makes you unfit to cope with it if it
    comes.

    --Ian Maclaren.

    Be not anxious for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
    drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on.

    --Matthew 6. 25.

My Father, save me from the habit of borrowing. So often I borrow
trouble and cannot use it, when the peace that I possess is all that I
need. Help me, that I may not miss the glory of to-day, by
anticipating the uncertainty of to-morrow; but may I discern my place
and have delight in every day. Amen.




JULY FOURTEENTH

Bastille destroyed 1789.

Jane Baillie Welch Carlyle born 1801.

Owen Wister born 1860.

    Sail fast, sail fast,
    Ark of my hopes, Ark of my dreams;
    Sweep lordly o'er the drowned Past,
    Fly glittering through the sun's strange beams;
    Sail fast, sail fast.
    Breath of new buds from off some drying lea,
    With news about the Future scent the sea;
    My brain is beating like the heart of Haste.
    I'll loose me a bird upon this Present waste;
           Go, trembling song,
    And stay not long; O, stay not long;
    Thou art only a gray and sober dove,
    But thine eye is faith and thy wing is love.

    --Sidney Lanier.

    God speed thee, pretty bird; may thy small nest,
    With little ones all in good time be blest.
           I love thee much;
    For well thou managest that life of thine,
    Well I!--O ask not what I do with mine!
      Would I were such!

    --Jane Welch Carlyle.

    Behold the birds of the heaven, that they sow not, neither do they
    reap, nor gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth them.
    Are not ye of much more value than they?

    --Matthew 6. 26.

My Father, may I start this day with more faith in myself and greater
love for thy world. May my soul be awakened to the highest and be
ready for the joys of to-day. Amen.




JULY FIFTEENTH

Inigo Jones born 1573.

Rembrandt born 1607.

Henry Edward Manning born 1808.

William Winter born 1836.

    His was the heart that overmuch
      In human goodness puts its trust,
    And his the keen, satiric touch
      That shrivels falsehood into dust.

    Fierce for the right, he bore his part
      In strife with many a valiant foe;
    But laughter winged his polished dart,
      And kindness tempered every blow.

    --William Winter.

    A wise man will so act that whatever he does may rather seem
    voluntary and of his own free will than done by compulsion, however
    much he may be compelled by necessity.

    --Machiavelli.

    Wherefore I saw that there is nothing better, than that a man should
    rejoice in his works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring
    him back to see what shall be after him?

    --Ecclesiastes 3. 22.

Lord God, may I not forget that it is in the light, and not the
darkness, that my work is revealed. I beseech thee to pour in thy
light as I plan my life, and open my heart and mind for the reception
of thy truth. Amen.




JULY SIXTEENTH

Andrea del Sarto born 1486.

Sir Joshua Reynolds born 1723.

Margaret Fuller Ossoli perished at sea 1850.

    Reverence the highest, have patience with the lowest. Let this day's
    performance of the meanest duty be thy religion. Are the stars too
    distant? Pick up the pebble that lies at thy feet and from it learn
    all.

    --Margaret Fuller.

    The situation that has not its Duty, its Ideal, was never yet
    occupied by man. Yet, here is this miserable, despicable Actual,
    wherein thou standest--here or nowhere is thy Ideal! Work it out
    therefrom!

    --Thomas Carlyle.


    And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a
    cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto
    you he shall in no wise lose his reward.

    --Matthew 10. 42.

Great God, may I begin this day bearing in mind that the things which
I think and do are my life. I pray that thou wilt keep me from making
great efforts for that which is valueless, and thus waste my life. May
I watch my pride and indolence that they may not cause me to lose the
best. Amen.




JULY SEVENTEENTH

Dr. Isaac Watts born 1674.

Charlotte Corday guillotined 1793.

Paul Delaroche born 1797.

J.A. McNeil Whistler died 1903.

    So frail is the youth and beauty of men,
      Though they bloom and look gay like the rose;
    But all our fond cares to preserve them is vain,
      Time kills them as fast as he goes.

    Then I'll not be proud of my youth nor my beauty,
      Since both of them wither and fade;
    But gain a good name by well doing my duty;
      For this will scent like the rose when I'm dead.

    --Isaac Watts.

    Onward, onward may we press
      Through the path of duty;
    Virtue is true happiness,
      Excellence true beauty;
    Minds are of supernal birth,
    Let us make a heaven of earth.

    --James Montgomery.

    All things therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
    you, even so do ye also unto them.

    --Matthew 7. 12.

My Lord and my strength, I pray that I may possess that expectancy
which comes in joyous hope and have the endurance that is controlled
by courage and energy. Grant in the future that I may be less
concerned about my living and more anxious for what I make of my life.
Amen.




JULY EIGHTEENTH

William Makepeace Thackeray born 1811.

Jane Austen died 1817.

Jean Antoine Watteau died 1721.

    Learn to admire rightly: the great pleasure of life is that. Note
    what great men admired; they admired great things; narrow spirits
    admire basely and worship meanly.

    --W.M. Thackeray.

    Our thoughts are often more than we are, just as they are often
    better than we are. And God sees us as we are altogether, and not in
    separate feelings or actions, as our fellow men see us. We are
    always doing each other injustice, and thinking better or worse of
    each other than we deserve, because we only hear separate feelings
    or actions. We don't see each other's whole nature.

    --George Eliot.

    The wilderness and the dry land shall be glad; and the desert shall
    rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

    --Isaiah 35. 1.

Eternal God, may I become more like thee. Give me the desire to
associate myself with people and places where the divine spirit is
supreme. May my soul breathe in the influence of all that is good and
true; and may I use my life for thy honor and praise. Amen.




JULY NINETEENTH

John Martin born 1789.

Samuel Colt born 1814.

Charles Victor Cherbuliez born 1829.

    In love, if love be love, if love be ours,
    Faith and unfaith can ne'er be equal powers:
    Unfaith in aught is want of faith in all.

    It is the little rift within the lute
    That by and by will make the music mute,
    And ever widening slowly silence all.
    The little rift within the lover's lute,
    Or little pitted speck in garner'd fruit,
    That rotting inward slowly molders all.

    It is not worth the keeping: let it go:
    But shall it? Answer, darling, answer no.
    And trust me not at all or all in all.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Take us the foxes, the little foxes,
    That spoil the vineyards;
    For our vineyards are in blossom.

    --Song of Solomon 2. 15.

Loving Father, help me to put away the distractions and cares that
make me discontented. Grant that I may not set myself in "gilded
pride" and keep out the precious things of life. Help me to abandon
doubt and suspicion, and keep the faith that is happy to believe and
willing to forgive. Amen.




JULY TWENTIETH

Petrarch born 1304.

Thomas Lovell Beddoes born 1803.

John Sterling born 1806.

Jean Ingelow died 1897.

      Let thy day be to the night
    A letter of good tidings! Let thy praise
    Go up as birds go up--that when they awake,
      Shake off the dew and soar.

    --Jean Ingelow.

    I, and the bird,
      And the wind together,
    Sang a supplication
      In the winter weather.

    The bird sang for sunshine,
      And the trees for winter fruit,
    And for love in the spring time
      When the thickets shoot.

    And I sang for patience
      When the teardrops start;
    Clean hands and clear eyes,
      And a faithful heart.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    Unto thee, O Jehovah, do I lift up my soul.

    --Psalm 25. 1.

Lord God, if I am discouraged this morning, may I pause for thine
encouragement. Grant that the fear of the night may make no decline in
my morn, but that "into the future I may fuse the past," and use what
is clearest for to-day. Amen.




JULY TWENTY-FIRST

Matthew Pryor born 1664.

William Lord Russell beheaded 1683.

Robert Burns died 1796.

    Our heaven must be within ourselves,
    Our home and heaven the work of faith
    And thro' this race of life which shelves
      Downward to death.
    While over all a dome must spread,
    And love shall be that dome above;
    And deep foundations must be laid,
      And these are love.

    --Christina Rossetti.

    If happiness has not her seat
      And center in the breast,
    We may be wise or rich or great,
      But never can be blest.

    --Robert Burns.

    Keep thy heart with all diligence; For out of it are the issues of
    life.

    --Proverbs 4.

My Father, if I choose to be unhappy and miserable, may I not be to
myself and friends as "a harp with one string." Help me to free myself
from thinking and anticipating things that keep me from the pleasure
that I might receive and give. May I have more trust in my friends and
in thee. Amen.




JULY TWENTY-SECOND

Sir John Graham killed 1298.

Pilgrims started for America 1620.

Earl of Shaftesbury (Anthony Ashley Cooper) born 1621.

    How comes it to pass, then, that we appear such cowards in
    reasoning, and are so afraid to stand the test of ridicule?

    --Earl of Shaftesbury.

    He that of such a height hath built his mind,
    And reared the dwelling of his thoughts so strong,
    As neither fear nor hope can shake the frame
    Of his resolved powers; nor all the wind
    Of vanity or malice pierce to wrong
    His settled peace, or to disturb the same:
    What a fair seat hath he, from whence he may
    The boundless wastes and wilds of man survey?

    --Samuel Daniel.

    Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee;
    because he trusteth in thee.

    --Isaiah 26. 3.

O Lord, it is not that I am ashamed to ask thee for the truth that I
do not more diligently seek it, but it is because I fear the sacrifice
that may follow in obtaining it. I would that I could understand that
thy strength is given in the sacrifice. Make me braver as I seek to
live in the truth. Amen.




JULY TWENTY-THIRD

Richard Gibson died 1690.

Charlotte Cushman born 1816.

Coventry Patmore born 1823.

    I do not ask, O Lord, that life may be
      A pleasant road;
    I do not ask that thou would'st take from me
      Aught of its load.

    For one thing only, Lord, dear Lord, I plead:
      Lead me aright--
    Though strength should falter, and though heart should bleed--
      Through peace to light.

    --Adelaide A. Procter.

    O, why and whither?--God knows all,
      I only know that he is good,
    And that whatever may befall
      Or here or there, must be the best that could.

    --John G. Whittier.

    Lead me, O Jehovah, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies;
    Make thy way straight before my face.

    --Psalm 5. 8.

Loving Father, may I never fail to ask for thy guidance, for thou hast
promised to lead me to the cool springs while I pass through the
desert places. Help me to put myself in thy keeping and say, "Thy will
be done." Amen.




JULY TWENTY-FOURTH

Rev. John Newton born 1725.

John P. Curran born 1750.

J.G. Holland born 1819.

    As the winged arrow flies
      Speedily the mark to find;
    As the lightning from the skies
      Darts and leaves no trace behind;
    Swiftly thus our fleeting days
      Bear us down life's rapid stream;
    Upward, Lord, our spirits raise;
      All below is but a dream.

    --John Newton.

    O gentlemen! the time is short;
    To spend that shortness basely were too long,
    If life did ride upon a dial's point,
    Still ending at the arrival of an hour.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Jehovah, make me to know mine end,
    And the measure of my days, what it is;
    Let me know how frail I am.

    --Psalm 39. 4.

Lord, forbid that I should overcast my life with intentions, and
neglect to put in the deeds. May I not be satisfied to spend my days
in being merely occupied, but live to learn and work. May I not be
dismayed over what I might have been, but with all my might do what I
can now. Amen.




JULY TWENTY-FIFTH

Thomas à Kempis died 1471.

Simon Bolivar born 1783.

Arthur James Balfour born 1848.

    Blessed indeed are those ears which listen not after the voice which
    is sounding without, but after the truth teaching within.

    --Thomas à Kempis.

    How joyed my heart in the rich melodies
    That overhead and round me did arise!
    The moving leaves--the water's gentle flow--
    Delicious music hung on every bough.
    Then said I in my heart, "If that the Lord
    Such lively music on the earth accord;
    If to weak, sinful man such sounds are given,
    O! what must be the melody of heaven!"

    --Izaak Walton.

    But thou, O Jehovah, knowest me; thou seest me, and triest my heart
    toward thee.

    --Jeremiah 12. 3.

Loving Father, thou hast made it needful for me to know that the songs
which are sung by divine love are rarely heard by cruel hearts. Grant
that my soul may chord with the sweetest music that vibrates in the
beauty and harmony of life. Amen.




JULY TWENTY-SIXTH

Charles Emmanuel died 1630.

John Wilmot died 1680.

George Clinton born 1739.

    Quiet minds cannot be perplexed or frightened, but go on in fortune
    or misfortune at their own private pace, like a clock during a
    thunderstorm.

    --Robert L. Stevenson.

    I have learned, as days have passed me,
      Fretting never lifts the load;
    And worry, much or little,
      Never smooths an irksome road;
    For do you know that somehow, always,
      Doors are opened, ways are made;
    When we work and live in patience
      Under all the cross that's laid.

    --Unknown.

    But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell securely, And shall be
    quiet without fear of evil.

    --Proverbs 1. 33.

Merciful and just God, I pray that I may regulate my life by thy
standards and conform my life to thy laws, that thy goodness and mercy
may not be wasted on me. Help me to bear in mind, that willingness is
the power that starts the hands to work. May I have thy presence while
I wait in quietness, that I may be helped through the anxious moments.
Amen.




JULY TWENTY-SEVENTH

Thomas Campbell born 1777.

Alexandre Dumas-fils born 1824.

Dr. John Dalton died 1844.

    What's hallowed ground? 'Tis what gives birth
      To sacred thoughts in souls of worth!--
    Peace! Independence! Truth! go forth
      Earth's compass round;
    And your high-priesthood shall make earth
      All hallowed ground.

    --Thomas Campbell.

    Remember the week day to keep it holy.

    --Elbert Hubbard.

    The meaning of life comes to us mostly in great revealing flashes
    and intense emotions.

    --Dean Farrar.

    To the pure all things are pure.

    --Titus 1. 15.

Gracious Father, may I not feel that it is necessary to wait for
certain days and ceremonies to prepare to worship thee, while at every
moment thy love is pleading for me. May I through the busiest hours
and the most perplexing moments serve thee in reverence and obedience,
and ever give praise to thy holy name. Amen.




JULY TWENTY-EIGHTH

John Sebastian Bach died 1750.

Robespierre executed 1794.

Jean Baptiste Corot born 1796.

    O Light that followest all my way,
      I yield my flickering torch to thee;
    My heart restores its borrowed ray,
    That in thy sunshine's blaze its day
      May brighter, fairer be.

    --George Matheson.

    Follow your Star that lights a desert pathway, yours or mine,
    Forward, till you learn the highest Human Nature is divine.
    Follow Light and do the Right--for man can half control his doom--
    Till you see the deathless Angel seated in the vacant Tomb.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    My soul waiteth for the Lord,
    More than watchmen wait for the morning;
    Yea, more than watchmen for the morning.

    --Psalm 130. 6.

Almighty God, help me to kindle my life by the shining light of thy
power and love, that I may be an ambassador for thee. Amen.




JULY TWENTY-NINTH

Andrew Marvell died 1678.

William Wilberforce died 1833.

Dr. Thomas Dick died 1857.

    I wrestle not with rage
      While fury's flame doth burn;
    It is vain to stop the stream
      Until the tide doth turn.

    But when the flame is out
      And ebbing wrath doth end
    I turn a late enraged foe
      Into a quiet friend.

    --Robert Southwell.

      If I can lend
    A strong hand to the fallen, or defend
    The right against a single envious strain,
      My life though bare
    Perhaps of much that seemeth dear and fair
    To us on earth, will not have been in vain.

    --Unknown.

    A friend loveth at all times;
    And a brother is born for adversity.

    --Proverbs 17. 17.

Gracious Father of us all, if I may have cause to be provoked to-day,
help me to rise above my angry passions, and not from weakness plunge
into that for which I may be sorry. Make me self-forgetful, that I may
be willing to make peace with those whom I may have displeased. Amen.




JULY THIRTIETH

Samuel Rogers born 1763.

Thomas Gray died 1771.

W.T. Adams (Oliver Optic) born 1822.

Prince Bismarck died 1898.

    Sit down, sad soul, and count
      The moments flying;
    Come, tell the sweet amount
      That's lost by sighing!
    How many smiles?--a score?
    Then laugh, and count no more;
      For day is dying.

    Lie down sad soul, and sleep,
      And no more measure
    The flight of time, nor weep
      The loss of leisure;
    But here by this lone stream,
    Lie down with us, and dream
      Of starry treasure.

    Bryan Waller Procter.

    The only thing grief has taught me is to know how shallow it is.
    Grief will not carry you one step into real nature; grief can teach
    me nothing.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Leave off, ye simple ones, and live;
    And walk in the way of understanding.

    --Proverbs 9. 6.

God of love, may I come quickly to thee, when I am in need of
protection and sympathy. Guard me against sorrow that is drawn from
the imagination. May I not allow grief to drag me into misery, but
with strength and courage may I find happiness in thy daily will.
Amen.




JULY THIRTY-FIRST

John Conybeare died 1775.

John Ericsson born 1803.

Paul B. Du Chaillu born 1835.

Phoebe Cary died 1871.

    Be wise to-day; 'tis madness to defer;
    Next day the fatal precedent will plead;
    Thus on, till wisdom is pushed out of life.
    Procrastination is the thief of time;
    Year after year it steals, till all are fled,
    And to the mercies of a moment leaves
    The vast concerns of an eternal scene.

    --Dr. Edward Young.

    O, my friend, rise up and follow
      Where the hand of God shall lead;
    He has brought thee through affliction,
      But to fit thee for his need.

    --Mary Howitt.

    For he is our God,
    And we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand.
    To-day, O that ye would hear his voice!
    Harden not your heart.

    --Psalm 95. 7, 8.

Lord God, I come to thee for help, that I may make more of my life.
Steady me, that I may know its value without wavering, and the loss it
sustains from wasted days. I pray that I may live more in thy
commandments, and with my work accept the joy of thy love. Amen.




AUGUST


      Flame-like, the long midday,
    With not so much of sweet air as hath stirred
      The down upon the spray,
      Where nests the panting bird,
    Dozing away the hot and tedious noon,
    With fitful twitter, sadly out of tune.

      Pleasantly comest thou,
    Dew of the evening, to the crisped-up grass;
      And the curled corn-blades bow,
      As the light breezes pass,
    That their parched lips may feel thee, and expand,
    Thou sweet reviver of the fevered land.

      So, to the thirsting soul,
    Cometh the dew of the Almighty's love;
      And the scathed heart, made whole,
      Turneth in joy above,
    To where the spirit freely may expand,
    And rove, untrammeled, in that "better land."

    --William D. Gallagher.




AUGUST FIRST

Andrew Melville born 1545.

Richard Henry Dana, Jr., born 1815.

Maria Mitchell born 1818.

    Am I wrong to be always so happy? This world is full of grief;
    Yet there is laughter of sunshine, to see the crisp green on the leaf,
    Daylight is ringing with song-birds, and brooklets are crooning at night;
    And why should I make a shadow when God makes all so bright?
    Earth may be wicked and weary, yet cannot I help being glad!
    There is sunshine without and within me, and how should I mope or be sad?
    God would not flood me with blessings, meaning me only to pine
    Amid all the bounties and beauties he pours upon me and mine;
    Therefore I will be grateful, and therefore will I rejoice;
    My heart is singing within me; sing on, O heart and voice.

    --Walter C. Smith.

    Rejoice always.

    --1 Thessalonians 5. 16.

Gracious Father, my soul floods with joy for the blessings of life.
May it be my privilege to be happy in them. Help me not to ask thee
for anything which will cause loss to another; may I not delight in a
lonely view, but as I see thy glory bring others to the vision also.
Amen.




AUGUST SECOND

Thomas Gainsborough died 1788.

Elisha Gray born 1835.

Marion Crawford born 1854.

William Watson born 1859.

    The Holy Supper is kept, indeed,
    In whatso we share with another's need;
    Not what we give, but what we share,
    For the gift without the giver is bare;
    Who gives himself with his alms feeds three,
    Himself, his hungering neighbor, and me.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    And when o'er storm and jar I climb,
      Beyond life's atmosphere,
    I shall behold the lord of time
      And space--of world and year.

    O vain, far quest! not thus my heart
      Shall ever find its goal!
    I turn me home--and there thou art,
      My Father, in my soul.

    --George Macdonald.

    That they should seek God, if haply they might feel after him and
    find him, though he is not far from each one of us; for in him we
    live, and move, and have our being.

    --Acts 17. 27, 28.

O Lord, my gracious Father, may I not be so eager for more, that I
feel I have nothing to spare. Help me to realize that if I may be on
the mountain-top, or at the level of the sea, thy spirit may dwell in
my soul. May I rejoice that I can always receive and share thy grace
and love. Amen.




AUGUST THIRD

John Henley born 1692.

Henry Cuyler Bunner born 1855.

Eugene Sue died 1857.

    Set out in the very morning of your lives with a frank and manly
    determination to look simply for what is right and true in all
    things.... This is the only way to know God's will and do it. You
    may not find it at once, but you have set your face in the true
    direction to find it.

    --Jeremy Taylor.

    The important thing in life is to have a great aim, and to possess
    the aptitude and perseverance to attain it.

    --Goethe.

    Blessed are they that keep his testimonies,
    That seek him with the whole heart.

    --Psalm 119. 2.

Lord God, forbid that I should lose the opportunities of making my
life by waiting for sudden developments. Cause me to notice that the
tree that bears fruit must first grow the blossom before it may be
perfected by the sun: whether thou hast made me greater or less, may I
be ashamed to live in untruth and wait in idleness. Amen.




AUGUST FOURTH

Percy Bysshe Shelley born 1792.

Edward Irving born 1792.

Walter H. Pater born 1839.

      We look before and after,
        And pine for what is not;
      Our sincerest laughter
        With some pain is fraught;
    Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought.

      Yet if we could scorn
        Hate and pride and fear,
      If we were things born
        Not to shed a tear,
    I know not how thy joy we ever could come near.

    --Percy Bysshe Shelley.

    It becomes no man to nurse despair,
    But in the teeth of clenched antagonisms
    To follow up the worthiest till he die.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    He suffered no man to do them wrong;
    Yea, he reproved kings for their sakes.

    --1 Chronicles 16. 21.

My Father, I bless thee for thy patience and forbearance. I pray that
thou wilt forgive me for all the sorrow that I have made from
rebellion and despair, and with thy forgiveness may I receive patience
and cheerful courage. Amen.




AUGUST FIFTH

John Eliot born 1604.

John, Lord Wrottesley, born 1798.

Richard Lord Howe died 1799.

    To live within a cave--it is most good;
      But if God made a day,
      And some one come, and say,
    "Lo! I have gathered faggots in the wood!"
      E'en let him stay,
    And light a fire, and fan a temporal mood!
    So sit till morning! when the light is grown
      That he the path can read,
      Then bid the man Godspeed!
    His morning is not thine: yet must thou own
      Those ashes on the stone.
      They have a cheerful warmth.

    --Thomas Edward Brown.

    It is given to us sometimes, even in our everyday life, to witness
    the saving influence of a noble nature, the divine efficacy of
    rescue that may lie in a self-subduing act of fellowship.

    --George Eliot.

    And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
    Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of these my brethren, even these
    least, ye did it unto me.

    --Matthew 25. 40.

Father of mankind, may I not be a barrier to the discouraged, but help
them in the ways of encouragement. May I not allow pride and prejudice
to keep me from acts of love and deeds of kindness, but may I be
worthy of thy trust. Amen.




AUGUST SIXTH

Ben Jonson died 1637.

François Fénelon born 1651.

Daniel O'Connell born 1775.

Alfred, Lord Tennyson, born 1809.

    O well for him whose will is strong!
      He suffers, but he will not suffer long;
    He suffers, but he cannot suffer wrong;
      For him nor moves the loud world's random mock,
    Not all Calamity's hugest waves confound,
      Who seems a promontory rock,
    That compassed round with turbulent sound,
      In middle ocean meets the surging shock,
    Tempest-buffeted, citadel-crowned.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Grandeur of character lies in force of soul--that is, in the force
    of thought, moral principle, and love; and this may be found in the
    humblest condition of life.

    --William Ellery Channing.

    So then, brethren, stand fast.

    --2 Thessalonians 2. 15.

Eternal God, help me that I may not be deceived by my surroundings as
I seek to have life abundantly. Instruct me that it is by the way of
character that I must attain the laws of growth, and learn reverence
for the spirit of divine life. Amen.




AUGUST SEVENTH

Battle of Thermopylae B.C. 480.

Frederick William (Dean) Farrar born 1831.

Alexander M. Bell died 1905.

    Although a friend may remain faithful in misfortune, yet none but
    the very best and loftiest will remain faithful to us after our
    errors and our sins.

    --Dean Farrar.

    Friendship is like a debt of honor: the moment it is talked of it
    loses its real name, and assumes the more ungrateful form of
    obligation. From hence we find that those who regularly undertake to
    cultivate friendship find ingratitude generally repays their
    endeavors.

    --Oliver Goldsmith.

    For even in their wickedness shall my prayer continue.

    --Psalm 141. 5.

Lord God, may I ever continue to be thankful for the times thou hast
helped me, when I have asked for thy compassion; may I recall the joy
in which I received it, when it may be mine to have compassion and
extend a helping hand to others. I pray that I may place my life where
it will be stronger than adversity and controlled by sincerity and
love. Amen.




AUGUST EIGHTH

Charles A. Dana born 1819.

Laurence Hutton born 1843.

Cecile Chaminade born 1861.

      Lo! all the glory gone!
      God's masterpiece undone!
    The last created and the first to fall;
    The noblest, frailest, godliest of all.

      Child of the humble sod,
      Wed with the breath of God,
    Descend! for with the lowest thou must lie--
    Arise! thou hast inherited the sky.

    --John B. Tabb.

    Far away there in the sunshine are my highest aspirations; I cannot
    reach them, but I can look up and see their beauty, believe in them,
    and try to follow where they lead.

    --Louisa M. Alcott.

    I will lift up mine eyes unto the mountains:
    From whence shall my help come?

    --Psalm 121. 1.

Heavenly Father, may I see as I raise my eyes to the mountains that
without the deep shadows there would be no vision of the high-light,
and still higher may I see that without the sun there would be no
color to encircle the rainbow. And beyond, O Father, may I believe
that without the shadow of the cross we could not have the glory of
the resurrection. May I keep the vision clear. Amen.




AUGUST NINTH

Izaak Walton born 1593.

John Dryden born 1631.

Francis Scott Key born 1780.

Joseph Jacques Tissot died 1902.

    All habits gather, by unseen degrees,
    Brooks make rivers, rivers run to seas.

    --John Dryden.

    Now it catches the gleam of the morning's first beam,
    In full glory reflected now shines on the stream;
    'Tis the star-spangled banner; O yet may it wave
    O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!

    --Francis Scott Key.

    Do not be troubled because you have not great virtues. God made a
    million spears of grass where he made one tree.... Only have enough
    of little virtues and common fidelities, and you need not mourn
    because you are neither a hero nor a saint.

    --Henry Ward Beecher.

    The reward of humility and the fear of Jehovah
    Is riches, and honor, and life.

    --Proverbs 22. 4.

Lord God, who keepest truth to generations, and who through love and
wisdom hath gathered us into nations, forgive me for what I have done
that is wrong, and for what I have neglected that was right. May I
give greater loyalty to my country and to thee. Amen.




AUGUST TENTH

Founding of Greenwich Observatory 1675.

Sir Charles Napier born 1782.

George Park Fisher born 1827.

    No one can ask honestly or hopefully to be delivered from temptation
    unless he has himself honestly and firmly determined to do the best
    he can to keep out of it.

    --John Ruskin.

    Men at some time are masters of their fates:
    The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
    But in ourselves, that we are underlings.

    --William Shakespeare.

    The greatest punishment one can have is to discover, not how hard,
    but how low he has fallen.

    --M.B.S.

    O Timothy, guard that which is committed unto thee, turning away
    from the profane babblings and oppositions of the knowledge which is
    falsely so-called.

    --1 Timothy 6. 20.

Almighty God, through thy mercies may I recognize my faults, and
correct any evil that is in me. Make me strong, that I may not yield
to temptation. May I have regard for thy will and be prepared to take
thy messages as they are flashed to the soul. Amen.




AUGUST ELEVENTH

Jean Victor Moreau born 1761.

Octave Feuillet born 1821.

Signer Crispi died 1901.

    Heaven overreaches you and me,
    And all earth's gardens and her graves.
    Look up with me, until we see
    The day break and the shadows flee.
    What though to-night wrecks you and me
    If so to-morrow saves?

    --Christina G. Rossetti.

    The essence of joy lies in the doing rather than in the result of
    the doing. There is a lifelong and solid satisfaction in any
    productive labor, manual or mental, which is not pushed beyond the
    limit of strength.

    --Charles W. Eliot.

    Show me thy ways, O Jehovah;
    Teach me thy paths.
    Guide me in thy truths, and teach me.

    --Psalm 25. 4, 5.

My Father, keep me where my eyes may look expectantly toward the dawn,
through the darkness. Take away everything that comes between me and
the brightness of the morning. Amen.




AUGUST TWELFTH

Robert Southey born 1774.

Francis Horner born 1778.

Edith Thomas born 1854.

Katherine Lee Bates born 1859.

    Our restlessness in this world seems to indicate that we are
    intended for a better. We have all of us a longing after happiness;
    and surely the Creator will gratify all the natural desires he has
    implanted in us.

    --Robert Southey.

    Whenso my quick, light-sandaled feet
    Bring me where Joys and Pleasures meet,
    I mingle with their throng at will;
    They know me not an alien still,
    Since neither words nor ways unsweet
    Of stored bitterness I spill;
    Youth shuns me not nor gladness fears,
    For I go softly all my years.

    --Edith Thomas.

    He hath swallowed up death forever; and the Lord Jehovah will wipe
    away tears from off all faces.

    --Isaiah 25. 8.

Loving Father, help me to guard my inclinations. May I be able to
appreciate that though I may be restless from ambition, I also may be
restless through discontent. Correct my life, that my desires may meet
the true demands of my soul. Strengthen me with the power of calmness,
that "I may go softly all my years," even though I walk through the
bitterness of sorrow. Amen.




AUGUST THIRTEENTH

Jeremy Taylor died 1667.

Dr. William Wotton born 1669.

Elizabeth Stuart Phelps Ward born 1844.

Elizabeth Prentiss died 1878.

Sir John Millais died 1896.

    Feeling the way--and all the way up hill;
    But on the open summit, calm and still,
    The feet of Christ are planted; and they stand
    In view of all the quiet land.

    Feeling the way--and if the way is cold,
    What matter? since upon the fields of gold
    His breath is melting; and the warm winds sing
    While rocking summer days for him.

    --Elizabeth S. Phelps.

    All the performances of human art, at which we look with praise and
    wonder, are instances of the resistless force of perseverance.

    --Samuel Johnson.

    But abide thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been
    assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them.

    ---2 Timothy 3. 14.

My Lord, I would remember to ask thee this morning for that of which I
seem to have most need. May I have the will to keep my patience and
realize the untold power of my words and actions. Give me thy peace,
not only to rest in, but that I may have it to give to others. Amen.




AUGUST FOURTEENTH

Dr. Meric Casaubon born 1599.

Dr. Charles Button born 1737.

Walter Besant born 1836.

Ernest Thompson Seton born 1860.

Florence Nightingale died 1910.

    I count this thing to be grandly true,
      That a noble deed is a step toward God;
      Lifting the soul from the common clod
    To a purer air and a broader view.

    We rise by the things that are under our feet,
      By what we have mastered of good or gain,
      By the pride deposed and the passion slain,
    And the vanquished ills that we hourly meet.

    --Richard Watson Gilder.

    No Apostle of Liberty much to my heart ever found I;
    License each for himself, this was at bottom their want.
    Liberator of many! first dare to be Servant of many;
    What a business is that, would'st thou know it, go try!

    --Goethe.

    Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

    --1 Thessalonians 5. 21.

Gracious Father, if I may be beginning this day with an unclean
purpose in my heart, help me to clear it away; if I may be trying to
avoid some urgent duty, make me ashamed to resist it. Keep away the
desires that harm my life, and that withhold the enjoyment of my
common work. Amen.




AUGUST FIFTEENTH

Jeremy Taylor baptized 1613.

Napoleon Bonaparte born 1769.

Sir Walter Scott born 1771.

Thomas de Quincey born 1785.

    And do our loves all perish with our frames?
    Do those that took their root and put forth buds,
    And their soft leaves unfolded in the warmth
    Of mutual hearts, grow up and live in beauty,
    Then fade and fall, like fair, unconscious flowers?

      O, listen, man!
    A voice within us speaks the startling word,
    "Man, thou shalt never die!"

    --Richard Henry Dana.

    I am drawing near to the close of my career; I am fast shuffling off
    the stage. I have been perhaps the most voluminous author of the
    day; and it is a comfort to me to think I have tried to unsettle no
    man's faith, to corrupt no man's principle, and that I have written
    nothing which on my deathbed I should wish blotted.

    --Sir Walter Scott.

    But concerning love of the brethren ye have no need that one write
    unto you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another.

    --1 Thessalonians 4. 9.

Almighty God, may I have that faith in eternal life which will make me
careful of what I choose for my own and more careful of what I put in
the lives of others. Amen.




AUGUST SIXTEENTH

Ralph Thoresby born 1658.

Dr. Thomas Fuller died 1661.

Dr. Matthew Tindal died 1733.

    The secret of goodness and greatness is in choosing whom you will
    approach and live with, in memory or imagination, through the
    crowding obvious people who seem to live with you.

    --Robert Browning.

    Fair Nature's book together read,
    The old wood-paths that knew our tread,
    The maple shadows overhead--

    Where'er I look, where'er I stray,
    Thy thought goes with me on my way,
    And hence the prayer I breathe to-day.

    --John Greenleaf Whittier.

    Shall two walk together, except they have agreed?

    --Amos 3. 3.

Lord God, I thank thee for the delight of congenial companions and the
memory of friendship. May I not be quick to lose my friends through
misunderstanding and selfishness. May I be considerate and constant
and be able to climb to the highest steeps of friendship. Amen.




AUGUST SEVENTEENTH

Dr. William Carey born 1761.

David Crockett born 1786.

Mary Abigail Dodge (Gail Hamilton) died 1896.

    The destiny of nations lies far more in the hands of women--the
    mothers--than in the hands of those who possess power. We must
    cultivate women, who are educators of the human race, else a new
    generation cannot accomplish its task.

    --Froebel.

    In an old continental town they will show you a prison in a tower,
    and on all the stones of that prison within reach one word is
    carved--it is, "Resist!" Years ago a godly woman was for forty years
    immured in that dungeon, and she spent her time in cutting with a
    piece of iron on every stone that one word, for the strengthening of
    her own heart and for the benefit of all who might come after her,
    "Resist!" "Resist!" "Resist!"

    --J.G. Mantle.


    Then Mordecai bade them return answer unto Esther, Think not with
    thyself that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than all
    the Jews ... and who knoweth whether thou art not come to the
    kingdom for such a time as this?

    --Esther 4. 13, 14.

Lord God, give me wisdom to help relieve the ignorant and suffering.
May I strive in every way to free thy people, that they may be
uplifted in the progress of life. Amen.




AUGUST EIGHTEENTH

Virginia Dare, first English child born in America, 1587.

Dr. Henry Hammond born 1605.

Robert Williams Buchanan born 1841.

John Russell born 1792.

    Pour out thy love like the rush of a river,
    Wasting its waters for ever and ever,
    Through the burnt sands that reward not the giver;
      Silent or songful thou nearest the sea.

    Scatter thy life as the summer showers pouring.
    What if no bird through the pearl rain is soaring?
    What if no blossom looks upward adoring?
      Look to the life that was lavished for thee.

    --Unknown.

    Who is the happiest person? He whose nature asks for nothing that
    the world does not wish and use.

    --Goethe.

    Freely ye received, freely give.

    --Matthew 10. 8.

My Father, I pray that I may have the sympathy that responds with
consideration and devotion. May it be a joy for me to give comfort and
render service where I may help. Grant that I may not linger too long
in happiness and miss thy blessings, but remember that to "travel
hopefully is a better thing than to arrive." Amen.




AUGUST NINETEENTH

Augustus Cæsar died A.D. 14.

James Watt died 1819.

Robert Bloomfield died 1823.

Honore Balzac died 1850.

    It is written not, "Blessed is he that feedeth the poor," but
    "Blessed is he that considereth the poor." And you know a little
    thought and a little kindness are often worth more than a great deal
    of money.

    --John Ruskin.

    So pity never leaves the gentle breast
    Where love has been received a welcome guest;
    As wandering saints poor huts have sacred made,
    He hallows every heart he once has swayed,
    And, when his presence we no longer share,
    Still leaves compassion as a relic there.

    --Thomas Sheridan.

    If a brother or sister be naked and in lack of daily food, and one
    of you say unto them, Go in peace, be ye warmed and filled; and yet
    ye give them not the things needful to the body; what doth it
    profit?

    --James 2. 16.

Tender Father, help me to consider those who receive the crust of
bread at my door; for if it be needed it is asked for by sad and
desperate lives. Make me conscious of thy mercy and help, that I may
be considerate for the one with the outstretched hand. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTIETH

Saint Bernard died 1153.

Robert Herrick born 1591.

John and Cornelius De Witt killed 1672.

Francis Asbury born 1745.

Henry P. Liddon born 1829.

Benjamin Harrison, Ohio, twenty-third President
United States, born 1833.

    The busy world shoves angrily aside
    The man who stands with arms akimbo set
    Until occasion tells him what to do;
    And he who waits to have his task marked out
    Shall die and leave his errand unfulfilled.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    Awake, arise! the hour is late!
      Angels are knocking at thy door!
    They are in haste and cannot wait,
      And once departed come no more.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    Boast not thyself of to-morrow;
    For thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.

    --Proverbs 27. 1.

Gracious Father, grant that I may not tarry so long, that when I
arrive I will hear, "Too late, too late, ye cannot enter now"; but may
I be so persistent with every day that when I arrive I may be ready as
well as on time. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-FIRST

Lady Mary Montagu died 1762.

Jules Michelet born 1798.

John Tyndall born 1820.

    Let us never be afraid of innocent joy; God is good and what he does
    is well done; resign yourself to everything, even happiness; ask for
    the spirit of sacrifice, of detachment, of renunciation, and above
    all, for the spirit of joy and gratitude.

    --Amiel.

               That's the wise thrush;
    He sings each song twice over,
    Lest you should think he never could recapture
    The first fine careless rapture!

    --Robert Browning.

    And these things we write, that our joy may be made full.

    --1 John 1. 4.

Lord God, help me to keep the things under my feet that are inclined
to destroy happiness. Show me clearly the line which divides right and
wrong, that I may not fear the censure of the world. Help me to act
with good judgment and be calm in obeying thy laws. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-SECOND

John B. Gough born 1817.

Warren Hastings died 1818.

G. W. De Long born 1844.

    I never saw a moor,
      I never saw the sea;
    Yet know I how a heather looks
      And what a wave must be.

    I never spoke with God,
      Nor visited in heaven;
    Yet certain am I of the spot
      As if the chart were given.

    --Emily Dickinson.

    I don't want to possess a faith; I want a faith which will possess
    me.

    --Charles Kingsley.

    Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of
    hosts.

    --Zechariah 4. 6.

My Father, may there be no room in my soul for doubt. Help me to be
cautious and careful that my own neglect and carelessness may not
cause the loss of my faith. May I be trustful as I look for the great
light that guides me over the uncertain way. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-THIRD

Rowland Hill born 1744.

Louis XVI born 1754.

William E. Henley born 1849.

    Out of the night that covers me,
      Black as the Pit from pole to pole,
    I thank whatever gods may be
      For my unconquerable soul.

    It matters not how strait the gate,
      How charged with punishments the scroll,
    I am master of my fate,
      I am the captain of my soul.

    --W. E. Henley.

    A man who has borne himself honorably through a whole life makes an
    action honorable which might appear ambiguous in others.

    --Goethe.

    Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable.

    --1 Corinthians 15. 58.

Father of mercy, I beseech thee to protect me in my endeavors as I try
to live my ideals. May I not choose unnecessary burdens, and when I
most need to be strong find that I have lived in that which has
weakened my life. I ask for a clear mind and a strong heart that I may
be "Captain of my soul." Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-FOURTH

William Wilberforce born 1759.

William Thomas Moncrieff born 1794.

Theodore Parker born 1810.

    Give me, Lord, eyes to behold the truth;
      A seeing sense that knows the eternal right;
    A heart with pity filled, and gentlest ruth;
      A manly faith that makes all darkness light:
    Give me the power to labor for mankind;
      Make me the mouth of such as cannot speak;
    Eyes let me be to groping men and blind.

    --Theodore Parker.

    Love's hearts are faithful, but not fond,
    Bound for the just, but not beyond;
    Not glad, as the low-loving herd,
    Of self in other still preferred,
    But they have heartily designed
    The benefit of broad mankind.
    And they serve men austerely,
    After their own genius, clearly,
    Without a false humility.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Herein I also exercise myself to have a conscience void of offense
    toward God and men always.

    --Acts 24. 16.

Heavenly Father, help me to-day to look into my heart and see the
truth of my life, and show me thy heart that I may see the truth of
life. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-FIFTH

Thomas Chatterton died 1770.

Sir William Herschel died 1822.

Francis Bret Harte died 1902.

    O teach me in the trying hour,
      When anguish swells the dewy tear,
    To still my sorrows, own thy power,
      Thy goodness love, thy justice fear.

    Then why, my soul, dost thou complain?
      Why drooping seek the dark recess?
    Shake off the melancholy chain,
      For God created all to bless.

    --Thomas Chatterton.

    Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows
       which show like grief itself, but are not so:
    For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
    Divides one thing entire to many shadows.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
    And why art thou disquieted within me?
    Hope thou in God.

    --Psalm 42. 5.

Loving Father, forbid that I should be lonesome, and forget thou art
my friend: and may I not pass over thy mercies while waiting for thy
compassion. Help me to find contentment in the inheritances of the
earth, where I may always draw from thee. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-SIXTH

Sir Robert Walpole born 1676.

Adam Clarke died 1832.

Henry Fawcett born 1833.

    Lord, for to-morrow and its needs
          I do not pray;
    Keep me, my God, from stain of sin
          Just for to-day.
    Help me to labor earnestly,
          And duly pray;
    Let me be kind in word and deed,
          Father, to-day.

    Let me no wrong or idle word
          Unthinking say;
    Set thou a seal upon my lips
          Through all to-day.
    Let me in season, Lord, be grave,
          In season gay;
    Let me be faithful to thy grace,
          Dear Lord, to-day.

    --Ernest Wilberforce.

    And which of you by being anxious can add one cubit unto the measure
    of his life?

    --Matthew 6. 27.

My Lord, I pray that thou wilt control my life, and bless the going
out of my work, be it ever so great or small. Help me to realize the
necessity of earnestness, that I may "work while it is to-day," and I
have the light, and not wait for the night, when it is too dark for
work to be done. May I be faithful in my work until it is completed.
Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-SEVENTH

William Woollett born 1735.

James Thomson died 1748.

George W. F. Hegel born 1770.

    Who are thy playmates, boy?
    "My favorite is joy,
    Who brings with him his sister Peace, to stay
    The livelong day.
    I love them both; but he
    Is most to me!"

    And where are thy playmates now,
    O man of sober brow?
    "Alas! dear joy, the merriest is dead,
    But I have wed
    Peace; and our babe, a boy
    Newborn, is joy."

    --John B. Tabb.

    Depart from evil, and do good;
    Seek peace, and pursue it.

    --Psalm 34. 14.

Lord God, may I realize more my dependence on thee for the joys of
life. I pray that as I accept thy gifts I will not neglect to take the
peace and happiness which thou dost give with them. Grant that I may
have the bright hope and cheerful courage that is the experience of
power and truth. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-EIGHTH

Johann W. von Goethe born 1749.

Ormsby MacKnight Mitchel born 1809.

Jones Very born 1813.

Count Lyoff (Leo) Tolstoy born 1828.

Sir Edward Burne-Jones born 1833.

Leigh Hunt died 1859.

    All truly wise thoughts have been already thought a thousand times;
    but to make them truly ours we must think them over again honestly,
    till they take firm root in our personal experience.

    --Goethe.

    The light that fills thy house at morn
      Thou canst not for thyself retain;
    But all who with thee here are born
      It bids to share an equal gain.

    The wave, the blue encircling wave,
      No chain can bind, no fetter hold;
    Its thunders tell of Him who gave
      What none can ever buy for gold.

    --Jones Very.

    And the glory which thou hast given me I have given unto them

    --John 17. 22.

Father of love, I thank thee for thy daily love and for thy daily
bread. May I feel that thy gifts are for all, and not mine to keep and
store from those who are in need. Help me as I say, "Thy will be done
to me," to so will it to others. Amen.




AUGUST TWENTY-NINTH

John Locke born 1632.

John Fawcett born 1768.

Frederick D. Maurice born 1805.

Oliver Wendell Holmes born 1809.

Maurice Maeterlinck born 1862.

    Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,
          As the swift seasons roll!
          Leave thy low-vaulted past!
    Let each new temple, nobler than the last,
    Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast,
          Till thou at length art free,
    Leaving thine outgrown shell by life's unresting sea!

    --Oliver Wendell Holmes.

    We all live in the sublime. Where else can we live? That is the only
    place of life. Though you have but a little room, do you fancy that
    God is not there, too, and it is impossible to live therein a life
    that shall be somewhat lofty? Do you imagine that you can possibly
    be alone, that love can be a thing one knows, a thing one sees; that
    events can be weighed like the gold and silver of ransom?

    --Maurice Maeterlinck.

    My soul waiteth in silence for God only:
    From him cometh my salvation.

    --Psalm 62. 1.

Loving Father, help me to live, that my spirit may always dwell in thy
protecting love. Amen.




AUGUST THIRTIETH

Cleopatra died B. C. 30.

William Paley born 1743.

Julian A. Weir born 1852.

             Thyself and thy belongings
    Are not thine own so proper as to waste
    Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
    Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
    Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
    Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
    As if we had them not.  Spirits are not finely touched
    But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends
    The smallest scruple of her excellence,
    But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
    Herself the glory of a creditor,
    Both thanks and use.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Brethren, be ye imitators together of me, and mark them that so walk
    even as ye have us for an ensample.

    --Philippians 3. 17.

My Father, I pray that I may not let my life become commonplace
through habit. May I not be content to rest in my virtues and let the
days pass neglected. Awaken my dull satisfactions to a desire to live
for the greatest, that I may have the greatest to live for. Amen.




AUGUST THIRTY-FIRST

John Bunyan died 1686.

Charles James Lever born 1806.

Theophile Gautier born 1811.

Queen Wilhelmina of Holland born 1880.

    Let us be patient, and endure a while; the time may come that God
    may give us a happy release; but let us not be our own murderers.

    --John Bunyan.

    He that is down need fear no fall;
      He that is low no pride;
    He that is humble ever shall
      Have God to be his guide.

    --John Bunyan.

    Time delivers fools from grief and reason wise men.

    --Epictetus.

    For our light affliction, which is for the moment, worketh for us
    more and more exceedingly an eternal weight of glory.

    --2 Corinthians 4. 17.

My Lord, if I may be walking through fields that are rough with grief
and care, may I have the courage to continue on to the smooth
pastures, where I may walk with comfort and peace. May I not let the
weariness and sorrow that may come to my heart to-day dwarf my hope
and enjoyment of the future. Amen.




SEPTEMBER


            Go forth at eventide,
    The eventide of summer, when the trees
    Yield their frail honors to the passing breeze,
    And woodland paths with autumn tints are dyed;
    When the mild sun his paling luster shrouds
    In gorgeous draperies of golden clouds,
    Then wander forth, mid beauty and decay,
    To meditate alone--alone to watch and pray.

    --Emma C. Embury.




SEPTEMBER FIRST

Edward Alleyn born 1566.

Lydia Sigourney born 1791.

James Gordon Bennett, Sr., born 1795.

William Stanley Jevons born 1835.

               O ye, who proudly boast,
    In your veins, the blood of sires like these,
    Look to their lineaments. Dread lest ye lose
    Their likeness in your sons. Should mammon cling
    Too close around your heart, or wealth beget
    That bloated luxury which eats the core
    From manly virtue, or the tempting world
    Make faint the Christian purpose in your soul,
    Turn ye to Plymouth Rock, and where they knelt
    Kneel, and renew the vow they breathed to God.

    --Lydia Sigourney.

    Educate children without religion, and you make a race of clever
    devils.

    --Duke of Wellington.

    Remember his covenant for ever,
    The word which he commanded to a thousand generations.

    --1 Chronicles 16. 15.

O Lord of wisdom, kindle me with a love for true knowledge, that I may
strive, in the moments I have now, to culture my life. Not by might,
not by power, but by thy spirit, O Lord, may I learn and teach thy
children. Amen.




SEPTEMBER SECOND

John Howard born 1726.

Henry George born 1839.

George R. Sims born 1842.

Eugene Field born 1850.

Newell Dwight Hillis born 1858.

    And thus we sat in darkness,
      Each one busy in his prayer;
    "We are lost!" the captain shouted,
      As he staggered down the stair.
    But the little daughter whispered,
      As she took his icy hand,
    "Isn't God upon the ocean,
      Just the same as on the land?"

    --Eugene Field.

    Happiness is through helpfulness. Every morning let us build a booth
    to shelter some one from life's fierce heat. Every noon let us dig
    some life-spring for thirsty lips.

    --Newell Dwight Hillis.

    Jehovah is nigh unto all them that call upon him,
    To all that call upon, him in truth.

    --Psalm 145. 18.

Heavenly Father, may I live that my spirit may never feel lost from
thee; and when I am in great need of thee, even unto death, may I know
that thou art very near. Amen.




SEPTEMBER THIRD

Oliver Cromwell died 1658.

George Lillo died 1739.

Bishop James Harrington born 1847.

Sarah Orne Jewett born 1849.

    Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that hate thee:
    Corruption wins not more than honesty.
    Still in thy right hand carry peace,
    To silence envious tongues. Be just and fear not:
    Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
    Thy God's and truth's; then if thou fallest, O Cromwell,
    Thou fallest a blessed martyr.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Surely, the only true knowledge of our fellow man is that which
    enables us to feel with him, which gives us a fine ear for the
    heart-pulses that are beating under the mere clothes of circumstance
    and opinion.

    --George Eliot.

    With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
    another in love.

    --Ephesians 4. 2.

    Lord, give thy people consistency of judgment, one heart, and mutual
    love; and go on to deliver them, and with the work of the
    reformation; and make the name of Christ glorious in the world.
    Teach those who look too much on thy instruments to depend more upon
    thyself. Pardon the folly of this short prayer: Even for Christ's
    sake. And give us a good night, if it be thy pleasure. Amen.

    --Prayer by Oliver Cromwell, just before death.




SEPTEMBER FOURTH

Pindar, poet, born B. C. 522.

William E. Dodge born 1805.

Phoebe Cary born 1824.

Sir Wilfred Lawson born 1829.

    I ask not wealth, but power to take
      And use the things I have, aright;
    Not years, but wisdom that shall make
      My life a profit and delight.

    --Phcebe Gary.

    Another day may bring another mind,
      A mind to learn when there is none to teach;
    To follow when no leader we can find;
      To enjoy when good is now beyond our reach.

    A better mind, but not a better time,
      A mind to will, but not a time to do
    What had been done, if we in life's bright prime,
      When God was ready, had been ready too.

    --Thomas T. Lynch.

    Give diligence to present thyself approved unto God, a workman that
    needeth not to be ashamed.

    --2 Timothy 2. 15.

My Father, help me to have lofty thoughts, and may I not be content
until they are carried into purpose. Help me to conquer that which
will keep me from an act of happiness, and grant that by thinking of
that which is pure, and doing that which is good, I may be made
helpful and true. Amen.




SEPTEMBER FIFTH

Catherine Parr died 1548.

Cardinal Richelieu born 1585.

Robert Fergusson born 1750.

Giacomo Meyerbeer born 1791.

Richard C. Trench born 1807.

    Be patient! O, be patient! Put your ear against the earth;
    Listen there how noiselessly the germ o' the seed has birth--
    How noiselessly and gently it upheaves its little way,
    Till it parts the scarcely broken ground, and the blade stands up in day.

    Be patient! O, be patient!--though yet our hopes are green,
    The harvest fields of freedom shall be crowned with sunny sheen.
    Be ripening! be ripening--mature your silent way,
    Till the whole broad land is tongued with fire on freedom's harvest day.

    --Richard C. Trench.

    And let patience have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
    entire, lacking in nothing.

    --James 1. 4.

Gracious Father, help me to see the truth as thou hast made it, and
may I not be indifferent to the beauty and patience of the earth's
revelations. May I not mistake indolence for patient ambition, which I
would have for anxious hours, and which I need for my heart's desires.
Amen.




SEPTEMBER SIXTH

Moses Mendelssohn born 1729.

Marquis de Lafayette born 1757.

Jane Addams born 1860.

    God will not seek thy race,
      Nor will he ask thy birth;
    Alone he will demand of thee,
      What hast thou done on earth?

    --Persian.

    One dreams of the time when the interest and capacity of each person
    shall be studied with reference to the industry about to be
    undertaken.

    --Jane Addams.

    Honor is purchased by deeds we do, honor is not won, until some
    honorable deed is done.

    --Sir Christopher Marlowe.

    In diligence not slothful; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord.

    --Romans 12. 11.

Gracious Father, wilt thou bring to my mind and heart the important
things which are needed in preparing life. Help me to use the strength
that is given to me for to-day, that I may not have to give to-morrow
to learning what I should have known. Amen.




SEPTEMBER SEVENTH

Queen Elizabeth born 1533.

Comte de Buffon born 1707.

Victorien Sardou born 1831.

Hannah More died 1833.

John G. Whittier died 1892.

            Side by side
    In the low sunshine by the turban stone
    They knelt; each made his brother's woe his own,
    Forgetting, in the agony and stress
    Of pitying love, his claim of selfishness;
    Peace, for his friend besought, his own became;
    His prayers were answered in another's name;
    And when at last they rose up to embrace,
    Each saw God's pardon in his brother's face.

    --John G. Whittier.

    My care is like my shadow in the sun,
    Follows me flying, flies when I pursue it;
    Stands and lies by me, does what I have done,
    This too familiar care does make me rue it.
      No means I find to rid him from my breast,
      Till by the end of things it be suppressed.

    --Queen Elizabeth.

    Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

    --Galatians 6. 2.

Lord God, help me to look for those who are in need of help. Forgive
me for my failures, and may I gather up my broken promises and try to
redeem them. I ask for thy forgiveness, as I ask that thou wilt help
me to forgive them who may have trespassed against me. Amen.




SEPTEMBER EIGHTH

Richard Coeur de Lion born 1157.

A.W. Schlegel born 1767.

Antonin Dvorak born 1841.

    All service ranks the same with God,--
    With God, whose puppets, best and worst,
    Are we: there is no last nor first.


    --Robert Browning.

    Thou needest not man's little life of years,
      Save that he gather wisdom from them all;
    That in thy fear he lose all other fears,
      And in thy calling heed no other call.
    Then shall he be thy child to know thy care,
    And in thy Self the eternal Sabbath share.


    --Jones Very.

    He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his soul;
    But he that is careless of his ways shall die.
    --Proverbs 191. 6.

My Lord, forbid that I should want to live to be known only for power
and pride. Help me to strive for that which is helpful and lovely. May
I never be restrained from thee, but delight to follow in thy way.
Help me to be obedient to thy laws, that I may learn thy truths. Amen.




SEPTEMBER NINTH

Battle of Flodden.

James the Fourth of Scotland killed 1513.

Luigi Galvani born 1737.

    Then welcome each rebuff
    That turns earth's smoothness rough,
      Each sting that bids nor sit, nor stand but go!
    Be our joys three-parts pain!
    Strive and hold cheap the strain;
      Learn, nor account the pang; dare, never grudge the throe.

    --Robert Browning.

    Life without industry is guilt; and industry without art is
    brutality.

    --John Ruskin.

    Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he hath been
    approved, he shall receive the crown of life.

    --James 1. 12.

Almighty God, help me as I start this day to remember how easy it is
to drive the peace from it. May I do my best to keep it, and defy any
indolence or disposition, that may make me spoil it. May I lay me down
at night in peace and sleep because of the contentment that has filled
the hours. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TENTH

William the Conqueror died 1087.

Dr. Thomas Sheridan died 1788.

Mungo Park born 1771.

Mrs. Godwin (Mary Wollstonecraft) died 1797.

    Let the wind blow east, west, north, or south, the immortal soul
    will take its flight to the destined point.

    --Thomas Sheridan.

    He is void of true taste who strives to have his house admired by
    decorating it with showish outside; but to adorn our character by
    gentleness of a communicative temper is a proof of good taste and
    good nature

    --Epictetus.

    Let fortune empty her whole quiver on me.
    I have a soul that, like an empty shield,
    Can take it all, and verge enough for more.

    --Thomas Dryden.

    The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will save me unto
    his heavenly kingdom.

    --2 Timothy 4. 18.

Almighty God, I bless thee that it is thou who brought me to live on
earth; and I rejoice that it is thou who wilt judge my life when thou
takest me away. May I be saving thy rich gifts that I may not be found
poor; and may I be worthy to receive thine inheritance and hear thee
say, "Well done." Amen.




SEPTEMBER ELEVENTH

Battle of Marathon B. C. 490.

William Lowth born 1661.

James Thomson born 1700.

    But what is virtue but repose of mind,
      A pure ethereal calm, that knows no storm;
    Above the reach of wild ambitious wind,
      Above the passions that this world deform.

    --James Thomson.

    And if I pray, the only prayer
      That moves my lips for me
    Is, "Leave the heart that now I bear,
      And give me liberty!"

    Yes, as my swift days near their goal,
      'Tis all that I implore;
    In life and death, a chainless soul
      With courage to endure.

    --Emily Brontë.

    Cast not away therefore your boldness, which hath great recompense
    of reward.

    --Hebrews 10. 35.

Tender Father, may I pause this morning to look at that which I keep
uppermost in my life; and if it may not be worthy of thy esteem, may I
be bold enough to revise my ideals. With thy compassion may I free my
heart and mind of all unworthiness, and be given endurance to restore
the empty places. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWELFTH

Jean-Philippe Rameau born 1693.

Griffith Jones died 1786.

Charles Dudley Warner born 1829.

    Our duty is to be useful, not according to our desires, but
    according to our powers.

    --Amiel.

    How good is man's life, the mere living! how fit to employ
    All the heart and the soul and the senses for ever in joy!

    --Robert Browning.

    Do something! No man is born with a mortgage on his soul; but every
    man is born a debtor to Time. Meet this obligation before you find
    too late that your life is impoverished and you cannot redeem it.

    --M.B.S.

    Let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that
    he may have whereof to give to him that hath need.

    --Ephesians 4. 28.

My Father, what I have left out of my life I know I cannot recover
now. I pray that I may give the best to what is left. Make me
deliberate, that I may prove my earnestness. Make me industrious, that
I may use my best resources to develop my life and further thy
kingdom. Amen.




SEPTEMBER THIRTEENTH

William Cecil born 1520.

Michael de Montaigne died 1592.

General Wolfe died 1759.

Charles James Fox died 1806.

    And thou, O river of to-morrow, flowing
      Between thy narrow adamantine walls,
      But beautiful, and white with waterfalls
    And wreaths of mist, like hands the pathway showing;
    I hear the trumpets of the morning blowing.

    It is the mystery of the unknown
      That fascinates us; we are children still,
    Wayward and wistful; with one hand we cling
    To the familiar things we call our own,
      And with the other, resolute of will,
    Grope in the dark for what the day will bring.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth.

    --Job 5. 17.

Almighty God, I pray that thou wilt help me to correct my life to-day
that I may know a better way to-morrow; and may I be mindful and try
to do right. Grant that I may be patient and kind if I may be sick or
in need, and always keep uppermost the faith of deliverance and
eternal care. Amen.




SEPTEMBER FOURTEENTH

Alighieri Dante died 1321.

Alexander Baron von Humboldt born 1769.

Julia Magruder born 1854.

Charles Dana Gibson born 1867.

    Since it is Providence that determines the fates of men, their inner
    nature is thus brought into unison. There is such harmony, as in all
    things of nature, that one might explain the whole without referring
    to a higher Providence. But this only proves the more clearly and
    certainly this higher Providence, which has given existence to this
    harmony.

    --Wilhelm von Humboldt.

    The good mariner, when he draws near the port, furls his sails and
    enters it softly; so ought we to lower the sails of our worldly
    operations, and turn to God with all heart and understanding.

    --Dante.

    Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God;
    Thy judgments are a great deep:
    O Jehovah, thou preservest man and beast.

    --Psalm 36. 6.

My Father in heaven, may I hear thy voice to-day! May I be quiet as I
listen to thee. Above the clamor of the crowd may I hear thee calling
me. May I hear thee in my joys and in my sorrows; in my work and in my
leisure. May I listen to thee oftener, that I may be familiar with thy
ways. Amen.




SEPTEMBER FIFTEENTH

James Fenimore Cooper born 1789.

Louis Joseph Martel born 1813.

Porfirio Diaz born 1830.

William Howard Taft, Ohio, twenty-sixth President United States, born 1857.

    Friendship is one of the cheapest and most accessible of pleasures;
    it requires no outlay and no very serious expenditure of time or
    trouble. It is quite easy to make friends, if one wants to... There
    is surely no greater pleasure in the world than to feel one is
    needed, welcomed, missed, and loved.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    "Friendship is love without his wings."

    --William H. Taft (from Byron).

    Without sympathy, in the highest sense of intellectual penetration,
    kindness may be a folly, and intended aid, oppression.

    --John Ruskin.

    He that maketh many friends doeth it to his own destruction; but
    there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.

    --Proverbs 18. 24.

My Father, may I know the delight of true friendship which is
responsive and sincere. May I never feel so secure in myself that I
will cease to want friends, or be so dependent on others that I will
be continually seeking them. May I understand the value of having a
stanch friend and of being one. Amen.




SEPTEMBER SIXTEENTH

Gabriel D. Fahrenheit died 1736.

W. Augustus Muhlenberg born 1796.

Francis Parkman born 1823.

    Yes, to this thought I hold with firm persistence--
      The last result of wisdom stamps it true:
    He only earns his freedom and existence
      Who daily conquers them anew.

    --Goethe.

    For thee hath been dawning
      Another blue day;
    Look how thou let it
      Slip empty away.

    --Goethe.

    Happy the man, and happy he alone,
    Who can call to-day his own:
    He who, secure within, can say,
    "To-morrow, do thy worst, for I have lived to-day."

    --John Dryden.

    Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is
    risen upon thee.

    --Isaiah 60. 1.

Gracious Father, help me to be alert this morning and select the
noblest that is in to-day. May I be diligent and not find in the
evening that I have been unworthy of the day. Amen.




SEPTEMBER SEVENTEENTH

Samuel Prout born 1783.

Dr. John Kidd died 1851.

Walter Savage Landor died 1864.

    In the hour of distress and misery the eye of every mortal turns to
    friendship; in the hour of gladness and conviviality, what is your
    want? It is friendship. When the heart overflows with gratitude or
    with other sweet and sacred sentiment, what is the word to which it
    would give utterance? A friend.

    --Walter Savage Landor.

    The hurried quest of some people to get hold of new friends is so
    perpetual that they never have time to get acquainted with anyone.

    --M.B.S.

    Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not;
    And go not to thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity:
    Better is a neighbor that is near than a brother far off.

    --Proverbs 27. 10.

My Lord and my Friend, I pray that my sympathy may be sincere and
comforting, and with a glad heart I may bring rejoicing to my friends.
May I learn from thee how I may be a permanent friend. Amen.




SEPTEMBER EIGHTEENTH

Trajan, Roman emperor, born 1584.

James Shirley born 1596.

Samuel Johnson born 1709.

Joseph Story born 1779.

    There is no greater happiness than to be able to look on a life
    usefully and virtuously employed: to trace our own purposes in
    existence by such tokens that excite neither shame nor sorrow.

    --Dr. Johnson.

    The perfect poise that comes-from self-control,
      The poetry of action, rhythmic, sweet--
    The unvexed music of the body and soul
      That the Greeks dreamed of, made at last complete.
    Our stumbling lives attain not such a bliss;
      Too often, while the air we vainly beat,
    Love's perfect law of liberty we miss.

    --Annie Matheson.

    Brethren, I have lived before God in all good conscience until this
    day.

    --Acts 23. 1.

Heavenly Father, may I not confuse my life with rebellion, but through
thy guidance find peace. Help me through the perplexities that may
keep me from the quietness of to-day. Keep me in sight of the great
plan of life, that I may grow steadfastly toward thee. Amen.




SEPTEMBER NINETEENTH

Battle of Poitiers 1356.

Hartley Coleridge born 1796.

President Garfield died 1881.

    Be not afraid to pray--to pray is right.
      Pray if thou canst, with hope; but ever pray
      Though hope be weak, or sick with long delay;
    Pray in the darkness, if there be no light.
    Far is the time, remote from human sight,
      When war and discord on earth shall cease:
      Yet every prayer for universal peace
    Avails the time to expedite.

    --Hartley Coleridge.

    More things are wrought by prayer
    Than the world dreams of. Wherefore let thy voice
    Rise like a fountain for me night and day.
    For what are men better than sheep or goats
    That nourish a blind life within the brain,
    If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer
    Both for themselves and those who call them friend?
    For so the whole world is every way
    Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Continue stedfastly in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving.

    --Colossians 4. 2.

O Lord, give me the desire to pray, and teach me to pray as thou
wouldst have my needs. Sustain me, that I may overcome my weaknesses,
and strengthen me, that I may have thine approval. May I be reverent
and unselfish as I come to thee in prayer. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTIETH

Battle of Salamis B. C. 480.

Alexander the Great born B. C. 356.

Robert Emmet died 1803.

David Ross Locke (Petroleum V. Nasby) born 1833.

    'Tis weary watching wave by wave,
      And yet the tide heaves onward;
    We climb, like corals, grave by grave,
      That pave a pathway sunward.
    We're driven back, for our next fray
      A newer strength to borrow;
    And where the vanguard camps to-day,
      The rear shall rest to-morrow.

    --Gerald Massey.

    Be like the bird, that, pausing in her flight
    A while on boughs too slight,
    Feels them give way beneath her, and yet sings,
    Knowing that she hath wings.

    --Victor Hugo.

    Trust in Jehovah, and do good;
    Dwell in the land, and feed on his faithfulness.

    --Psalm 37. 3.

Eternal God, help me to realize that life is not only endless but,
whether I live in love and obedience, or wait in neglect and
indifference, that I can never separate myself from thee. May I be
diligent in worthy endeavors to do my best for thee. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-FIRST

Girolamo Savonarola born 1452.

Emperor Charles V died 1558.

Sir Walter Scott died 1832.

    It is the secret sympathy,
    The silver link, the silken tie,
    Which heart to heart and mind to mind
    In body and in soul can bind.

    --Sir Walter Scott.

    No action, whether foul or fair,
    Is ever done, but it carves somewhere
    A record, written by fingers ghostly,
    As a blessing or a curse, and mostly
    In the greater weakness or greater strength
    Of the acts which follow it.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold,
    when I come to the outermost part of the camp, it shall be that, as
    I do, so shall ye do.

    --Judges 7. 17.

Loving Father, may I remember that from the beginning, all things were
created beautiful and were given for love. I pray that I may be
willing to be guided to the beautiful things of life and receive from
them the delight of thy love. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-SECOND

Peter Simon Pallas born 1741.

Michael Faraday born 1791.

Theodore Edward Hook born 1788.

    Man learns to swim by being tossed into life's maelstrom and left to
    make his way ashore. No youth can learn to sail his life-craft in a
    lake sequestered and sheltered from all the storms, where other
    vessels never come. Skill comes through sailing one's craft amidst
    rocks and bars and opposing fleets, amidst storms and whirls and
    counter currents.

    --Newell Dwight Hillis.

    O, a trouble's a ton or a trouble's an ounce,
      Or a trouble is what you make it!
    And it isn't the fact that you're hurt that counts,
      But only--how did you take it?

    --Edmund C. Vance.

    And thus, having patiently endured, he obtained the promise.

    --Hebrews 6. 15.

Tender Father, may I not encourage the disposition to enlarge and make
much of the troubles and disappointments of life, and make light of
the joys and privileges. I pray that I may keep a large place for
happiness. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-THIRD

Karl Theodore Körner born 1791.

Hjalmar Hjorth Boyesen born 1848.

Wilkie Collins died 1889.

M.F.H. De Haas died 1895.

    When over the fair fame of friend or foe
      The shadow of disgrace shall fall; instead
    Of words to blame, or reproof of thus and so,
      Let something good be said.

    Forget not that no fellow-being yet
      May fall so low but love may lift his head;
    Even the cheek of shame with tears is wet
      If something good be said.

    --Author unknown.

    The right Christian mind will ... find its own image wherever it
    exists; it will seek for what it loves, and draw out of all dens and
    caves, and it will believe in its being, often when it cannot see
    it; and so it will lie lovingly over the faults and rough places of
    the human heart, as the snow from heaven does over the hard, and
    black, and broken mountain rocks.

    --John Ruskin.

    To him that is ready to faint kindness should be showed from his
    friend.

    --Job 6. 14.

Lord God, grant that after years of climbing I may not find the mist
in my soul has dulled the vision of thy glory. Keep me from the habit
of looking for faults, and missing the virtues in others. Forbid that
I should be so occupied in taking measure of other lives that I
neglect to measure my own. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-FOURTH

John Marshall born 1755.

Zachary Taylor, Virginia, twelfth President United
States, born 1784.

S.R. Crockett born 1860.

    Get the truth once uttered, and 'tis like
    A star newborn that drops into its place,
    And which, once circling in its placid round,
    Not all the tumult of the earth can shake.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    If you would be well spoken of, learn to speak well of others. And
    when you have learned to speak well of them, endeavor likewise to do
    well to them; and reap the fruit of being well spoken of by them.

    --Epictetus.

    He that slandereth not with his tongue,
    Nor doeth evil to his friend,
    Nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbor;
    He that doeth these things shall never be moved.

    --Psalm 15. 3, 5.

Lord God, I bless thee for the lives of men and women who are willing
to be led by the truth, and who are worthy to follow thee. I pray that
thou wilt make me truthful, and keep me steadfast, that none may go
astray by the uncertainty of my way. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-FIFTH

William Romaine born 1714.

Felicia D. Hemans born 1793.

W.M. Rossetti born 1829.

    Not as the conqueror comes,
      They, the true-hearted, came;
    Not with the roll of the stirring drums,
      And the trumpet songs of fame:

    Amidst the storm they sang,
      And the stars heard and the sea;
    And the sounding aisles of the dim woods rang
      To the anthem of the free.

    Ay, call it holy ground,
      The soil where first they trod;
    They have left unstained what there they found--
      Freedom to worship God.

    --Felicia D. Hemans.

    But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig-tree;
    and none shall make them afraid.

    --Micah 4. 4.

Eternal God, may I look to the Pilgrims and learn that to pray by
faith with the heart is not to pray by faith of the imagination. Help
me to pray, and have faith to struggle for that which I would
rightfully have. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-SIXTH

Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood born 1750.

Dr. Mary Walker born 1832.

Irving Bacheller born 1859.

Frederic William Faber died 1863.

    God is never so far off as even to be near--
    He is within: Our spirit is the home he holds most dear.
    To think of him as by our side is almost as untrue
    As to remove his throne beyond the starry blue.

    --F.W. Faber.

    Nearer, my God, to thee,
      Nearer to thee!
    E'en though it be a cross
      That raiseth me;
    Still all my song shall be--
    Nearer, my God, to thee,
      Nearer to thee!

    --Sarah F. Adams.

    My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: My heart shall
    not reproach me so long as I live.

    --Job 27. 6.

My Father, may I consider the place in which I stand: and may I not be
deceived in thinking I am near thee while I am living far away. Teach
me the way to draw nearer to thee each day, until my spirit may
continually dwell with thee. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-SEVENTH

George Cruikshank born 1792.

Samuel Francis Dupont born 1803.

Aimé Millet born 1819.

Henri Frédéric Arniel born 1821.

    The man who has no refuge in himself, who lives, so to speak, in his
    front rooms, in the outer whirlwind of things and opinions, is not
    properly a personality at all; ... he is one of a crowd.

    --Amiel.

    Happy the heart that keeps its twilight hour,
    And in the depths of heavenly peace reclined,
    Loves to commune with thoughts of tender power--
    Thoughts that ascend, like angels beautiful.

    --Paul Hamilton Hayne.

    The art of meditation may be exercised at all hours and in all
    places; and men of genius in their walks, at table, and amidst
    assemblies, turning the eye of the mind inward, can form an
    artificial solitude; retired amidst a crowd, calm amidst
    distractions, and wise amidst folly.

    --Disraeli.

    Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still.

    --Psalm 4. 4.

Heavenly Father, save me from being so poor in spirit, that I will
have to be sustained by the bright spirits of others. May I be
continually refreshed by the spirit of life that may be found at all
times. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-EIGHTH

Francis Turner Palgrave born 1824.

Frances E. Willard born 1839.

General John D. French born 1852.

Mary Anderson born 1859.

    Unless there is a predominating and overmastering purpose to which
    all the accessories and incidents of life contribute, the character
    will be weak, irresolute, uncertain.

    --Frances E. Willard.

    Life is not an idle ore,
    But iron dug from central gloom,
      And heated hot with burning fears,
      And dipt in baths of hissing tears,
    And battered with the shocks of doom
    To shape and use.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    He that doubteth is like the surge of the sea driven by the wind and
    tossed.... A double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.

    --James 1. 6, 8.

O God, help me to be positive. May I not want to be in so many places,
and in so many things, that I can never be found in anything. Help me
to know that a purpose secured is worth many attempts, and that to
have a character I must build it. Amen.




SEPTEMBER TWENTY-NINTH

Pompey killed B.C. 48.

Robert Lord Clive born 1725.

Horatio Nelson born 1758.

    O strange and wild is the world of men
      Which the eyes of the Lord must see--
    With continents, inlands, tribes, and tongues,
      With multitudes bond and free!
    All kings of the earth bow down to him,
      And yet--he can think of me.

    For none can measure the mind of God
      Or the bounds of eternity,
    He knows each life that has come from him,
      To the tiniest bird and bee,
    For the love of his heart is so deep and wide
      That it takes in even me.

    --Mary E. Allbright.

    Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? and not one of them shall
    fall on the ground without your Father: but the very hairs of your
    head are all numbered.

    --Matthew 10. 29, 30.

Almighty God, cause me to look out this morning, and open wide my
eyes, that I may see what great preparation thou hast made that I
might live. May I be ashamed to start wrong and be unworthy of the
glory of this day. Amen.




SEPTEMBER THIRTIETH

George Whitefield died 1770.

William Hutton born 1723.

John Dollond died 1761.

    Up, up, my soul, the long-spent time redeeming;
      Sow thou the seeds of better deeds and thought;
    Light other lamps while yet thy lamp is beaming--
      The time is short.

    Think of the good thou might'st have done when brightly
      The suns to thee life's choicest season brought;
    Hours lost to God in pleasure passing lightly--
      The time is short.

    If thou hast friends, give them thy best endeavor,
      Thy warmest impulse, and thy purest thought,
    Keeping in mind and words and action ever--
      The time is short.

    --Elizabeth Prentiss.

    What is your life? For ye are a vapor that appeareth for a little
    time, and then vanisheth away.

    --James 4. 14.

Loving Father, help me to realize that I am not living in the right
way nor the right place if I am discontented, or happy in trifles and
untruth. Help me to find my place, and with thy help may I stand firm
and confident. Amen.




OCTOBER


    The morns are meeker than they were,
      The nuts are getting brown;
    The berry's cheek is plumper,
      The rose is out of town.
    The maple wears a gayer scarf,
      The field a scarlet gown;
    Lest I should be old-fashioned,
      I'll put a trinket on.

    --Emily Dickinson.




OCTOBER FIRST

Saint John Viscount Bolingbroke born 1678.

Pierre Corneille died 1684.

Rufus Choate born 1799.

    He speaks not well who doth his time deplore,
    Naming it new and a little obscure,
    Ignoble and unfit for lofty deeds.
    All times were modern in the time of them,
    And this no more than others. Do thy part
    Here in the living day, as did the great
    Who made old days immortal.

    --Richard Watson Gilder.

    He who is false to present duty breaks a thread in the loom, and
    will find the flaw when he may have forgotten the cause.

    --Henry Ward Beecher.

    For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
    And master the devil, or throw him out
    With wondrous potency.

    --William Shakespeare.

    And when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his
    house (now his windows were open in his chamber toward Jerusalem;)
    and he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and
    gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.

    --Daniel 6. 10.

Heavenly Father, help me to get away from doubt that leads to despair.
Give me a vision of hope that is stayed on faith. May I be conscious
and appreciative of my privileges while they come to me and make them
immortal. Amen.




OCTOBER SECOND

Aristotle died B.C. 322.

Major John Andre hanged 1780.

William Ellery Channing died 1842.

    I am not earth-born, though I here delay;
      Hope's child, I summon infiniter powers,
    And laugh to see the mild sunny day
      Smile on the shrunk and thin autumnal hours;
    I laugh, for hope hath a happy place for me--
    If my bark sinks, 'tis to another sea.

    --William E. Channing.

    The stars shall fade away, the sun himself
    Grow dim with age, and Nature sink in years;
    But thou shall flourish in immortal youth,
    Unhurt amidst the war of elements,
    The wreck of matter and the crush of worlds.

    --Thomas Addison.

    For with thee is the fountain of life:
    In thy light shall we see light.

    --Psalm 36. 9.

My Father, I would pray that my sense of gloom may not be more than
thy grace. May the glorious light of thy love break through my
disheartened soul, and reveal the sincerity of thy promises, that I
may be happy in thy care. Amen.




OCTOBER THIRD

Robert Barclay died 1690.

George Bancroft born 1800.

William Morris died 1896.

    Come hither, lads, and harken,
      For a tale there is to tell
    Of the wonderful days a-coming,
      When all shall be better than well.

    Come, then, let us cast off fooling,
      And put by ease and rest,
    For the cause alone is worthy
      Till the good days bring the best.

    --William Morris.

    Man's life is but a working day
      Whose tasks are set aright;
    A time to work, a time to pray,
      And then a quiet night.
    And then, please God, a quiet night
    Where palms are green and robes are white;
    A long-drawn breath, a balm for sorrow,
    And all things lovely on the morrow.

    --Christina G. Rossetti.

    And the ransomed of Jehovah shall return, and come with singing unto
    Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads.

    --Isaiah 61. 11.

Heavenly Father, help me to see that before the night thou hadst
planned the morning, and that thou hast never sent the night without
the hope of the morning. Before I rest in the night may I be ready for
the morning. Amen.




OCTOBER FOURTH

Francis of Assisi died 1226.

Edmund Malone born 1741.

François Guizot born 1787.

Jean François Millet born 1814.

Rutherford B. Hayes, Ohio, nineteenth President
United States, born 1822.

M.E. Braddon born 1837.

    We ought to rise day by day with a certain zest, a clear intention,
    a design to make the most of every hour; not to let the busy hours
    shoulder each other or tread on each other's heels, but to force
    every action to give up its strength and sweetness. There is work to
    be done, and there are empty hours to be filled as well.... But,
    most of all, there must be something to quicken, enliven, practice
    the soul.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    Men's souls ought to be left to see clearly; not jaundiced, blinded,
    twisted all awry, by revenge, moral abhorrence, and the like.

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    But there is a spirit in man,
    And the breath of the Almighty giveth them understanding.

    --Job 32. 8.

Spirit of life, I pray that thou wilt continually live within me. May
my days be spent neither in waste nor idleness, but planned to use,
with the best that is given me. Amen.




OCTOBER FIFTH

Jonathan Edwards born 1703.

Denis Diderot born 1713.

Horace Walpole born 1717.

Nancy Hanks died 1818.

Chester A. Arthur, Vermont, twenty-first President
United States, born 1830.

H.R. Guy de Maupassant born 1850.

    Earth gets its price for what earth gives us;
      The beggar is taxed for a corner to die in,
    The priest has his fee who comes and shrives us,
      We bargain for the graves we lie in;
    At the devil's booth are all things sold,
    Each ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold;
    For a cap and bells our lives we pay,
      Bubbles we buy with a whole soul's tasking;
    'Tis heaven alone that is given away,
      'Tis only God may be had for the asking.

    --James Russell Lowell.


    The free gift of God is eternal life.

    --Romans 6. 23.

Gracious Father, may the world speak to me of thy gifts, and of the
peace and power which it freely offers. May I not pass by thy great
appeals, and prefer to purchase at a great cost my indolence and
dissipation. Amen.




OCTOBER SIXTH

Jenny Lind Goldschmidt born 1820.

Harriet G. Hosmer born 1830.

Charles Stewart Parnell died 1891.

Alfred Tennyson died 1892.

    The heart which boldly faces death
      Upon the battlefield, and dares
    Cannon and bayonet, faints beneath
      The needle-points of frets and cares.
    The stoutest spirits they dismay--
    The tiny stings of every day.

    Ah! more than martyr's aureole
      And more than hero's heart of fire,
    We need the humble strength of soul
      Which daily toils and ills require.
    Sweet patience, grant us, if you may
    An added grace for every day.

    --Adelaide A. Procter.

    Sunset and evening star,
      And one clear call for me!
    And may there be no moaning of the bar,
      When I put out to sea.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Fret not thyself.

    --Proverbs 24. 19.

My Father, I pray that I may not be dismayed over life, and its
trifles. Help me to master difficulties great and small, and give me
patience through all until I reach the untroubled way. Amen.




OCTOBER SEVENTH

Sir Philip Sidney died 1586.

Edgar Allan Poe died 1849.

Oliver Wendell Holmes died 1894.

Mary J. Holmes died 1907.

    Yet in opinions look not always back;
      Your wake is nothing, mind the coming track;
    Leave what you've done for what you have to do;
      Don't be "consistent," but be simply true.

    --Oliver Wendell Holmes.

    A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by
    little statesmen and philosophers and divines. With consistency a
    great soul has nothing to do.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward.

    --Exodus 14. 15.

Heavenly Father, I pray that I may not be so consistent in the small
things of life that I will lose the great inspirations that come to
the soul. Broaden my life, that I may have the freedom of heart and
mind to pass over the failures and interruptions, and with vigorous
energy continue in the progress of life. Amen.




OCTOBER EIGHTH

Caroline Howard Gilman born 1794.

Edmund Clarence Stedman born 1833.

John Hay born 1838.

    He weren't no saint; them engineers
      Is pretty much alike--
    One wife in Natchez-under-the-Hill,
      Another one here in Pike;
    A keerless man in his talk was Jim,
      And an awkward hand in a row,
    But he never flunked, and he never lied--
      I reckon he never knowed how.

    --John Hay.

    He is brave whose tongue is silent
      Of the trophies of his word.
    He is great whose quiet bearing
      Marks his greatness well assured.

    --Edwin Arnold.

    The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee,
    that I am not as the rest of men.

    --Luke 18. 11.

Lord God, thou knowest what I am and where I belong. Have mercy upon
me and strengthen me, that I may not through weakness stay in the
darkness. Lead me out into the light; and may I find my way and be
contented with it. Amen.




OCTOBER NINTH

Michael Cervantes born 1547.

Jacques Auguste de Thuanus (De Thou) born 1553.

Charles Camilla Saint-Saëns born 1835.

    I will not doubt, though all my ships at sea
      Come drifting home with broken masts and sails;
      I shall believe the Hand which never fails
    From seeming evil worketh good for me;
    And though I weep because those sails are battered,
    Still will I cry, while my best hopes lie shattered,
      "I trust in Thee."

    --Ella Wheeler Wilcox.[1]

    Cease every joy to glimmer on my mind.
    But leave, O leave the light of hope behind.

    --Thomas Campbell.

    Hope deferred maketh the heart sick; But when the desire cometh, it
    is a tree of life.

    --Proverbs 13. 12.

Loving Father, help me to pass by my discouragements of yesterday and
look into the hope of to-day. Make me more careful of my strength, and
less forgetful of thy promises and of my trust. Amen.

[Footnote 1: Special permission W.B. Conkey, Hammond, Indiana.
Copyright 1912.]




OCTOBER TENTH

Henry Cavendish born 1731.

Benjamin West born 1738.

Hugh Miller born 1802.

Giuseppe Verdi born 1813.

Fridtjof Nansen born 1861.

    We cannot make bargains for blisses,
      Nor catch them like fishes in nets;
    And sometimes the thing our life misses
      Helps more than the thing which it gets.
    For good lieth not in pursuing,
      Nor gaining of great nor small,
    But just in the doing and doing
      As we would be done by is all.

    --Alice Gary.

    True, it is most painful not to meet the kindness and affection you
    feel you have deserved, and have a right to expect from others; but
    it is a mistake to complain, for it is no use; you cannot extort
    friendship with a cocked pistol.

    --Sydney Smith.

    Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

    --Matthew 22. 39.

Lord God, help me to understand that true affection is not that which
as it gives feels it merits return. May I avoid being selfish and
stubborn; and with my affections give peace and joy. Amen.




OCTOBER ELEVENTH

Sir Thomas Wyatt died 1542.

Dr. Samuel Clarke born 1675.

James Barry born 1741.

    Ask God to give thee skill
      In comfort's art,
    That thou may'st consecrated be
      And set apart,
    Unto a life of sympathy;
    For heavy is the weight of ill
      In every heart;
    And comforters are needed much
      Of Christlike touch.

    --Alexander Hamilton.

    The man who melts
    With social sympathy though not allied,
    Is than a thousand kinsmen of more worth.

    --Euripides.

    Who comforteth us in all our affliction, that we may be able to
    comfort them that are in any affliction, through the comfort
    wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.

    --2 Corinthians 1. 4.

Heavenly Father, thou hast made sympathy divine. May I never make it
commonplace. Grant that as thou dost bless and comfort me I may be
willing to comfort others, and do whatsoever thou wouldst have me do.
Amen.




OCTOBER TWELFTH

Columbus discovered America 1492.

Lyman Beecher born 1775.

George W. Cable born 1844.

Helena Modjeska born 1844.

    One poor day!
    Remember whose and how short it is!
    It is God's day, it is Columbus's.
    One day with life and heart is more than time enough to found a world.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    An illusion haunts us, that a long duration, as a year, a decade, a
    century, is valuable. But an old French sentence says, "God works in
    moments." We ask for long life, but 'tis deep life or grand moments
    that signify. Let the measure of Time be spiritual, not mechanical.
    Life is unnecessarily long. Moments of insight, of fine personal
    relation, a smile, a glance--what ample borrowers of eternity they
    are!

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years
    as one day.

    --2 Peter 3. 8.

My Father, I pray that when the "sun sets to-day my hope may not set
with it." Be with me earlier than the dawn, that I may plan with thee
a new day. I pray that thou wilt release me from anything that keeps
me from reaching the highest. Amen.




OCTOBER THIRTEENTH

Theodore Beza died 1605.

Murat, King of Naples, shot 1815.

Elizabeth Fry died 1845.

    What stronger breast-plate than a heart untainted! Thrice is he
    armed that hath his quarrel just, And he but naked, though locked up
    in steel, Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.

    --William Shakespeare.

    A man's accusations of himself are always believed, his praises
    never.

    --Montaigne.

    Justice needs that two be heard.

    --From Goethe's Autobiography.

    That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest
    live.

    --Deuteronomy 16. 20.

Lord of justice, if I may be influenced this morning by doubt and am
inclined to be resentful, wilt thou cause me to have a generous spirit
and keep my faith. May I never descend to anything base or deceitful,
but may I remember that if I lay down my life, I may have the power to
take it up again. Amen.




OCTOBER FOURTEENTH

William Penn born 1644.

James Fenimore Cooper died 1851.

Duke of Wellington died 1852.

    Do good with what thou hast, or it will do thee no good. If thou
    wouldst be happy, bring thy mind to thy condition, and have an
    indifferency for more than what is sufficient.

    --William Penn.

    The finest fruit earth holds up to its Maker is a finished man.

    --Humboldt.

    I considered Napoleon's presence in the field equal to forty men in
    the balance.

    --Duke of Wellington.

    What is man, that thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that
    thou visitest him? For thou hast made him but little lower than God,
    And crownest him with glory and honor.

    --Psalm 8. 4, 5.

Eternal God, may I know the value of the gift of life. May I think
seriously of it, and not through abuse or neglect cripple it,
remembering that it is mine to sow, to grow, and to reap. I pray that
I may care more for the food and raiment of my soul than I care for
the food and raiment of my body. Amen.




OCTOBER FIFTEENTH

Virgil born B.C. 70.

Evangelista Torricelli born 1608.

Edward Fitzgerald born 1763.

    Being not unacquainted with woe, I learned to help the unfortunate.

    --Virgil.

    There are some hearts like wells green-mossed and deep
      As ever summer saw,
    And cool their water is, yea, cool and sweet;
      But you must come to draw.
    They hoard not, yet they rest in calm content,
      And not unsought will give;
    They can be quiet with their wealth unspent,
      So self-contained they live.

    --Author unknown.

    For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you
    with many tears; not that ye should be made sorry, but that ye might
    know the love which I have more abundantly unto you.

    --2 Corinthians 2. 4.

Gracious Father, help me to understand that while I may be content to
rest with what I have gathered, I cannot preserve the strength of my
soul unless I share my possessions. Give me a passion for humanity
that will advance gifts through love, and offer service without the
need of an appeal. Amen.




OCTOBER SIXTEENTH

Bishop Hugh Latimer burned at Oxford 1555.

Albrecht von Haller born 1708.

Noah Webster born 1758.

Robert Stephenson born 1803.

    As ships meet at sea--a moment together, when words of greeting must
    be spoken, and then away upon the deep--so men meet in this world;
    and I think we should cross no man's path without hailing him, and
    if he needs, giving him supplies.

    --Henry Ward Beecher.

    Nothing is more unaccountable than the spell that often lurks in a
    spoken word. A thought may be present to the mind, and two minds
    conscious of the same thought, but as long as it remains unspoken
    their familiar talk flows quietly over the hidden idea.

    --Nathaniel Hawthorne.

    And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others?

    --Matthew 5. 47.

Heavenly Father, I pray that thou wilt give me a generous heart. May I
not lose sight of the truth, that thou hast made others to have the
same needs and wants that I may have. May I not through pride or
egoism fail to help, and neglecting to speak, miss an opportunity to
assist. May I be self-forgetful in friendly service. Amen.




OCTOBER SEVENTEENTH

Andreas Osiander died 1552.

Frederic Chopin died 1849.

    Good name, in man or woman, dear my Lord, Is the immediate jewel of
    their souls; Who steals my purse, steals trash; 'tis something,
    nothing; 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands; But
    he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not
    enriches him, And makes me poor indeed.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Keep back your tears when a soul is untrue;
    "Sorrow is shallow"; and one can wade through
    The mud and the marshes, and still endure
    If he finds he has kept his spirit pure.

    The rose near died when it fell to its lot
    To break its heart for forget-me-not;
    But after its heart was healed by the dew,
    Right by its side a sweet violet grew!

    --M.B.S.

    A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, And loving
    favor rather than silver and gold.

    --Proverbs 22. 1.

My Father, teach me the value of the possessions that can neither be
handled nor seen; and may I not take them away from others. Help me to
keep thy commandment "Thou shalt not steal," and interpret it in all
its relations to life. Amen.




OCTOBER EIGHTEENTH

Matthew Henry born 1662.

Margaret (Peg) Woffington born 1720.

Helen Hunt Jackson born 1831.

Frederick Harrison born 1831.

    Yet I argue not against heaven's hand or will, nor bate a jot of
    heart of hope;, but still bear up and steer right onward.

    --John Milton.

    Write it on your heart that every day is the best day in the year.
    No man has learned anything rightly until he knows that every day is
    doomsday.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    He mourns that day so soon has glided by:
    E'en like the passage of an angel's tear
    That falls through the clear ether silently.

    --John Keats.

    I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go:
    I will counsel thee with mine eye upon thee.

    --Psalm 32. 8.

My Father, if I may be living in bad habits, help me to get out of
them. If I may be neglectful of good deeds, help me to get at them.
May I reach for the highest purposes as I search for the realities,
and may I not delay, but start to-day. Amen.




OCTOBER NINETEENTH

Dean (Jonathan) Swift died 1745.

Leigh Hunt born 1784.

Henry Kirke White died 1806.

    Don't look too hard except for something agreeable; we can find all
    the disagreeable things we want, between our own hats and boots.

    --Leigh Hunt.

    Instead of a gem or a flower, cast the gift of a lovely thought into
    the heart of a friend.

    --George Macdonald.

    For the want of common discretion the very end of good breeding is
    wholly perverted; and civility, intended to make us easy, is
    employed in laying chains and fetters upon us, in debarring our
    wishes, and in crossing our most reasonable desires and
    inclinations.

    --Jonathan Swift.

    If it be possible, as much as in you lieth, be at peace with all
    men.

    --Romans 12. 18.

My Lord, help me to adjust my life to what I ought to be, rather than
be content in what I am. May I not spend my time in dreaming of
obstacles, or searching for things that hurt, but may I be gentle and
kind, and as I see the truth speak for it and follow it. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTIETH

Sir Christopher Wren born 1632.

Thomas Hughes born 1823.

Charles Dudley Warner died 1900.

    There has always seemed to me something impious in the neglect of
    health. I could not do half the good I do if it were not for the
    strength and activity some consider coarse and degrading.

    --Charles Kingsley.

    To keep well drink often, but water;
    Eat not that which makes life shorter;
    But first, with all your might and skill,
    Just chain your habits to your will.

    --M.B.S.

    I will be lord over myself. No one who cannot master himself is
    worthy to rule, and only he can rule.

    --Goethe.

    Know ye not that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit which is
    in you, which ye have from God?

    --1 Corinthians 6. 19.

Lord God, may I not wait until I am afflicted and cannot use them to
thank thee for my blessings. Guard me against infirmities that are
brought on through indulgences, and help me to control my life. May I
never forget that regret will not retrieve the life that is spent,
even if it brings forgiveness and hope for the days to come. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-FIRST

Samuel Taylor Coleridge born 1772.

Alphonse Lamartine born 1790.

Samuel F. Smith born 1808.

Will Carleton born 1845.

    He prayeth best who loveth best
      All things both great and small;
    For the dear God who loveth us,
      He made and loveth all.

    --Samuel Taylor Coleridge.

    We thank thee, O Father, for all that is bright--
    The gleam of the day and the stars of the night,
    The flowers of our youth and the fruits of our prime,
    And the blessings that march down the pathway of time.

    --Will Carleton.

    Thanklessness is a parching wind, drying up the fountain of pity,
    the dew of mercy, the streams of grace. For doth not that rightly
    seem to be lost which is given to one ungrateful?

    --Saint Bernard.

    O give thanks unto Jehovah; for he is good; For his lovingkindness
    endureth for ever.

    --Psalm 136. 1.

My Father, help me to understand that I cannot have self-development
unless the spirit of truth drills my character. Cleanse my heart from
all impurity, and strengthen me for all usefulness: help me to daily
live this prayer. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-SECOND

Charles Martel died 741.

Franz Liszt born 1811.

George Eliot born 1819.

Sarah Bernhardt born 1844.

    O may I join the choir invisible
    Of those immortal dead who live again
    In minds made better by their presence: live
    In pulses stirred to generosity,
    In deeds of daring rectitude, in scorn
    For miserable aims that end with self,
    In thoughts sublime that pierce the night like stars,
    And with their mild persistence urge man's search
    To vaster issues.

              This is life to come,
    Which martyred men have made more glorious
    For us to strive to follow. May I reach
    That purest heaven, be to other souls
    The cup of strength in some great agony,
    Enkindle generous ardor, feed pure love,
    Beget the smiles that have no cruelty,
    Be the sweet presence of a good diffused,
    And in diffusion ever more intense!
    So shall I join the choir invisible
    Whose music is the gladness of the world.

    --George Eliot.

    And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish.

    --John 10. 28.

My Father, I pray that I may be more generous with my smiles and
gladness, and more saving with my tears and sadness. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-THIRD

Anne Oldfield died 1730.

Robert Bridges born 1844.

Mollie Elliot Seawell born 1860.

    O youth whose hope is high,
      Who doth to truth aspire,
    Whether thou live or die,
      O look not back nor tire.

    Thou that art bold to fly
      Through tempest, flood and fire,
    Nor dost not shrink to try
      Thy heart in torments dire--

    If thou canst Death defy,
      If thy faith is entire,
    Press onward, for thine eye
      Shall see thy heart's desire.

    --Robert Bridges.

    Doubt indulged becomes doubt realized. To determine to do anything
    is half the battle. Courage is victory, timidity is defeat.

    --Nelson.

    And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of
    their words, though briers and thorns are with thee, and thou dost
    dwell among scorpions.

    --Ezekiel 2. 6.

Gracious Father, try me again by the courage I have to-day, if thou
art judging me by the fear I held yesterday. Help me to see that
wavering is misleading and temperament is deceptive. May I learn
self-control. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-FOURTH

Hugh Capet died 996.

Sir Moses Montefiore born 1784.

Daniel Webster died 1852.

    Exceeding peace made Ben Adhem bold,
    And to the presence in the room he said,
    "What writest thou?" The vision raised its head,
    And, with a look made of all sweet accord,
    Answered, "The names of those who love the Lord."
    "And is mine one?" said Abou. "Nay, not so,"
    Replied the angel. Abou spoke more low,
    But cheerily still; and said, "I pray thee, then,
    Write me as one that loves his fellow men."

    The angel wrote, and vanished. The next night
    It came again, with a great awakening light,
    And showed the names whom love of God had blessed--
    And, lo! Ben Adhem's name led all the rest!

    --Leigh Hunt.

    Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and will show thee great
    things.

    --Jeremiah 33. 3.

Lord God, may I keep within my heart that secret sympathy that adds to
the power of life. Help me to seek the things that are real, and not
be deceived by the things which only appear to be. May all with whom I
have to do feel the better for my companionship. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-FIFTH

Geoffrey Chaucer died 1400.

William Hogarth died 1764.

George W. Faber born 1773.

Thomas B. Macaulay born 1800.

    Wav'ring as winds the breath of fortune blows,
    No power can turn it, and no prayers compose.
    Deep in some hermit's solitary cell,
    Repose, and ease, and contemplation dwell.
    Let conscience guide thee in the days of need,
    Judge well thy own, and then thy neighbor's deed.

    --Geoffrey Chaucer.

    To every man upon this earth
    Death cometh soon or late;
    And how can man die better
      Than facing fearful odds,
    For the ashes of his fathers
      And the temples of his gods.

    --Thomas B. Macaulay.

    Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
    minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

    --Matthew 20. 28.

Heavenly Father, help me to remember that I am to cover life's
journey, even though I may go the way carelessly and aimlessly. May I
make an estimate of what I am losing, by waiting so long at the
resting places, "For the road winds up hill all the way to the end,
and the journey takes the whole day long, from morn to night." Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-SIXTH

Dr. Philip Doddridge died 1751.

Count Von Moltke born 1800.

Elizabeth Cady Stanton died 1902.

    One of the notable eddies of the present-day world currents is what
    has been loosely called the "Woman Movement." The sensitive and
    vicarious spirit of womanhood has been enlisted for service in
    behalf of those who have been denied a fair chance, or who are the
    victims of oppression, greed, and ignorance.

    --William T. Ellis.

    And whether consciously or not, you must be in many a heart
    enthroned: queens you must always be: queens to your lovers; queens
    to your husbands and sons; queens of higher mystery to the world
    beyond, which bows itself, and will forever bow, before the myrtle
    crown, and the stainless scepter of womanhood.

    --John Ruskin.

    O woman, great is thy faith: be it done unto thee even as thou wilt.

    --Matthew 15. 28.

Lord and Master of all, I pray that thou wilt make me see through my
prejudices and beyond my desires to the very "top of my condition."
May I not wait for places or circumstances that are dimly in the
distance or that are near at hand, but accomplish the work I should do
to-day. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-SEVENTH

James Cook born 1728.

Nicolo Paganini born 1782.

Theodore Roosevelt, New York, twenty-fifth President
United States, born 1858.

    The vice of envy is not only a dangerous, but a mean vice; for it is
    always a confession of inferiority. It may promote conduct which
    will be fruitful of wrong to others, and it must cause misery to the
    man who feels it.

    --Theodore Roosevelt.

    Of all the passions, jealousy is that which exacts the hardest
    service, and pays the bitterest wages. Its service is to watch the
    success of one's enemy; its wages to be sure of it.

    --C.C. Colton.

    Dear to me is the friend, yet I can also make use of an enemy. The
    friend shows me what I can do, the foe teaches me what I should.

    --Schiller.

    Let us not become vainglorious, provoking one another.

    --Galatians 5. 26.

Almighty God, I would ask thee that my days be filled with aspiration,
and that my heart may know no envy. Help me to love humanity. May I be
so glad of the success of others that I may never know what it is to
be envious. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-EIGHTH

Desiderius Erasmus born 1465.

John Locke died 1704.

Georges Jacques Danton born 1759.

    Not so in haste, my heart!
      Have faith in God and wait;
    Although he linger long,
      He never comes too late.

    Until he cometh, rest,
      Nor grudge the hours that roll;
    The feet that wait for God
      Are soonest at the goal;

    Are soonest at the goal
      That is not gained by speed;
    Then hold thee still, my heart,
      For I shall wait his lead.

    --Bayard Taylor.

    It is good that a man should hope and quietly wait for the salvation
    of Jehovah.

    --Lamentations 3. 26.

Lord of life, may I pause to remember that rest may not be obtained
with wretched thoughts, nor can it be enjoyed in discontent. In my
moments of rest wilt thou show me how to relax, and with tranquillity
may I gather hope for renewed ambition. Amen.




OCTOBER TWENTY-NINTH

Sir Walter Raleigh beheaded 1618.

James Boswell born 1740.

John Keats born 1795.

Thomas Bayard born 1828.

Thomas Edward Brown died 1897.

    Rise, O my soul, with thy desires to heaven,
      And with divinest contemplation use
    Thy time where time's eternity is given,
      And let vain thoughts no more thy thoughts abuse;
    But down in darkness let them lie:
    So live thy better, let thy worse thoughts die!

    --Sir Walter Raleigh.

    The great elements we know of are no mean comforters; the open sky
    sits upon our senses like a sapphire crown--the air is our robe of
    state, the Earth is our throne, and the Sea a mighty minstrel
    playing before it.

    --John Keats.

    Ah Lord Jehovah! behold, thou hast made the heavens and the earth by
    thy great power and by thine outstretched arm; there is nothing too
    hard for thee.

    --Jeremiah 32. 17.

Almighty God, I thank thee for the power that gives me the breath of
life. May I be willing to be controlled by its guiding care. Amen.




OCTOBER THIRTIETH

Rev. John Whitaker died 1808.

John Adams, Massachusetts, second President
United States, born 1735.

Adelaide Anne Procter born 1825.

        And yet thou canst know,
          And yet thou canst not see;
        Wisdom and sight are slow
          In poor humanity.
        If thou couldst trust, poor soul,
        In Him who rules the whole,
        Thou wouldst find peace and rest;
    Wisdom and right are well, but trust is best.

    --Adelaide Anne Procter.

    The heart to speak in vain essayed,
      Nor could his purpose reach--
    His will nor voice nor tongue obeyed,
      His silence was his speech.

    --John Quincy Adams.

    But still believe that story wrong
    Which ought not to be true.

    --Richard Brinsley Sheridan.

    Blessed is the man that maketh Jehovah his trust.

    --Psalm 40. 4.

My Father, may I not be given to unkindly speech. Deliver me from a
critical spirit; and may I not encourage mistrust, but cultivate the
kindly considerations in which life abounds. Amen.




OCTOBER THIRTY-FIRST

All Hallow's Eve.

John Evelyn born 1620.

Christopher Anstey born 1724.

    Ere, in the northern gale
      The summer tresses of the trees are gone,
    The woods of autumn, all around our vale,
      Have put their glory on.

    The mountains that unfold,
      In their wide sweep, the colored landscape round,
    Seem groups of giant kings, in purple and gold,
      That guard the enchanted ground.

    Ah! 'twere a lot too blessed
      Forever in thy colored shades to stray;
    Amid the kisses of the soft southwest
      To rove and dream for aye;

    And leave the vain low strife
      That makes men mad; the tug for wealth and power,
    The passions and the cares that wither life,
      And waste its little hour.

    --William Cullen Bryant.

    Let the field exult, and all that is therein; Then shall all the
    trees of the wood sing for joy.

    --Psalm 96. 12.

My Father, may I have an appreciation of the wonderful creations of
the earth. Give me a discriminating eye, that I may know the precious
things that thou art growing; and throughout my life may I love the
beautiful, and choose that which will make my life worthy of growth.
Amen.




NOVEMBER


    Who said November's face was grim?
      Who said her voice was harsh and sad?
    I heard her sing in wood paths dim,
      I met her on the shore so glad,
    So smiling, I could kiss her feet!
    There never was a month so sweet.

    --Lucy Larcom.




NOVEMBER FIRST

Sir Matthew Hale born 1609.

William M. Chase born 1849.

Sir Robert Grant died 1892.

    O worship the King, all glorious above,
    O gratefully sing his power and his love;
    Our Shield and Defender, the ancient of days,
    Pavilioned in splendor, and girded with praise.

    Thy bountiful care what tongue can recite?
    It breathes in the air, it shines in the light;
    It streams from the hills, it descends to the plain,
    And sweetly distills in the dew and the rain.

    --Robert Grant.

    Ye shall walk in all the way which Jehovah your God hath commanded
    you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye
    may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.

    --Deuteronomy 5. 33.

Almighty God, help me to make my life refulgent while I have the
abundance of summer, that I may not find the November of life bleak
and barren. Help me to live in the realities of life, that I may gain
energy and repose, to use for the lonesome and anxious hours. May I be
watchful for the conditions that thwart life, and with patience wait
for the awakening of truth. Amen.




NOVEMBER SECOND

Marie Antoinette born 1755.

Field-Marshal Radetzky born 1766.

James Knox Polk, North Carolina, eleventh President
United States, born 1795.

    Overmastering pain--the most deadly and tragical element in
    life--alas! pain has its own way with all of us; it breaks in, a
    rude visitant, upon the fairy garden where the child wanders in a
    dream, no less surely than it rules upon the field of battle, or
    sends the immortal war-god whimpering to his father; and innocence,
    no more than philosophy, can protect us from this sting.

    --Robert Louis Stevenson.

    My hopes retire; my wishes as before
      Struggle to find their resting place in vain;
    The ebbing sea thus beats against the shore;
      The shore repels it; it returns again.

    --W.S. Landor.

    Yet Jehovah will command his loving-kindness in the day-time, And in
    the night his song shall be with me.

    --Psalm 42. 8.

Loving Father, I bless thee for thy goodness and tender mercy which is
over all. May I trust thy provision and love through all
circumstances, and as I trust myself to thee may I have faith to
believe that thou wilt give me strength for what I may have to endure,
and believe that thou wilt care for me, as thou dost care for all.
Amen.




NOVEMBER THIRD

Lucan born A.D. 39.

William Cullen Bryant born 1794.

Francis D. Millet born 1846.

John Watson (Ian Maclaren) born 1850.

Pearl Mary Teresa Craigie (John Oliver Hobbes)
born 1867.

    Whither, midst falling dew,
      While glow the heavens with the last steps of day,
    Far, through their rosy depths, dost thou pursue
      Thy solitary way!

    Vainly the fowler's eye
      Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong,
    As, darkly painted on the crimson sky,
      Thy figure floats along.

    He who, from zone to zone,
      Guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight,
    In the long way that I must tread alone,
      Will lead my steps aright.

    --William Cullen Bryant.

    For Jehovah your God dried up the waters of the Jordan from before
    you, until ye were passed over.

    --Joshua 4. 23.

Almighty God, help me to guard against gratification that leads to
disappointment, that I may not miss the true way. I pray that thou
wilt lift me in my weakness, and carry me over the rough and
discouraging places, that I may be made strong in thy loving care, and
be able to continue alone. Amen.




NOVEMBER FOURTH

Guido Reni born 1575.

James Montgomery born 1771.

Edmund Keane born 1787.

Ernest Howard Crosby born 1856.

Eugene Field died 1895.

    Keep me, I pray, in wisdom's way,
      That I may truths eternal seek;
    I need protecting care to-day--
      My purse is light, my flesh is weak.

    --Eugene Field.

    No one could tell me where my Soul might be,
    I searched for God, but God eluded me.
    I sought my brother out, and found all three.

    --Ernest H. Crosby.

    In all thy ways acknowledge him, And he will direct thy paths.

    --Proverbs 3. 6.

My Father, may I not face the going down of the sun to-day, looking at
life, in a mirror that reflects my own privileges and prejudices, but
may I see it as it is, known to those who are living to make it
better. May the days to come prove my sincerity in wanting the truth
that I might live by it, and help to do good with it. Amen.




NOVEMBER FIFTH

Hans Sachs born 1494.

Dr. John Brown born 1715.

Benjamin Butler born 1818.

    The thing that goes the farthest
      Toward making life worth while,
    That costs the least, and does the most,
      Is just a pleasant smile.
    That smile that bubbles from a heart
      That loves its fellow men
    Will drive away the cloud of gloom
      And coax the sun again.

    --Anonymous.

    One whom I knew intimately, and whose memory I revere, once in my
    hearing remarked that, "Unless we love people we cannot understand
    them." This was a new light to me.

    --Christina G. Rossetti.

    Oil and perfume rejoice the heart; So doth the sweetness of a man's
    friend that cometh of hearty counsel.

    --Proverbs 27. 9.

Lord God, I pray that I may be worthy of my friends. May I not fear to
go where I am called, and may I go cheerfully, even though the way be
dark and lonesome. Amen.




NOVEMBER SIXTH

James Gregory born 1638.

John Bright born 1811.

Sir George Williams died 1905.

    Look full into thy spirit's self,
      The world of mystery scan;
    What if thy way to faith in God
      Should lie through faith in man?

    --John Bright.

    Blessed are they who have the gift of making friends, for it is one
    of God's best gifts. It involves many things, but above all, the
    power of going out of oneself and seeing and appreciating whatever
    is noble and loving in another.

    --Thomas Hughes.

    Be perfected; be comforted; be of the same mind; live in peace: and
    the God of love and peace shall be with you.

    --2 Corinthians 13. 11.

Lord God, I earnestly entreat thee to show me if I may be cramping the
happiness in another's life by forcing in my selfishness and demands.
May I understand that perfect gifts are those that come through loving
sacrifice. Make me ashamed to ask for what I refuse or prefer not to
give. Amen.




NOVEMBER SEVENTH

Sir Martin Frobisher died 1594.

William Stukeley born 1687.

Friedrich Leopold, Count von Stolberg, born 1750.

    Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide,
    In the strife of Truth with Falsehood, for the good or evil side;
    Some great cause, God's new Messiah offering each the bloom or blight,
    Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right;
    And the choice goes by forever 'twixt that darkness and that light.

    --James Russell Lowell.

    We cannot command veracity at will; the power of seeing and
    reporting truly is a form of health that has to be delicately
    guarded, and as an ancient rabbi has solemnly said, "The penalty of
    untruth is untruth."

    --George Eliot.

    Behold, this only have I found: that God made man upright; but they
    have sought out many inventions.

    --Ecclesiastes 7. 29.

My Father, help me to speak the truth and guard the truth, that
righteousness may be an abiding influence in my life. Amen.




NOVEMBER EIGHTH

Edmund Halley born 1656.

John Milton died 1674.

Owen Meredith (Bulwer Edward Lytton) born 1831.

    The morning drum-call on my eager ear
    Thrills unforgotten yet! the morning dew
    Lies yet undried along my field of noon.
    But now I pause a while in what I do,
    And count the bell, and tremble lest I hear
    (My work untrimmed) the sunset gun too soon.

    --Robert Louis Stevenson.

      I fear
    Life's many changes, not Death's changelessness.
    So perfect is this moment's passing cheer,
    I needs must tremble lest it pass to less.
    Thus in fickle love of life I live,
    Lest fickle life me of my love deprive.

    --Owen Meredith.

    And Jehovah said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore art thou thus
    fallen upon thy face?

    Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against
    to-morrow.

    --Joshua 7. 10, 13.

Almighty God, help me in these fleeting days that I may not use my
time to consider and hesitate, but be positive in my desires and
pursue them. Grant that I may have the strength to hold each day
precious, and live it more than consistently. Amen.




NOVEMBER NINTH

Mark Akenside born 1721.

William Sotheby born 1757.

Charles F. Thwing born 1853.

    The victor's road is the easy way.
      Straight it stretches and climbs to where
    Fame is waiting with garlands gay
      To wreathe the fighter who clambers there.
    There's applause in plenty and gold's red gleam
    For the man who plays on the winning team.

    The loser travels a longer lane;
      Level it leads to a lonely land.
    There's little glory for him to gain
      The voices mock him on either hand;
    But the man who wins in the greater game
    Is the man who, beaten, fights on the same.

    --G. Rice.

    The hero is not fed on sweets,
    Daily his own heart he eats;
    Chambers of the great are jails,
    And head-winds right for royal sails.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    He thanked God, and took courage.

    --Acts 28. 15.

O Lord, I pray that whether I may be successful in the sight of the
world, or whether I may be successful in my own sacrifices, I may have
the freedom of courage, and be master of my life. Amen.




NOVEMBER TENTH

Martin Luther born 1483.

William Hogarth born 1697.

Oliver Goldsmith born 1728.

Johann von Schiller born 1759.

Joaquin Miller born 1841.

Henry van Dyke born 1852.

    As faith, so is God.

    --Martin Luther.

    Learn the luxury of doing good.

    --Oliver Goldsmith.

    Love is the ladder by which we climb up to the likeness of God.

    --Johann von Schiller.

    And who will walk a mile with me
      Along life's weary way?
    A friend whose heart has eyes to see
    The stars shine out o'er the darkening lea,
      And the quiet rest at the end of the day--
      A friend who knows and dares to say,
      The brave sweet words that cheer the way
    Where he walks a mile with me.

    --Henry van Dyke.

    And whosoever shall compel thee to go one mile, go with him two.

    --Matthew 5. 41.

My Father, may I not dwell in the appearances of life, where I may
grow selfish; but live in the realities of simplicity. May I not only
seek those who may return me pleasure, but may I find delight in
brightening the walk of a weary friend. Amen.




NOVEMBER ELEVENTH

Alfred de Musset born 1810.

Thomas Bailey Aldrich born 1836.

Rev. Joshua Brookes died 1821.

    I'll not confer with Sorrow
      Till to-morrow,
    But joy shall have her way
      This very day.

    --Thomas Bailey Aldrich.

    Shall we have ears on the stretch for the footfalls of sorrow that
    never come, but be deaf to the whirr of the wings of happiness that
    fill all space?

    --Maurice Maeterlinck.

    This day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace: if we
    tarry till the morning light, punishment will overtake, us; now
    therefore come, let us go and tell the king's household.

    --2 Kings 7. 9.

Loving Father, I pray that thou wilt help me to overcome unhappiness.
May I not let depression overpower me, but claim the promises of joy
that are open to every life. May I be blest by my own cheerfulness and
encourage others to possess it. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWELFTH

Saint Augustine died A. D. 354.

Richard Baxter born 1615.

Amelia Opie born 1769.

Elizabeth Cady Stanton born 1815.

Thomas Lord Fairfax died 1671.

    In life it is difficult to say who do you the most mischief--enemies
    with the worst intentions or friends with the best.

    --Edward Bulwer.

    The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them to thy
    soul with hooks of steel.

    --William Shakespeare.

    Where persons who ought to esteem and love each other are kept
    asunder, as often happens, by some cause which three words of frank
    explanation would remove, they are fortunate if they possess an
    indiscreet friend who blurts out the whole truth.

    --Thomas B. Macaulay.

    Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted,
    Who did eat of my bread,
    Hath lifted up his heel against me.

    --Psalm 41. 9.

Lord God, help me to consider more carefully what I offer to my
friends; and may I not be critical of what I receive from my friends.
May I not be a hindrance instead of a help to those who would have my
companionship. Amen.




NOVEMBER THIRTEENTH

Sir John Moore born 1761.

Robert Louis Stevenson born 1850.

Sir John Forbes died 1861.

    Little do we know our own blessedness; for to travel hopefully is a
    better thing than to arrive, and the True Success is to labor.

    --Robert Louis Stevenson.

    Whether thy work be fine or coarse, planting corn or writing epics,
    so only it be honest work, done to thine own approbation, it shall
    earn a reward to sense as well as to the thought.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Nature gives to labor; and to labor alone. In a very garden of Eden
    a man would starve but for human exertion.

    --Henry George.

    But let each man prove his own work, and then shall he have his
    glorying in regard of himself alone, and not of his neighbor.

    --Galatians 6. 4.

My Father, make pure living clear to me, that I may not be deceived in
my work; and may I not use my working hours searching for more
suitable work, but may I be sure in what I am that I may feel secure
in what I undertake to do. Amen.




NOVEMBER FOURTEENTH

Bishop Hoadley born 1676.

Fanny Mendelssohn-Hensel born 1805.

Robert Smythe Hichens born 1864.

    Give us, O give us, the man who sings at his work! Be his occupation
    what it may, he is better than any of those who follow the same
    pursuit in silent sullenness.

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    What doctor possesses such curative resources as those latent in a
    single ray of hope? The mainspring of life is in the heart. Joy is
    the vital air of the soul, and grief is a kind of asthma complicated
    by atony.

    --Amiel.

    I will sing unto Jehovah as long as I live:
    I will sing praise to my God while I have any being.

    --Psalm 104. 33.

Loving Father, restore the spirit of gentleness and meekness if it may
be withered within me, that I may be contented. May I make it a habit
to be happy over my work and cheerful about my duties. May I never
lose the view of the glory of thy kingdom. Amen.




NOVEMBER FIFTEENTH

William Pitt, Earl of Chatham, born 1708.

William Cowper born 1731.

Sir William Herschel born 1738.

Johann Lavater born 1741.

Richard Henry Dana born 1787.

Ida Tarbell born 1857.

    The parting sun sends out a glow
      Across the placid bay,
    Touching with glory all the show--
      A breeze! Up helm! Away!

    Careening to the wind, they reach,
      With laugh and call, the shore.
    They've left their footprints on the beach,
      But them I hear no more.

    --Richard Henry Dana.

    Art little? Do thy little well:
      And for thy comfort know
    The great can do their greatest work
      No better than just so.

    --Goethe.

    But be thou an ensample to them that believe, in word, in manner of
    life, in love, in faith, in purity.

    --1 Timothy 4. 12.

Lord God, grant that if I may be complaining of what Providence has
not sent me, I may not be neglecting what Providence has given me. May
I not pause too long over what I have done, or over what I might have
done, but may I be appreciative of what thou dost expect of me and
endeavor to accomplish it. Amen.




NOVEMBER SIXTEENTH

Tiberius born B.C. 42.

Gustavus Adolphus killed 1632.

Francis Danby born 1793.

    Judge not the workings of his brain
      And of his heart thou canst not see;
    What looks to thy dim eyes a stain
      In God's pure light may only be
    A scar, brought from some well-won field,
      Where thou would'st only faint and yield.

    And judge none lost; but wait and see,
      With hopeful pity, not disdain;
    The depth of the abyss may be
      The measure of the height of pain
    And love and glory that may raise
     The soul to God in after days!

    --Adelaide A. Procter.

    I am more afraid of deserving criticism, than of receiving it.

    --William Gladstone.

    Judge not, that ye be not judged.

    --Matthew 7.1.

Lord Jehovah, judge of all mankind, forbid that I should set myself as
a judge of another's life, and neglect to live for the higher judgment
of my own. May I not be absorbed in that which thrives in darkness,
but live in the light of honesty and gentleness. Amen.




NOVEMBER SEVENTEENTH

Queen Mary of England died 1558.

Joost van den Vondel born 1587.

George Grote born 1794.

    There are evergreen men and women in the world, praise be to
    God!--not many of them, but a few. They are not the showy folk.
    (Nature is an old-fashioned shopkeeper; she never puts her best
    goods in the window.) They are only the quiet, strong folk; they are
    stronger than Fate. The storms of life sweep over them, and the
    biting frosts creep round them; but the winds and the frosts pass
    away, and they are still standing, green and straight.

    --Jerome K. Jerome.

    And he shall be like a tree planted by the streams of water,
    That bringeth forth its fruit in its season,
    Whose leaf also doth not wither;
    And whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

    --Psalm 1.3.

Gracious Lord, may I not spend most in equipment and forget the tides,
which may desert me on the sands, or the rocks in the channels, which
may crush the finest vessel. May I be prepared for the hard knocks if
they come, but may I know how to keep clear of them. Amen.




NOVEMBER EIGHTEENTH

Sir David Wilkie born 1785.

Louis J. M. Daguerre born 1789.

Cyrus Field born 1819.

William S. Gilbert born 1836.

    If e'er when man had fallen asleep,
    I heard a voice, "Believe no more,"
    A warmth within the breast would melt
      The freezing reason's colder part,
      And like a man in wrath, the heart
    Stood up and answered, "I have felt."

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Faith is the deep want of the soul. We have faculties for the
    spiritual, as truly as for the outward world. God, the foundation of
    all existence, may become to the mind the most real of all beings.
    The believer feels himself resting on an everlasting foundation.

    --William Henry Channing.

    And they said one to another, Was not our heart burning within us,
    while he spake to us in the way, while he opened to us the
    scriptures?

    --Luke 24. 32.

Lord God, save me from a hard and doubting heart. May I be trustful
and come to thee in faith. All the days of my life may my lips sing
thy praise as I unfold thy love and purposes. Amen.




NOVEMBER NINETEENTH

Nicolas Poussin died 1665.

Albert Thorwaldsen born 1770.

James A. Garfield, Ohio, twentieth President United
States, born 1831.

Mary Hallock Foote born 1847.

Count Lyoff (Leo) Tolstoy died 1910.

      And son I live, you see,
    Go through the world, try, prove, reject,
    Prefer, still struggling to effect
    My warfare; happy that I can
    Be crossed and thwarted as a man,
    Not left in God's contempt apart,
    With ghastly smooth life, dead at heart,
    Tame in earth's paddock, as her prize.

    --Robert Browning.

    Be good at the depths of you, and you will discover that those who
    surround you will be good even to the same depths. Therein lies a
    force that has no name; a spiritual rivalry that has no resistance.

    --Maurice Maeterlinck.

    First of all, I must make myself a man; if I do not succeed in that,
    I can succeed in nothing.

    --James A. Garfield.

    That we may be no longer children, tossed to and fro and carried
    about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, in
    craftiness, after the wiles of error.

    --Ephesians 4. 14.

Eternal God, I thank thee for all the sterling elements that greaten
the individual life. I pray that I may not desire to be kept a small
creature, but seek to grow in wisdom and love, and qualify for mighty
purposes and achievements. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTIETH

Paul Potter born 1625.

Thomas Chatterton born 1752.

William Ellery Channing born 1818.

Sir Wilfred Laurier born 1841.

    Then why, my soul, dost thou complain?
       Why drooping seek the dark recess?
    Shake off the melancholy chain,
       For God created all to bless.

    The gloomy mantle of the night,
       Which on my sinking spirits steals,
    Will vanish at the morning light,
       Which God, my East, my Sun, reveals.

    --Thomas Chatterton.

    Lady, there is a hope that all men have--
    Some mercy for their faults, a grassy place
    To rest in, and a flower-strewn, gentle grave:
    Another hope which purifies our race,
    That when that fearful bourne forever past,
    They may find rest--and rest so long to last.

    I seek it not, I ask no rest forever,
    My path is onward to the farthest shores.

    --William Ellery Channing.

    He brought me up also out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay;
    And he set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.
    And he put a new song in my mouth.

    --Psalm 40. 2, 3.

My Father, I pray that I may have patience to live through the
difficulties of life. May I correct my faults, that they may not
destroy my peace and take from me my strength; help me to center my
life in brightness and hope. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-FIRST

Claude Lorraine died 1682.

Bryan Waller Procter (Barry Cornwall) born 1787.

Mary Johnston born 1870.

    There is not a creature from England's king
      To the peasant that delves the soil,
    Who knows half the pleasures the seasons bring
      If he had not his share of toil.

    --Barry Cornwall.

    It may be proved, with much certainty, that God intends no man to
    live in this world without working; but it seems to me no less
    evident that he intends every man to be happy in his work. Now, in
    order that people may be happy in their work, these three things are
    needed: they must be fit for it; and they must not do too much of
    it; and they must have a sense of success in it.

    --John Ruskin.

    Let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that
    he may have whereof to give to him that hath need.

    --Ephesians 4. 28.

My Father, if my work seems hard to-day, may I not cease working if I
grow weary, but may my strength be renewed to continue my work. May
the aim of my work be to please thee, and to help in the progress of
humanity. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-SECOND

Saint Cecilia martyred A.D. 230.

Sir Henry Havelock died 1857.

Justin M'Carthy born 1830.

    Sometimes the sun, unkindly hot,
    My garden makes a desert spot,
    Sometimes a blight upon the tree
    Takes all my fruit away from me;
    And then with throes of bitter pain
    Rebellious passions rise and swell;
    And so I sing and all is well.

    --Paul Laurence Dunbar.

    Such songs have power to quiet
      The restless pulse of care,
    And come like benediction
      That follows after prayer.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    Songs consecrate to truth and liberty.

    --Percy Bysshe Shelley.

    David took the harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was
    refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

    --1 Samuel 16. 23.

Almighty God, I thank thee that thou wilt come to me as my heart cries
for need. I bless thee that thou dost come to me as my lips sing thy
praise. I pray that I may be saved from a cruel and cheerless heart,
and be a sharer of the songs that are sung to the soul. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-THIRD

Thomas Tallis died 1585.

Franklin Pierce, New Hampshire, fourteenth President
United States, born 1804.

Marie Bashkirtseff born 1860.

    Asleep, awake, by night or day,
      The friends I seek are seeking me;
    No word can drive my bark astray,
      Nor change the tide of destiny.

    The stars come nightly to the sky,
      The tidal wave unto the sea;
    Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high,
      Can keep my own away from me.

    --John Burroughs.

    If a man could make a single rose we would give him an empire; yet
    flowers no less beautiful are scattered in profusion over the world,
    and no one regards them.

    --Martin Luther.

    Let patience have its perfect work.

    --James 1. 4.

My Creator, may I remember that after thou didst create the earth thou
didst say it was good. May I love the fragrance and beauty of the
flowers which were made to nourish the soul, and the fruits and herbs
which were made to nourish the body. May my song of thanksgiving be
new every morning, as I awake in the abundance of what thou hast
prepared. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-FOURTH

John Knox died 1572.

Baron Spinoza born 1632.

Grace Darling born 1815.

Frances Hodgson Burnett born 1849.

    I waited long until the sky
      Should give me of its blue
    To weave and wear, and share, and weave
      The very stars into.
    The days they went, the years they went,
      And left my hands instead
    Another thing for wonderment,
      The mending and the bread.

    Ah me, and one must set a hand
      To burnish up the task,
    And hush and hush the old demand
      A wakeful heart will ask.
    But with a star's clear eye on me,
      O, I can hear it said,
    "What souls there be that only see
      The mending and the bread!"

    --Josephine P. Peabody.

    The riches of a commonwealth
    Are free, strong minds and hearts of health.
    And more to her than gold or grain,
    The cunning hand and cultured brain.

    --John G. Whittier.

    For the life is more than the food, and the body than the raiment.

    --Luke 12. 23.

My Father, I pray that thou wilt help me, that I may not consume my
life in preparing clothes and food for my body. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-FIFTH

Charles Kemble born 1775.

John Bigelow born 1817.

Paul Haupt born 1858.

John Kitto died 1854.

    I will not kill or hurt any living creature needlessly, nor destroy
    any beautiful thing, but will strive to save and comfort all gentle
    life and guard and perfect all natural beauty on earth. I will
    strive to raise my own body and soul daily into all the higher
    powers of duty and-happiness, not in rivalship or contention with
    others, but for help, delight, and honor of others and for the joy
    and peace of my own life.

    --John Ruskin.

    They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the
    earth shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah, as the waters cover
    the sea.

    --Isaiah 11. 9.

Lord God, I rejoice in the blessedness of peace. May I not try to
force peace where cruelty has entered, but keep a watch for what may
come into my life. I pray that if I may be in turbulence to-day, thou
wilt quiet me with thy peace which knows no fear or wrong. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-SIXTH

Sir William Ware born 1594.

John Elwes died 1789.

John Loudoun Macadam died 1836.

      I'd like a way
    To change the clouds that bring us sorrow,
    And build to-day a bright to-morrow;
    To banish cares that tarry long,
    And have the days like the blue-bird's song--
      I'd like a way.

      I'll find a way--
    I'll set sail when the breeze is high,
    And calmly drift when pleasure's nigh;
    I'll steer a course afar from tears,
    And take in joy the coming years--
      I'll find a way.

      I've lost the way!
    Out through the gloom a beam of light
    Looks like a purpose looming bright!
    Up with the sail! I'll out to sea
    And bring that purpose back with me,
      Or go its way.

    --M.B.S.

    Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: He is
    gracious, and merciful, and righteous.

    --Psalm 112. 4.

My Father, I pray that I may not through indifference wander without a
purpose, or through discouragement stumble through the darkness. May I
be drawn to the light by the vision of hopeful and useful days. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-SEVENTH

Horace died B.C. 8.

Marquise d'Aubigné Maintenon born 16324.

General Artemus Ward born 1727.

Fanny Kemble born 1809.

Alexandra Dumas died 1895.

    Be this thy brazen bulwark of defense, to preserve a conscience void
    of offense, and never turn pale with guilt.

    --Horace.

    Is life a noxious weed which whirlwinds sow?
    A useless flint o'er which the waters flow?
      Not so!
    A life well spent has not its weight in gold;
    It is the clearest crystal earth doth hold,
    A gem beside which suns seem dull and cold.

    --Robert Louis Stevenson.

    That they may lay hold on the life which is life indeed.

    --1 Timothy 6. 19.

Lord God, I pray that my life may not be impoverished by neglect, nor
burdened with indulgences, but that it may be kept in condition for
high endeavors. Grant that I may never be content to rest in
satisfaction and ease when I could struggle and accomplish a good
work. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-EIGHTH

William Blake born 1757.

Anton G. Rubinstein born 1829

Washington Irving died 1859.

    The sorrow for the dead is the only sorrow from which we refuse to
    be divorced. Every other wound we seek to heal, every other
    affliction to forget. Take warning by the bitterness of this thy
    contrite affliction over the dead, and henceforth be more faithful
    and affectionate in the discharge of thy duties to the living.

    --Washington Irving.

    Joy and woe are woven fine,
    A clothing for the soul divine;
    Every grief and pine
    Runs a joy with a silken twine.

    --William Blake.

    Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

    --John 16. 20.

Heavenly Father, grant that I may not lose the kindness that I may
give and receive to-day. I thank thee for the memories of yesterday,
the hope of to-morrow, and the wisdom of to-day. May I have a vision
of immortality that will keep me through the closest sorrow. Amen.




NOVEMBER TWENTY-NINTH

Sir Philip Sidney born 1554.

A. Bronson Alcott born 1799.

Wendell Phillips born 1811.

Louisa M. Alcott born 1832.

    Truth is sensitive and jealous of the least encroachment of its
    sacredness.

    --A. Bronson Alcott.

    Faith that withstood the shocks of toil and time,
      Hope that defied despair,
      Patience that conquered care,
    And loyalty whose courage was sublime;

    Teaching us how to seek the highest goal,
      To earn the true success;
      To live to love, to bless,
    And make death proud to take a royal soul.

    --Louisa M. Alcott.

      Nor is it
    Wiser to weep a true occasion lost,
    But trim our sails, and let old bygones be.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    In hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised before
    times eternal.

    --Titus 1. 2.

Heavenly Father, I pray that I may live in truth; and without fear of
life or death live content in the faith of eternal life. Amen.




NOVEMBER THIRTIETH

Peregrine White born New England 1620.

Jonathan Swift born 1687.

Samuel L. Clemens (Mark Twain) born 1835.

Winston Churchill born 1874.

    He gave it for his opinion that whoever could make two ears of corn,
    or two blades of grass, to grow upon a spot of ground where only one
    grew before, would deserve better of mankind, and do more essential
    service to his country, than the whole race of politicians put
    together.

    --Jonathan Swift.

    That man may last, but never lives,
    Who much receives, but nothing gives;
    Whom none can love, whom none can thank,--
    Creation's blot, creation's blank.

    --Thomas Gibbons.

    Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down,
    shaken together, running over, shall they give into your bosom. For
    with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again.

    --Luke 6. 38.

My Father, preserve my soul from all selfishness. May I delight in thy
teaching as I trust in thy word. I pray that I may not only speak
truthfully, but that I may leave the door of my spirit open, that
truth may always enter and abide continually. Amen.




DECEMBER


    He comes--he comes--the Frost Spirit comes:
      You may trace his footsteps now
    On the naked woods and the blasted fields,
      And the brown hill's withered brow.
    He has smitten the leaves of the gray old trees,
      Where their green came forth,
    And the winds, which follow wherever he goes,
      Have shaken them down to earth.

    He comes--he comes--the Frost Spirit comes!
      Let us meet him as we may,
    And turn with the light of the parlor fire
      His evil power away;
    And gather closer the circle round,
      Where the firelight dances high,
    And laugh at the shriek of the baffled fiend,
      As his sounding wing goes by.

    --John G. Whittier.




DECEMBER FIRST

Dr. George Birkbeck died 1841.

Queen Alexandra born 1844.

R.W. Dale born 1829.

Ebenezer Elliott died 1849.

    We would fill the hours with the sweetest things,
      If we had but a day:
    We should drink alone at the purest springs,
      In our upward way:
    We should guide our wayward or wearied will,
      By the clearest light:
    We should keep our eyes on the heavenly hills,
      If they lay in sight:
    We should be from our clamorous selves set free,
      To work and pray:
    And be what the Father would have us to be,
      If we had but a day.

    --Margaret E. Sangster.

    Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honorable,
    whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
    things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be
    any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.

    --Philippians 4. 8.

Gracious Father, help me to understand that my life grows out of what
I put into my days. Forgive me for the unspoken words and the kind
deeds which I kept for rare days, and had so few occasions to use. May
I be as useful in kindness as I am in work, remembering that to thee
every day is a golden day. Amen.




DECEMBER SECOND

David Masson born 1822.

John Brown hanged, Charlestown, West Virginia
1859.

Hugh Miller died 1856.

    The solitude of life is known to us all; for the most part we are
    alone, and the voices of friends come only faint and broken across
    the impassable gulfs which surround every human soul.

    --Hamilton Mabie.

    To have an ideal or to have none, to have this ideal or that--this
    is what digs gulfs between men, even between those who live in the
    same family circle, under the same roof, or in the same room. You
    must love with the same love, think with the same thoughts as some
    one else if you are to escape solitude.

    --Amiel.

    The plans of the heart belong to man;
    But the answer of the tongue is from Jehovah.

    --Proverbs 16. 1.

Lord God, help me to take in the glory of life, that my spirit may
never be lonely, even though I may have to be much alone. I pray that
thou wilt spare me the loneliness and the solitude that may be brought
on by selfishness. Make me considerate of others. May I soar above the
disappointments and losses that may come to me, and stay where I may
have thy companionship. Amen.




DECEMBER THIRD

Samuel Crompton born 1753.

Sir Frederick Leighton born 1830.

Robert Louis Stevenson died 1894.

    To know what you prefer, instead of humbly saying "Amen" to what the
    world tells you you ought to prefer, is to have kept your soul
    alive.

    --Robert Louis Stevenson.

    There is precious instruction to be got by finding we were wrong.
    Let a man try faithfully, manfully to be right. He will grow daily
    more and more right.

    --Thomas Carlyle.

    The hero is the man who is immovably centered.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Let us draw near with a true heart in fulness of faith, having our
    hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience: and having our body washed
    with pure water.

    --Hebrews 10. 22.

Gracious Father, grant that I may not be content to follow through
ignorance and indolence and be led to the lowly paths of life. Make my
Hie positive; and from my surroundings may I look out and struggle to
mount to the highest ideals, that I may be qualified to select the
best in life. Amen.




DECEMBER FOURTH

Cardinal Richelieu died 1642.

William Drummond died 1649.

Madame Recamier born 1777.

Thomas Carlyle born 1795.

John Kitto born 1804.

    It is with a man's soul as it is with nature: the beginning of
    Creation is--Light. Till the eye have visions the whole members are
    in bonds. Divine moment, when over the tempest-tost Soul, as once
    over the wild-weltering Chaos, it is spoken: Let there be Light!

    --Thomas Carlyle.

      What in me is dark
    Illumine, what is low raise and support;
    That to the light of this great argument
    I may assert eternal Providence
    And justify the ways of God to men.

    --John Milton.

    For thou art my lamp, O Jehovah; And Jehovah will lighten my
    darkness.

    --2 Samuel 22. 29.

My Lord, forgive me if I have allowed bitterness and misery to darken
my life, for my soul yearns continually for the light. In thy
compassion lead me to the "sunny side of the road where the beautiful
flowers grow," that my path may be made bright and cheerful all the
rest of the way. Amen.




DECEMBER FIFTH

Martin Van Buren, New York, eighth President
United States, born 1782.

Christina G. Rossetti born 1830.

Alice Brown born 1857.

    A cold wind stirs the blackthorn
      To burgeon and to blow,
    Besprinkling half-green hedges
      With flakes and sprays of snow.

    Through coldness and through keenness,
      Dear hearts take comfort so:
    Somewhere or other doubtless
      These make the blackthorn blow.

    --Christina G. Rossetti.

    There are some men and women in whose company we are always at our
    best. All the best stops in our nature are drawn out by their
    intercourse, and we find a music in our souls never there before.

    --Henry Drummond.

    And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works.

    --Hebrews 10. 24.

My Father, I thank thee for life. Make me sensitive to the unseen
influences that bring thy messages. May I be led where great riches
may be found through small kindnesses, and where I may learn from the
meek the beauty of earth. Amen.




DECEMBER SIXTH

General George Monk born 1608.

Warren Hastings born 1732.

Dr. Richard Barham born 1786.

    That low man seeks a little thing to do,
      Sees it and does it:
    This high man, with a great thing to pursue,
      Dies ere he knows it.
    That low man goes on adding one to one,
      His hundred's soon hit:
    This high man, aiming at a million,
      Misses an unit.
    That, has the world here--should he need the next,
      Let the world mind him!
    This, throws himself on God, and unperplexed
      Seeking shall find him.

    --Robert Browning.

    Hitch your wagon to a star.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    When thou saidst, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy
    face, Jehovah, will I seek.

    --Psalm 27. 8.

Almighty God, show me what thou hast given for me to do, that I may
not leave undone that which is mine. Forgive me for useless planning
and blind asking for the things which cannot be mine. I pray that my
work may be honest work, well done, and acceptable for thy service.
Amen.




DECEMBER SEVENTH

Cicero assassinated B.C. 43.

John Dalton born 1766.

Mary Stuart, Queen of Scotland, born 1542.

    It is virtue--yes, let me repeat it again--it is virtue alone that
    can give birth, strength, and permanency to friendship. For virtue
    is a uniform and steady principle ever acting consistently with
    itself.

    --Cicero.

    A common friendship--who talks of a common friendship? There is no
    such thing in the world. On earth no word is more sublime.

    --Henry Drummond.

    But thou shalt surely open thy hand unto him, and shalt surely lend
    him sufficient for his need.

    --Deuteronomy 15. 8.

Lord God, wilt thou reveal to me my weakness if I may be insincere;
and give me the strength that I lack to keep me true. May I not take
advantage of the ignorant, or thoughtlessly lead the innocent into
temptation. Grant that I may be a trustful and kind friend. Amen.




DECEMBER EIGHTH

John Pym died 1643.

Richard Baxter died 1691.

Thomas De Quincey died 1859.

Elihu Burritt born 1810.

Robert Collyer born 1823.

    Into the dusk of the East,
      Gray with the coming of night,
    This may we know at least--
      After the night comes light!
    Over the mariners' graves,
      Grim in the depths below,
    Buoyantly breasting the waves,
      Into the East we go.

    On to a distant strand,
      Wonderful, far, unseen,
    On to a stranger land,
      Skimming the seas between;
    On through the days and nights,
      Hope in each sailor's breast,
    On till the harbor lights
      Flash on the shores of rest!

    J.H. Jowett.

    So he bringeth them unto their desired haven.

    --Psalm 107. 30.

Lord God, I pray that thou wilt provide me with thy indwelling peace.
May it keep me reconciled to the decline of years, and enable me to
bear the earthly separation from those whom I love. May I always have
hope and trust in thee. Amen.




DECEMBER NINTH

John Milton born 1608.

Sir Anthony Van Dyck died 1641.

Joel Chandler Harris born 1848.

    Doth God exact day labor, light denied?
    I fondly ask: but Patience, to prevent
    That murmur, soon replies, "God doth not need
    Either man's work, or his own gifts; who best
    Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best; his state
    Is kingly; thousands at his bidding speed,
    And post o'er land and ocean without rest;
    They also serve who only stand and wait."

    --John Milton.

    "'Tain't on'y chilluns w'at got de consate er doin' eve'ything dey
    see yuther folks do. Hit's grown folks w'at oughter know better,"
    said Uncle Remus.

    --Joel Chandler Harris.

    Wherefore, receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us have
    grace, whereby we may offer service well-pleasing to God with
    reverence and awe.

    --Hebrews 12. 28.

My Father, teach me to select my work from that which is noble and
true. May I not mold my life in affectation or feel that I must
imitate the lives of others, but grant that I may perfect my life
through experiences which are worthy of increasing endeavors. Amen.




DECEMBER TENTH

Thomas Holcroft born 1745.

Dr. Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet born 1787.

Eugene Sue born 1804.

    Be of good cheer. Do not think of to-day's failures, but of success
    that may come to-morrow. You have set yourselves a difficult task,
    but you will succeed if you persevere; and you will have a joy in
    overcoming obstacles--a delight in climbing rugged paths which you
    would perhaps never know if you did not sometimes slip backward, if
    the road were always smooth and pleasant. Remember, no effort that
    we make to attain something beautiful is ever lost.

    --Helen Keller.

    We rise by things that are beneath our feet,
      By what we have mastered by good and gain,
      By the pride deposed and passion slain,
    And the vanquished ills that we hourly meet.

    --J.G. Holland.

    He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with, me in my
    throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father in his
    throne.

    --Revelation 3. 21.

My Father, I pray that I may not be given to contradicting and
doubting, nor take for granted that which needs to be considered.
Grant that I may have the faith and strength of heart to fulfill the
longings of my soul. Amen.




DECEMBER ELEVENTH

Sir Roger L'Estrange died 1704.

Dr. William Cullen born 1712.

Colley Cibber died 1757.

    Lord, subdue our selfish will;
      Each to each our tempers suit,
    By thy modulating skill,
      Heart to heart, as lute to lute.

    --Charles Wesley.

    One of the last, slowly murmured sayings of Whittier, was this:
    "Give--my--love--to--the--world." And this is the world's supreme
    need to-day; more than our eloquence, or our knowledge, or our
    wealth, or all else besides, it needs our love. True, even love may
    sometimes err; but the cure for love's mistakes is just more love;
    we often blunder because we do not love enough. God help us all
    that, like Whittier, we may live and die, giving our love to the
    world.

    --George Jackson.

    Love never faileth.

    --1 Corinthians 13. 8.

Lord God, help me to see the beauty of the world, and through my duty
may I find the love in the world. May I not spend my life in
discontent, but may I remember that thou hast said, "The meek shall
inherit the earth." Fill my heart with compassion, that I may love my
fellow man as I love myself. Amen.




DECEMBER TWELFTH

Chief Justice John Jay born 1745.

Gustav Flaubert born 1821.

Robert Browning died 1889.

    A people is but the attempt of many
    To rise to the completer life of one.
    And those who live for models for the mass
    Are singly of more value than they all.

    --Robert Browning.

    Give me the power to labor for mankind;
      Make me the mouth of such as cannot speak;
    Eyes let me be to groping men and blind;
      A conscience to the base; and to the weak
    Let me be hands and feet, and to the foolish, mind;
      And lead still further on such as thy kingdom seek.

    --Theodore Parker.

    I was eyes to the blind,
    And feet was I to the lame.

    --Job 29. 15.

Almighty God, wilt thou guide me in the direction where I may choose a
useful life; open wide my heart as well as my eyes, that I may early
see my work and be diligent in its prosecution. Reveal to me, when I
may have failed, that I may do better to-morrow. Amen.




DECEMBER THIRTEENTH

William Drummond born 1585.

Dr. Samuel Johnson died 1784.

Joseph Noel Paton born 1821.

Phillips Brooks born 1835.

Hamilton Mabie born 1846.

    When the clouds of sorrow gather over us, we see nothing beyond
    them, nor can imagine how they can be dispelled; yet a new day
    succeeded to the night, and sorrow is never long without a dawn of
    ease.

    --Dr. Samuel Johnson.

    The fountains of joy and sorrow are for the most part locked up in
    ourselves.... There come to great, solitary, and sorely smitten
    souls moments of clear insight, of assurance of victory, of
    unspeakable fellowship with truth and life and God, which outweigh
    years of sorrow and bitterness.

    --Hamilton Mabie.

    And ye therefore now have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your
    heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one taketh away from you.

    --John 16. 22.

My Father, may I remember that the days of my life that I give over to
grief can never be reclaimed. Help me that I may not want to keep
sorrow in my life, but with faith may I believe that "weeping may
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." Amen.




DECEMBER FOURTEENTH

Daniel Neal born 1678.

Rev. Charles Wolfe born 1791.

George Washington died 1799.

Frances Ridley Havergal born 1836.

    Seldom can the heart be lonely,
      If it seek a lonelier still;
    Self-forgetting, seeking only
      Emptier cups of love to fill.

    --Frances R. Havergal.

    When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
      I summon up remembrance of things past,
    I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought.
      And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste

           *       *       *       *       *

    But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
    All losses are restored, and sorrows end.

    --William Shakespeare.

    The Lord Jehovah hath given me the tongue of them that are taught,
    that I may know how to sustain with words him that is weary.

    --Isaiah 50. 4.

Gracious Father, keep me cheerful and courageous, that I may not be
given to weary murmurings. May my hours of solitude be spent
profitably as they pass. Grant that I may be a help to those who are
in need of sympathy and encouragement, and through the peace that is
given to me help them to a tranquil life. Amen.




DECEMBER FIFTEENTH

Catherine of Aragon born 1485.

George Romney born 1734.

Franklin B. Sanborn born 1831.

    Yet frequent visitors shall kiss the shrine,
      And ever keep its vestal lamp alight;
    All noble thoughts, all dreams divinely bright,
      That waken or delight this soul of mine.

    --F.B. Sanborn.

    One small cloud can hide the sunlight;
    Loose one string, the pearls are scattered;
    Think one thought, a soul may perish;
    Say one word, a heart may break.

    --A.A. Procter.

    Self-scrutiny is often the most unpleasant, and always the most
    difficult, of moral actions. But it is also the most important and
    salutary; for, as the wisest of the Greeks said, "An unexamined life
    is not worth living."

    --J. Strachan.

    Try your own selves, whether ye are in the faith; prove your own
    selves.

    --2 Corinthians 13. 5.

Gracious Father, help me that I may not be thoughtless and unkind. May
I be gentle and sympathetic. Forgive me for any unhappiness which I
may have made, and may it be mine to know the rejoicing that comes hi
lifting a discouraged life in time. Amen.




DECEMBER SIXTEENTH

John Selden born 1584.

François La Rochefoucauld born 1610.

George Whitefield born 1714.

Jane Austen born 1775.

    So live that when thy summons comes to join
    The innumerable caravan that moves
    To that mysterious realm where each shall take
    His chamber in the silent halls of death,
    Thou go not, like the quarry slave at night,
    Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed
    By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave
    Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
    About him and lies down to pleasant dreams.

    --William Cullen Bryant.

    As the wind extinguishes a taper but kindles the fire, so absence is
    the death of an ordinary passion, but lends strength to the greater.

    --La Rochefoucauld.

    If a man die, shall he live again?

    --Job 14. 14.

Heavenly Father, with thy help may I enter into the hope that
overcomes the fear of death. May my days be full of aspiration, and
through faith may my life move toward the eternal and the sublime.
Amen.




DECEMBER SEVENTEENTH

Sir Roger L'Estrange born 1616.

Ludwig van Beethoven born 1770.

Sir Humphry Davy born 1779.

John Greenleaf Whittier born 1807.

    The night is mother of the day,
      The winter of the spring;
    And ever upon old decay
      The greenest mosses cling.
    Behind the cloud the starlight lurks,
      Through showers the sunbeams fall;
    For God, who loveth all his works,
      Has left his hope with all.

    --John Greenleaf Whittier.

    The sun set; but not his hope:
    Stars rose; his faith was earlier up.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    What I am I have made myself.

    --Sir Humphry Davy.

    Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth:
    My flesh also shall dwell in safety.

    --Psalm 16. 9.

My Father, may I never be content to pass by thy beautiful offerings
and keep on in wretched despair. Save me if I may 'be inclining toward
misery. Give me the spirit of repose, and help me to confide in thee
as I daily seek the strength of thy love. Amen.




DECEMBER EIGHTEENTH

Charles Wesley born 1708.

Lyman Abbott born 1835.

Samuel Rogers died 1855.

Sir Joseph John Thomson born 1845.

    And let this feeble body fail,
      And let it faint or die;
    My soul shall quit this mournful vale,
      And soar to worlds on high.

    --Charles Wesley.

    It were better to live an immortal life and be robbed of immortality
    hereafter by some supernal power, than to live the mortal, fleshly
    animal life, and live it endlessly. Who would not rather have a
    right to immortality than to be immortal without a right to be?

    --Lyman Abbott.

    So when a great man dies,
      For years beyond our ken,
    The light he leaves behind him lies
      Upon the paths of men.

    --Henry W. Longfellow.

    But he that soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal
    life.

    --Galatians 6. 8.

My Father, I pray that I may be spared the deprivations that may come
from years spent in selfishness. Help me to realize before it is too
late how little self can hold and how much remorse may accumulate.
Help me to aspire to ideals that compel me to live an immortal life.
Amen.




DECEMBER NINETEENTH

Gustavus Adolphus born 1594.

Horatio Bonar born 1808.

F. Delsarte born 1811.

Mary A. Livermore born 1820.

J.M.W. Turner died 1851.

    If a man is to be a pillar in the temple of his God by and by, he
    must be some kind of a prop in God's house to-day. We are here to
    support, not to be supported. No one can be a living stone on the
    foundations of the Spiritual House which is God's habitation without
    being a foundation to the stones above him.

    --Maltbie Babcock.

    Since trifles make the sum of human things,
    And half our misery from our foibles springs;
    Since life's best joys consist in peace and ease,
    O let th' ungentle spirit learn from hence,
    A small unkindness is a great offense.

    --Hannah More.

    He that overcometh I will make a pillar in the temple of my God, and
    he shall go out thence no more.

    --Revelation 3. 12.

My Father, grant that I may not deceive myself and expect big results
from little efforts; nor be willing to receive assistance and refuse
my support. May I not only be anxious to give others all that I can,
and share their burdens, but may I be glad to help make fewer burdens
for others to bear. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTIETH

Louis the Dauphin died 1765.

John Wilson Croker born 1780.

Cyrus Townsend Brady born 1861.

      Love is not love
    Which alters when it alteration finds,
      Or bends with the remover to remove.
    O no! it is an ever-fixed mark
      That looks on tempests and is never shaken.
    It is the star to every wandering bark,
      Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.

    --William Shakespeare.

    I will not doubt the love untold
      Which not my worth nor want hath bought,
    Which wooed me young and wooes me old,
      And to this evening hath me brought.

    --Henry David Thoreau.

    Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with
    lovingkindness have I drawn thee.

    --Jeremiah 81. 3.

Loving Father, teach me the secret of constancy, that none may ever be
disappointed in me. May I not reckon what I give on recompense, but
have the spirit of giving which has no measure for what it may receive
in return. May I not be forgetful of thy love which will hold me to
deeper reverence and devotion. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-FIRST

Jean Baptiste Racine born 1639.

Robert Moffat born 1795.

Laura Bridgman born 1829.

    To think and to feel constitute the two grand divisions of men and
    genius--the men of reasoning and the men of imagination.

    --Disraeli.

    Grow old along with me! the best is yet to be,
      The last of life, for which the first was made:
    Our times are in his hand who saith, a whole I planned,
    Youth shows but half; trust God: see all, nor be afraid!

    --Robert Browning.

    But the path of the righteous is as the dawning light, That shineth
    more and more unto the perfect day.

    --Proverbs 4. 18.

Almighty God, I pray that I may have the grace to penetrate the deep
things of life and test their truth and greatness. May I have faith in
thy power and train for the best which thou hast made possible for me
to live. Help me to think and feel aright, that I may be thine to-day,
and in the days of to-morrow may I still be thine, ever keeping bright
memories of past days. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-SECOND

Franz Abt born 1819.

Thomas W. Higginson born 1823.

George Eliot died 1880.

      Love and Pain
    Make their own measure of all things that be.
    No clock's slow ticking marks their deathless strain;
    The life they own is not the life we see;
    Love's single moment is eternity.

    --Thomas W. Higginson.

    Life is made stronger
      Giving, receiving;
    Love is made longer
      Hoping, believing.

    Life is made sweeter,
      Truly worth living;
    Love is completer,
      Trusting, forgiving.

    --M.B.S.

    In love of the brethren be tenderly affectioned one to another; in
    honor preferring one another.

    --Romans 12. 10.

Loving Father, I thank thee that every morn breaks in a new day
without the sadness of yesterday or the gladness of to-morrow. I pray
that I may not lose the love and joy that it brings to-day. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-THIRD

Michael Drayton died 1631.

Robert Barclay born 1648.

James Sargent Storer died 1854.

    When heaven endows you with all gifts, you are an incomplete being
    if you stay still in your corner instead of taking advantage of your
    real value.

    --Marie Bashkirtseff.

    Life, which ought to be a thing complete in itself, and ought to be
    spent partly in gathering materials, and partly in drawing
    inferences, is apt to be a hurried accumulation lasting to the edge
    of the tomb. We are put into the world, I cannot help feeling, to be
    rather than do.

    --Arthur C. Benson.

    Jehovah is the strength of my life.

    --Psalm 27. 1.

Heavenly Father, I pray that thou wilt reverse my standards of life if
I may be striving only for selfish gain. May I care for all that I
could be, and may I care for where I should be found, but, most of
all, may I care for what I really am. Help me to keep my mind on thee
that I may find delight in doing thy will. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-FOURTH

George Crabbe born 1754.

Kit Carson born 1809.

Matthew Arnold born 1822.

John Morley born 1838.

William Makepeace Thackeray died 1863.

    Ah, friend, let us be true
      To one another! For the world, which seems
      To lie before us like a land of dreams,
    So various, so beautiful, so new,
    Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light,
      Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain,
      And we are here as on a darkling plain
    Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight,
    Where ignorant armies clash by night.

    --Matthew Arnold.

    We take care of our health, we lay up money, we make our roof tight
    and our clothing sufficient, but who provides wisely that we shall
    not be wanting in the best property of all--friends?

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Faithful are the wounds of a friend.

    --Proverbs 27. 6.

Gracious Lord, fill my life with the spirit of love and sacrifice. I
bless thee for the deep fellowships and tender intimacies; and on the
eve of this Christmas ask thy blessing for all, as my heart rings with
joy for those whom I love. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-FIFTH

Christmas Day.

Sir Isaac Newton born 1642.

William Collins born 1721.

Father Taylor born 1794.

    This is the month, and this is the happy morn,
      Wherein the Son of heaven's eternal King,
    Of wedded maid, and virgin mother born,
      Our great redemption from above did bring.

    --John Milton.

    Christmas is here;
    Winds whistle shrill,
    Icy and chill,
    Little care we;
    Little we fear
    Weather without,
    Shelter'd about
    The Mahogany tree.

    --William M. Thackeray.

    And the angel said unto them, Be not afraid; for behold, I bring you
    good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people: for
    there is born to you this day in the city of David a Saviour, who is
    Christ the Lord.

    --Luke 2. 10, 11.

Almighty God, I give honor and praise to express my joy for thy great
love in the gift of thy Son, Jesus Christ. With a glad heart I wish
all mankind "A merry Christmas," and may I ever remember, where the
angels sang, "Peace on earth, good will toward men." Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-SIXTH

Thomas Gray born 1716.

Mrs. Southworth born 1818.

Stephen Girard died 1831.

    Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
      Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
    Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
      The short and simple annals of the poor.

    Nor you, ye proud, impute to those the fault,
      If memory o'er their tomb no trophies raise,
    Where, through the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault,
      The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.

    Full many a gem of purest ray serene
      The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
    Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
      And waste its sweetness on the desert air.

    --Thomas Gray.

    Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty;
    Neither do I exercise myself in great matters,
    Or in things too wonderful for me.

    --Psalm 131. 1.

Gracious Father, give me the courage to live my life, and the
endurance to overcome the disappointments that may come to me. May I
not be neglectful of the great opportunities of which I am privileged
to take advantage. May I not be pretentious of what I have not done,
or boastful of what I am, but with my best ability live in truth.
Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-SEVENTH

Jacques Bernoulli born 1654.

Johann Kepler born 1571.

Charles Lamb died 1834.

    There is a time in every man's education when he arrives at the
    conviction that envy is ignorance; that imitation is suicide; that
    he must take himself for better or worse, as his portion; that,
    though the wide universe is full of good, no kernel of nourishing
    corn can come to him but through his toil bestowed on that plot of
    ground which is given him to till.

    --Ralph Waldo Emerson.

    Knowing ourselves, our world, our task so great,
    Our time so brief, 'tis clear if we refuse
    The means so limited, the tools so rude
    To execute our purpose, life will fleet,
    And we shall fade, and leave our task undone.

    --Robert Browning.

    Study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with
    your hands.

    --1 Thessalonians 4. 11.

Lord God of life, give me the desire to learn, and the wisdom to live
in my best. May I not fail to culture my mind and heart and make life
productive and worthy. Help me to see the mistakes that I have made in
the past, and in the year that is approaching not only try to avoid
them, but try to make amends for them. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-EIGHTH

Catherine M. Sedgwick born 1789.

Woodrow Wilson, Virginia, twenty-seventh President
United States, born 1856.

Thomas B. Macaulay died 1859.

    The government might be serviceable for many things. It might assist
    in a hundred ways to safeguard the lives and the health and promote
    the comfort and happiness of the people; but it can do these things
    only if they respond to public opinion, only if those who lead
    government see the country as a whole, feel a deep thrill of
    intimate sympathy with every class and every interest in it.

    --Woodrow Wilson.

    The hearts of men are their books; events are their tutors; great
    actions are their eloquence.

    --Thomas B. Macaulay.

    Be of good courage, and let us play the man for our people, and for
    the cities of our God: and Jehovah do that which seemeth him good.

    --2 Samuel 10. 12.

Lord God, I pray that my estimate of life may not be as I take it, but
as thou hast given it for peace and prosperity. Teach me my duty to my
country, and make me useful in uplifting and serving humanity. Amen.




DECEMBER TWENTY-NINTH

Thomas a Becket died 1170.

Andrew Johnson, Tennessee, seventeenth President
United States, born 1808.

William E. Gladstone born 1809.

Margaret Bottome born 1827.

Pauline O. Louise, Queen of Roumania (Carmen
Sylva), born 1843.

Christina G. Rossetti died 1894.

    One example is worth a thousand arguments.

    --William E. Gladstone.

    One day at a time! That's all it can be
      No faster than that is the hardest of fate,
    And days have their limit, however we
      Begin them too early or stretch them late.

    --J.R. Miller.

    He lives happy and master of himself
    Who can say, as each day passes on,
    I have lived! no matter whether to-morrow
    The great Father shall give us a clouded sky or a clear day.

    --Horace.

    Give us this day our daily bread.

    --Matthew 6. 11.

Eternal God, guard me against the love of praise, that I may not lose
the sense of duty. Start me for the right places and give me strength
with my days, that I may press toward their possession. Deliver me
from drifting when it is mine to pull against the tide, that I may not
be carried out of my course. Shield me from the storms that may gather
about me, and bring us all to the desired haven safe in thy keeping.
Amen.




DECEMBER THIRTIETH

Titus born A.D. 40.

William R. Alger born 1822.

Rudyard Kipling born 1865.

    God of our fathers, known of old,
      Lord of our far-flung battle line,
    Beneath whose awful hand we hold
      Dominion over palm and pine:
    Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
    Lest we forget--lest we forget!

    For heathen heart that puts her trust
      In reeking tube and iron shard;
    All valiant dust that builds on dust,
      And guarding calls not thee to guard:
    For frantic boast and foolish word,
    Thy mercy on thy people, Lord! Amen.

    --Rudyard Kipling.

    But thou shalt remember Jehovah thy God, for it is he that giveth
    thee power to get wealth.

    --Deuteronomy 8. 18.

Almighty God, as I come to thee wilt thou forgive me for the errors I
have made, and for the promises that I have broken. Help me to be as
true as the holly that keeps itself red through the snow. Remind me of
my opportunities as I breathe in thy blessings, "Lest I forget!" Amen.




DECEMBER THIRTY-FIRST

New Year's Eve.

John Wycliffe died 1384.

Battle of Wakefield 1460.

Charles Marquis Cornwallis born 1738.

    Ring out, wild bells, to the wild sky,
      The flying cloud, the frosty light:
      The year is dying in the night;
        Ring out, wild bells, and let him die.

      Ring out old shapes of foul disease,
        Ring out the narrow lust of gold:
      Ring out the thousand wars of old,
        Ring in the thousand years of peace.

    --Alfred Tennyson.

    Let every dawn of morning be to you as the beginning of life, and
    every setting sun be to you as its close.

    --John Ruskin.

    The night is far spent, and the day is at hand: let us therefore
    cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of
    light.

    --Romans 13. 12.

My Father, as I look to the past days, I feel much of my happiness and
much of my misery has come from my own choice. May I be more watchful
of my standards and less wasteful of my time, and keep a poise in life
that will leave a memory of well-spent days. For the year that has
passed and for its blessings I thank thee. Amen.





End of Project Gutenberg's Leaves of Life, by Margaret Bird Steinmetz



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF LIFE, FOR DAILY INSPIRATION ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


