The Project Gutenberg eBook of The American Missionary — Volume 49, No. 03, March, 1895
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The American Missionary — Volume 49, No. 03, March, 1895

Author: Various

Release date: May 24, 2005 [eBook #15887]
                Most recently updated: December 14, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Valère
        Swinnen and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 49, NO. 03, MARCH, 1895 ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, Valère
Swinnen and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.









The American Missionary


March, 1895

Volume XLIX, No. 3.



CONTENTS

  THIS NUMBER--FIELD NOTES
  ARE THEY GRATEFUL?
  PIONEER MISSIONARY IN AFRICA (Illustrated)
  PIONEER MISSIONARY AMONG INDIANS (Illustrated)
  A SOUTHERN JOURNEY, BY SEC. BEARD
  VALUE OF PURE AND INTELLIGENT CHURCHES
  TILLOTSON, AUSTIN, TEXAS (Illustrated)
  DEATH OF DR. TAYLOR
  DEATH OF REV. C.C. PAINTER--ONE MISSIONARY DAY
  SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES
  A SCHOOLBOY'S COMPOSITION
  WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS
  RECEIPTS




NEW YORK

PUBLISHED BY THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

Bible House, Ninth St. and Fourth Ave., New York.



Price, 50 Cents a Year in advance.

Entered at the Post Office at New York, N.Y., as second class matter.




American Missionary Association.




PRESIDENT, MERRILL E. GATES, LL.D., MASS.

_Vice-Presidents._

  Rev. F.A. NOBLE, D.D., Ill.
  Rev. ALEX. MCKENZIE, D.D., Mass.
  Rev. HENRY HOPKINS, D.D., Mo.
  Rev. HENRY A. STIMSON, D.D., N.Y.
  Rev. WASHINGTON GLADDEN, D.D., Ohio.

_Corresponding Secretaries._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. A.F. BEARD, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._
  Rev. F.P. WOODBURY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._

_Assistant Corresponding Secretary._

  Rev. C.J. RYDER, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._

_Recording Secretary._

  Rev. M.E. STRIEBY, D.D., _Bible House, N.Y._

_Treasurer._

  HENRY W. HUBBARD, Esq., _Bible House, N.Y._

_Auditors._

  PETER McCARTEE.
  JAMES MITCHELL.

_Executive Committee._

  CHARLES L. MEAD, Chairman.
  CHARLES A. HULL, Secretary.

  _For Three Years._

    WILLIAM HAYES WARD,
    JAMES W. COOPER,
    LUCIEN C. WARNER,
    JOSEPH H. TWICHELL,
    CHARLES P. PEIRCE.

  _For Two Years._

    CHARLES A. HULL,
    ADDISON P. FOSTER,
    ALBERT J. LYMAN,
    NEHEMIAH BOYNTON,
    A.J.F. BEHRENDS.

  _For One Year._

    SAMUEL HOLMES,
    SAMUEL S. MARPLES,
    CHARLES L. MEAD,
    WILLIAM H. STRONG,
    ELIJAH HORR.

_District Secretaries._

  Rev. GEO. H. GUTTERSON, 21 _Cong'l House, Boston, Mass._
  Rev. JOS. E. ROY, D.D., 151 _Washington Street, Chicago, Ill._
  Rev. W.E.C. WRIGHT, D.D., _Cong'l Rooms, Y.M.C.A. Building, Cleveland,
    Ohio._

_Secretary of Woman's Bureau._

 Miss D.E. EMERSON, _Bible House, N.Y._


COMMUNICATIONS

Relating to the work of the Association may be addressed to the
Corresponding Secretaries; letters for "THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY," to the
Editor, at the New York Office; letters relating to the finances, to the
Treasurer; letters relating to woman's work, to the Secretary of the
Woman's Bureau.


DONATIONS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS

In drafts, checks, registered letters, or post-office orders, may be
sent to H.W. Hubbard, Treasurer, Bible House, New York, or, when more
convenient, to either of the Branch Offices, 21 Congregational House,
Boston, Mass., 151 Washington Street, Chicago, Ill., or Congregational
Rooms, Y.M.C.A. Building, Cleveland, Ohio. A payment of thirty dollars
constitutes a Life Member.

NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.--The date on the "address label" indicates the
time to which the subscription is paid. Changes are made in date on
label to the 10th of each month. If payment of subscription be made
afterward the change on the label will appear a month later. Please send
early notice of change in post-office address, giving the former address
and the new address, in order that our periodicals and occasional papers
may be correctly mailed.


FORM OF A BEQUEST.

"I GIVE AND BEQUEATH the sum of ---- dollars to the 'American Missionary
Association,' incorporated by act of the Legislature of the State of New
York." The will should be attested by three witnesses.




THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY

VOL. XLIX.
March, 1895.
No. 3.


In this number of THE MISSIONARY we present our readers with an
interesting variety of information, embracing sketches of personal
observation by secretaries of the Association, letters from field
workers, pictures of pioneers in two important fields, and pictures of
one of our higher institutions. It is with sorrow that we are compelled
to notice the death of our late honored and beloved President, Dr.
William M. Taylor, and that of Professor Painter, so successful and so
faithful in his work among the Indians.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIELD NOTES.

BY SECRETARY RYDER.


MOUNTAIN WORK.--A very interesting spiritual awakening seems to prevail
in many points of our mountain field. From a pastor of one of these
churches among our American Highlanders we have received the following:
"I have held meetings a couple of weeks, first at the church, and then
at the academy. A large number have been reached. The open meetings
disclosed the new life to all. We held daily meetings of prayer in the
evening, and a large percentage of the students attended. All took part.
The Y.P.S.C.E. has increased fourfold, and all the time is occupied in
their meetings, and often two or three arise to speak at once. Six names
were presented for active membership, and two for associate. The work is
not confined to this single church and academy.

"I went recently to another village and half a dozen committed
themselves for Christ. The Association needs an evangelist to visit
these fields. Audiences fill the churches, most of them people who are
out of Christ. All that prevents meeting this crying want of these
mountain people in supplying to them more intelligent and consecrated
ministers of the Gospel is the lack of money consecrated and given to
this great service. This mountain field is now ripe to the harvest.
Will not the churches multiply their gifts so that we can send into this
harvest field more devoted men who are ready to go if they can do their
work and simply be supported?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The hard times and the difficulty of the mountain people to get clothing
is illustrated in the following, which comes to us in a recent
missionary letter from this mountain field:

"There would have been much more suffering had it not been for the
clothing which has gone out from this school. When seven chickens bring
only thirty-five cents the poor mountain people do not have much
chance."

       *       *       *       *       *

A pastor of the Association among our American Highlanders writes as
follows: "This has been a most blessed and glorious season of
refreshing. In the bounds of my work this fall and winter I have held
and assisted in meetings which have in all resulted in something more
than 100 hopeful conversions. My work now is especially to care for and
look after the welfare of these precious souls lately brought to Christ
and to give as much time as possible to my studies."

       *       *       *       *       *

INDIAN WORK.--Our friends will remember the appeal made by Rev. James F.
Cross, of Rosebud Agency, S.D., at our annual meeting at Elgin, Ill.,
for a chapel to be built at Cedar Butte, S.D. President Gates, moved by
the appeal, took it up so enthusiastically that nearly $400 came from
him and other generous givers. The Indians drew the logs and have just
erected the chapel under the direction of Superintendent Cross. A note
just received from the field contains the following, which abundantly
proves the wisdom of opening this new station at Cedar Butte and helping
the Indians in the erection of their church: "Last week I was up to
Cedar Butte church. It was the first time since it was built that I have
been there for service. I received two young men into the church. It was
a warm day and the thermometer has not been ten degrees away from zero,
except to go thirteen below, since." This chapel at Cedar Butte is the
center of a new work, and this message brings the hopefulness of the
field.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We received five grown persons to our church fellowship on Sunday, and
two children were baptized. Three Christian Indian families were
constituted by Christian marriage at the same time. Praise God!" So
writes Supt. C.L. Hall, of Fort Berthold Indian Mission, N.D.

       *       *       *       *       *

ARE THEY GRATEFUL?

REV. CHAS. F. SARGENT, THOMASVILLE, GA.


Very often we are asked if the people among whom we labor are grateful
for the work that is done for and among them--whether there is
self-denial on their part in helping themselves in church and school
work.

It is very important that we should have some expression on their part
in regard to this. There are many incidents in which grateful
acknowledgment is made. A few incidents will best answer the above
question.

A little more than a mile from here there lives in an almost
uninhabitable cabin an old lady who is called "Aunt Eliza." I saw her
first one cold day last winter, when I called and found her in bed sick
with pneumonia. We ministered unto her as we best could, providing
medicine, food and clothing.

From a missionary barrel garments were obtained which helped to make her
body comfortable. She depended on the kindness of a neighbor to gather
sticks for her and draw water. At times there was only enough fire in
the fire-place to give a faint glimmer, not enough to make the room
cheerful. Aunt Eliza is old and crippled, and it was only with much care
and patient waiting that in the goodness of God she was restored to
health. Some time passed after her recovery before I saw her. She came
to our house on a hot summer day to bring an offering of gratitude for
God's mercy in giving her back health and strength. She brought to us in
a corner of her handkerchief fifty-five cents which she had saved from
little gifts from children and grandchildren nearly as poor as herself.
She had at this time only meal enough in her house to make one "pone" of
bread. Gratefully she urged upon us her self-denying gift of
thanksgiving. Of course we accepted it, only to return it to her in the
name of the Master, who is the Great Gift Giver. Later in the season our
sister remembered us again. She had saved for us two chickens, but a
"_conjuror_" came along and said he would tell her fortune for them. He
succeeded in "_beating_" her out of her offering for the Lord, and in
return she received nothing. She came and told us all about it. This
good woman did not rest until she brought us one at a time the chickens
that she had promised. When the Association met with us a few days ago
she brought, as her part to help, a few eggs. There are other incidents
in her life which are interesting, but we cannot tell them all now. She
certainly is grateful and gives the "widow's mite" in giving all that
she has. She has been to our church and been blessed in meeting God in
the sanctuary. The first Sunday that she came she bowed and courtesied
to the people as she came in, much to their amusement.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PIONEER MISSIONARY IN AFRICA.


[Illustration: REV. GEORGE THOMPSON.]

Rev. George Thompson was early enlisted as a missionary in the Mendi
Mission on the west coast of Africa. He had been a most ardent friend of
the slave, active in aiding their escape from the house of bondage, and
as a consequence had spent five years in the Missouri State Prison. He
went to Africa in 1848 under the commission of the American Missionary
Association, and proved himself to be remarkably useful. One of his most
far-reaching efforts was in the work as a peacemaker. A fierce and
unrelenting war had been raging among the tribes around the mission, and
this was brought to a close through the wise and persistent efforts of
Mr. Thompson. He was chosen umpire for the contending chiefs, and after
repeated and wearying excursions, and ten interviews or councils with
both parties, he at length succeeded. Then came the joy which peace
brings. Warriors met and fell on each other's necks; chiefs, who were
for years enemies, now shook hands and embraced each other with the
affection of long-separated friends; sisters, wives and daughters, long
captives, fell into each other's arms, weeping for joy. A chief's
daughter was seen running to embrace her father's feet, a wife hastened
to welcome her husband and children, and entire towns were filled with
cries of gladness. The beatitude, "Blessed are the peacemakers," belongs
to Mr. Thompson.

Ill health at length compelled Mr. Thompson to relinquish the work in
Africa, and in 1856 he returned to Oberlin, Ohio, where he spent five
years in publishing his book on Africa, entitled, "Palm Land," and in
educating two boys whom he brought with him from Africa. In 1861 he
removed with his family to northwestern Michigan, where he labored as a
home missionary for eighteen years, being the pastor for fifteen years
of a church which he established. He then returned to Oberlin, where he
remained until his death in 1893. In all these years Mr. Thompson was a
laborious and useful man, actively engaged in awakening the churches to
an interest in Africa, in writing his books and educating his children.
In his later years, while living in Oberlin, he was abundant in labors
in connection with Sunday-schools and feeble churches in Ohio and other
States.

       *       *       *       *       *

A PIONEER MISSIONARY AMONG THE INDIANS.


In 1843 a number of young men from Oberlin entered upon a mission among
the Ojibway Indians in the northern part of what is now Minnesota, under
the auspices of the Western Evangelical Missionary Society, which was
soon afterward transferred to the American Missionary Association. Of
the inaccessibility of this field, a competent authority has said:
"There is probably no missionary field to-day on the face of the earth
more difficult to reach than this was at that time."

[Illustration: REV. S.G. WRIGHT.]

Among this group of missionaries was Rev. S.G. Wright. As a part of his
experience it is said that after a short visit at home, Mr. Wright
returned to the mission taking his young wife with him--their wedding
tour. It was a journey of over a month made in a canoe. They were both
compelled to walk at intervals twenty-two miles in the swamps along the
side of the stream until they reached Mr. Barnard's station. These walks
were varied by sickness; Mr. Wright sometimes had chills every day, but
at Mr. Barnard's station he recovered. There remained yet twenty miles
of their journey, and this was undertaken on foot, but soon a storm
brought five inches of snow. Mr. Wright says: "My wife was very lame,
and what woman would not be after walking twenty long miles through mire
and water, over high hills and through gullies, in snow from four to
five inches deep?"

The change wrought by these missionaries can be indicated in a sentence:
When they went there the Indians cultivated almost no land and their
only domestic animals were dogs. They maintained a precarious existence
by hunting and fishing, and the gathering of wild rice, with starvation
as no uncommon experience. In a few years these Indians raised their own
supplies of corn and potatoes, with some to sell to procure other
necessaries; they began to build houses for themselves; had the benefit
of a saw mill and a grist mill, with the blessings of a church and
boarding school.

The Association withdrew from the mission in 1859, but Mr. Wright
returned under other auspices, and spent several years in effective and
useful work. He still lives and is active in Christian labors as a
member of the church in Oberlin.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SOUTHERN JOURNEY.

BY SECRETARY A.F. BEARD.


It included every Southern State in extent from Virginia to Texas, and
from Texas to Florida. It was a study of schools, their methods and
attainments; it was the acquaintance of new teachers and their work, the
greeting of those who have become old friends, the look into the eyes of
more colored youth in schools than usually falls to one person. It was a
comparative study of classes of all grades in schools of the same grade,
and of schools in different States and environments. It was an
examination of industries in agriculture, industries in mechanics, of
schools, normal and collegiate. It was an inspection of properties; an
inquiry as to the prices of paints and brick and lime and wall papers.

It was a visit to churches, a handshake with pastors and deacons, a
gathering of congregations to "make their wants and wishes known" to
"the Association." One soon learns that the correct use of the definite
article to designate the A.M.A. is not confined to those who have
studied grammar. There is only one Association for these people. They
never call it "American" nor even "Missionary." "The" is all sufficient,
and it does one good to hear his society thus alphabetically
abbreviated, as it does to meet these warm-hearted brethren of the
colored churches which have been nourished with life by "The"
Association. If anyone is suffering from iciness in the cardiac region,
there is no better place for him to get the cockles of his heart well
warmed up than in some of the colored congregations' churches which I
visited. I said some. Alas! there is a difference in churches--in the
South.

I find the schools full of interest, and that in the higher institutions
the girls and young women are side by side in nearly equal numbers with
lads and young men in climbing up the steep hills of education. It is,
indeed, climbing. It takes more time, more patience and more resolution
than most white students with happier conditions can realize.

The characteristics of the student are changing somewhat from the
former days. Pupils are pushing into the more advanced grades earlier
in years. They have not the memories of slavery as had the generations
before them--only the traditions of it, and certain of its
influences--for influences do not die when institutions pass away. There
is not, for example, much old-fashioned Puritanism stalking about in New
York in these days, but considerable of Puritan influence is alive and
is just now contributing to the hopefulness of the times and the
interests of municipal reform and even of the State government.
Influences continue, and it will take time for those of slavery or the
effect on both races to pass away.

One may not particularize among so many schools and churches as were in
the path of my visitation, and one must generalize if he will keep
within limits. For ten years now it has been my privilege to study the
South as a personal observer, not only in schools and churches and not
only on the regular routes of travel, but in the bypaths of rural life
and in talks with all classes and conditions of men of every shade of
color. I may, therefore, be permitted to generalize.

First, it is often said that those who live among evils best understand
them and know how to meet them. This is a fallacy. The missionaries in
China knew better what was for the good of China than did the Emperor
himself. There are people in the United States, also, who could give
some good points to the new Emperor of Russia, and if he would take them
and use them it would be for the advantage of that country. It is true
that impressions are not facts, and one cannot run over a fashionable
route of travel holding converse with some hospitable Southern host and
return with much more than impressions. Such are likely to speak with
more confidence than knowledge, but, on the other hand, one who confines
himself to a single locality in the South and to the local facts is more
likely to have his views lean to inclination than to truth. One's
opinion ought to be estimated by his information. I have known an
otherwise intelligent citizen of New Orleans to be ignorant of the
existence of Straight University with its 500 students and its noble
accomplishment. A citizen of New York in this case could give the
citizen of New Orleans some information about the South.

Secondly, the negroes are gaining. Never were the schools better in
their entire range in different States, the studies more exacting, the
purpose on the part of students for mastery in their work more resolute.
Never was there manifested a more self-reliant spirit. The people are
having a hard time just now; many are poorer than ever before, but the
negroes are gaining, inch by inch. There are millions in schools and
unreached millions yet who could not read a word in the New Testament if
they had one; but the gain is seen in many ways; in schools, in
churches, in homes, and in the improved quality and character of the
newspapers edited by colored men, as also in their increased numbers.
The schools under the direction and superintendence of colored teachers
are gaining in standing and worthiness.

Thirdly, the white South is gaining. Not very rapidly, but gaining. The
lawless part of the South--and there is a lawless part--is as lawless as
ever. The lower and more violent elements, however, are but a small part
of the Southern people. Still they know that the general public opinion
is not positive enough to condemn them in any question between the
negroes and the whites; hence they are not afraid to do what they will
with the negro. The great body of the Southern people are law-abiding,
with the single exception that they do not propose to respect the
Fifteenth Amendment. They are committed against this. They deprecate
lawlessness. They are personally kind to the negroes. They are busy in
the ordinary duties of life, but the lawless know that these good people
will never disturb them in their injustices to the negro. Then, there is
a relatively small element of the people who are prophets of a better
day. They themselves often feel the slavery of a public opinion which
puts odium upon them when they are too friendly in behalf of the
oppressed colored man. They cannot oppose many things which they feel to
be wrong without losing their influence. These seers of the future are
in hearty sympathy with our work and give it such personal encouragement
as they may under the tyrannical conditions of a public opinion not
friendly to equal rights on the part of the negro.

There is a great gain, also, in Southern public opinion as to the
capacity of the colored man and his possible future. This gain is seen
in the better provisions for the colored public schools, in towns and
cities. The schools of the A.M.A. are both object lessons and incentives
for the education of the white as well as the colored in the public
schools. The South is exceedingly sensitive as to the opinion of the
North. A trifle of published criticism, for example, goes through the
Southern papers with rebuttals enough to break down a national
constitution. An imperfect and incorrect report of an interview, which
lived just long enough to be printed, has been lately passionately
confuted in certain Southern newspapers with a profusion of epithets
which were out of all proportion to the harmless nonsense committed to
the press by an untrained reporter--a new illustration of the extreme
sensitiveness of the South to Northern opinion. Northern sentiment is
often ridiculed, and frequently sends not a few Southern newspapers into
spasms, but it is heeded. Let it be kindly and true, and pressed
fraternally and constantly "In His Name" who came

  "To take away transgressions
  And set the captive free."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE VALUE OF PURE AND INTELLIGENT CHURCHES.


The extract given below has the true ring. It is from one of the pastors
of the American Missionary Association educated at Tougaloo and Howard
Theological Seminary. If sometimes our church work seems small and
discouraging there are many things to be remembered. Many times we are
told by the pastors of our churches "we could have larger churches and
more of them if we would accept the standards of those about us."
Moreover, some little church with fifty members may be doing more for
the cause of Christ than some big church of ten times the number. But,
read the extract:

"In the battle of Milliken's Bend, a color bearer was seen far in
advance of his company. The captain shouted to him, 'Bring those colors
back to the army!' The reply was sent back, 'Bring the army up to the
colors.'

"Just so, in the Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee,
and the South generally, our church is lifting up the standard, and
although men are constantly trying to get the standard bearer to fall
back to the army of biased, narrow humanity, the church ever shouts back
the reply of the immortal color bearer, 'Bring the army up to the
colors.'

"Every man and woman going out from our schools is imbued with the
thought that he or she is to hold up the standard of God--not man--for
the people. Every church, school or mission fostered by the A.M.A. is
holding up the highest ideals of all life. And while our work does not
grow in numbers as rapidly as we could wish, we are broadcasting the
good seeds of the Kingdom over all the land, and here and there they are
springing into life, bringing forth fruit--some thirty, some sixty, and
some an hundred fold; so we go on grinding out the grist ever and anon
holding one for toll. I am not ignorant of what other churches are
doing, and some are doing nobly, but ours is the great work. It has been
my observation, that wherever an enterprising work is being carried on
in church or school, the leading force is generally the product of
Congregational effort, directly or indirectly. So take away our work,
then it would be like blotting out the sun, moon and most of the stars
from the sky."

       *       *       *       *       *

A COLORED MAN WINS.--Charles W. Wood, of Chicago, a colored contestant
for oratorical honors, has won the first prize in Beloit College, Wis. A
few years ago he was a newsboy upon the street, but he made up his mind
to have an education. With the aid of a generous patron he has nearly
completed his college course and justified the high hopes of his many
friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

TILLOTSON, AUSTIN, TEXAS.

BY SECRETARY A.F. BEARD.


In the year 1875 the Rev. George J. Tillotson, of Connecticut, visited
various points of the South with a view to the establishment of a
school. He was accompanied by a secretary of the Association. After a
careful survey they selected Austin, Texas, as the most promising point.
About twenty-five acres of partially wooded land just beyond the eastern
boundary of the city of Austin were purchased for $5,000, the gift of
Mr. Tillotson. In the following year a charter was obtained and the work
of raising money for the building was entered upon. The funds were
finally secured, and in 1879 the foundations were laid, and the
building, 104 feet in length and 42 in depth, constructed of white
pressed brick with dress stone trimmings, rose to its five stories in
height. On the 17th of January, 1881, the school opened. Two of the five
floors were then open spaces. Eleven pupils only were enrolled at the
beginning, but the term closed in June with 107. During this year the
building was completed and named "Allen Hall," in honor of one of the
largest givers. At the opening of the fall term the beginning of the
next year, the accommodations were taxed to the utmost. In August, 1882,
the report reads, "Allen Hall is full to repletion, 100 in the boarding
department. Work cannot unfold for need of more room. Young men and
young women in the same building make an urgent appeal for a new
building."

At no time since the beginning of the second year have there been
adequate accommodations for all desiring to attend.

For ten years the institution under the name of "Tillotson Collegiate
and Normal Institute" has furnished to students from all parts of the
great State of Texas with its half million of colored people, and from
other States, and from Mexico, not only an opportunity to acquire a
thoroughly practical common-school education, but also a more extended
course to prepare students for entrance to the highest educational
institutions in the land; and a normal training course for teachers for
all positions in the public schools. Within this period of time a church
has been formed for the students of the institution and others, which
has been regularly ministered to by the president of the institution.

In the year 1888 a building for carpentry and manual instruction was
erected and a teacher was appointed for industrial training.

The picture following is that of Allen Hall as it looks down upon the
valley of the river Colorado. In every direction the views are of great
extent, and include many picturesque scenes. The State capitol--a mile
distant--and the various public buildings of Austin, are before the eye.
Since electricity has been introduced, Austin by night presents a
brilliant outlook from the grounds of the institution, but the light
which shines from these buildings on the hill sends its beams farther
than those of the electric plant, and pierces a denser darkness than
that of night.

[Illustration: ALLEN HALL.]

The industrial buildings--viz., the shop for carpentry, another for
blacksmithing, for repairing of vehicles, and for painting--are at a
suitable distance in the rear on the "boys' side" of the grounds. Below
them are located the barn, wagon house, hennery, etc.

On the crest of a second eminence, several hundred feet from "Allen
Hall," is the attractive new building (see picture, page 100) used as a
dormitory for teachers and young women pupils. In this building are the
culinary department also, and the dining room for each hall. There are
forty dormitory rooms in this hall which will accommodate sixty pupils
and their teachers. In addition to its dining-hall for all the pupils
within the institution there are reading and sewing rooms, etc., which
add to its completeness. There are not many school buildings anywhere
with more diversified landscape and beautiful natural surroundings than
those of Tillotson. Encompassed by oak trees large enough for shade and
shelter, but not over-towering the prospect, free from the distracting
noises and dust of the streets, and yet possessing all the advantages of
a thrifty and beautiful city, the student at Tillotson will have at
least one period in life that may not be commiserated.

This new building has not yet been duly named, and if anyone of those
who may read this sketch will give $1,000 to be used as an endowment
fund, the interest to be applied year by year as long as the school
stands, we shall be glad to name this new hall after the giver, unless
the name should happen to be too un-euphonious. Would not this beautiful
hall be a fine monument to bear the name of some considerate and
generous giver?

[Illustration: NEW HALL: DORMITORY FOR TEACHERS AND PUPILS.]

Tillotson was chartered under the corporate name of "Institute." This
charter has now expired, and since the institution has blossomed out
with the possibilities of a college it is hoped that under the new
charter it may bear the name of "College."

It has the following departments: Common English, Normal, College
Preparatory, College, Vocal and Instrumental Music, and Industrial, and
a department for trained nurses. The faculty of the institution has
consisted of the president, the normal principal, the industrial
teacher, and ten other teachers. The boarding department is conducted
upon the model of a Christian household. The intention is by no means
simply to furnish rooms and meals for those who are in attendance, but
also to inculcate ideas of right living and thinking, which are
indispensable to true manhood and womanhood.

In the Common English department the purpose is to prepare the pupils
thoroughly for the practical duties of life.

The College Preparatory gives a careful preparation in the way of
language studies which will fit them to enter into the more generous
course of study in which they may be fitted to be intelligent preachers
and leaders of their race. The demand for college-educated men among the
negroes is an intelligent one. This race cannot be elevated unless there
can be raised a sufficient number of strong, earnest men, thoroughly
trained intellectually, as well as morally; men who shall have a larger
than a local vision, and who shall stand forth as representative leaders
and teachers of those less fortunate than themselves.

The Normal department adds the study of subjects and methods, for those
who are preparing to become teachers among their own people.

The Industrial includes not only manual instruction, but carpentry,
blacksmithing and mechanical drawing for boys and young men, and also
sewing and dressmaking for girls and young women.

[Illustration: MANUAL INSTRUCTION SHOP.]

For a young institution the record of Tillotson is excellent. There are
few places in the great empire of Texas where it has not already become
known through its pupils, or through teachers who have received their
education within its walls.

Being under the care of a distinctively Christian organization it
carries out the intention of its founders in providing religious
instruction for all who attend. Its Sunday School, its Christian
Endeavor Societies, its social worship, its church service, its mission
work, all intensify the religious influence and religious life.

Tillotson is far away and needs friends who will give it help. It needs
scholarships and professorships. It needs a library, chemical and
philosophical apparatus, and a printing press. It needs gifts of
bedding, tableware for the halls, and clothing for needy students.
Friends, it needs your Christian sympathy and Christian prayers, that
the great and blessed Teacher may dwell within its walls and in the
hearts of the inmates.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEATH OF DR. TAYLOR.


Nine years ago we were called upon to record the death of Governor
Washburn, President of this Association. While he was seemingly in the
fullness of life and while on the platform at the meeting of the
American Board he suddenly and unexpectedly fell asleep in death. In a
far different way did his successor, Rev. William M. Taylor, D.D., meet
in quietude and with patient resignation the summons that called him
home. The premonition of death came three years ago, and the march has
been steady to the close. During these months his patience and sweet
assurance have been as marked illustrations of the power of the Gospel
as other graces were in his more active career.

Dr. Taylor, long before he became President of this Association, took a
deep interest in its work and brought to it his own personal influence
and that of his large and wealthy congregation. As a presiding officer
he was constant in his attendance, and by the dignity of his manner and
his great force of character gave guidance and strength to the
gatherings of our annual meeting. But Dr. Taylor was broad, and his
sympathies went forth to every form of endeavor for the spread of the
Gospel and the benefit of mankind. With a strong character derived from
his Scottish ancestry, he had made his mark as a pastor in the growth of
a church under his care in the old country. Nearly a quarter of a
century ago he came to this city, and by his commanding eloquence, his
pastoral gifts and the books which flowed from his pen, he has exerted a
wide and salutary influence. On great occasions, at college
anniversaries and at missionary and ecclesiastical gatherings, Dr.
Taylor was one of the most acceptable and efficient speakers. One marked
characteristic of Dr. Taylor came from his great heart, and mellowed and
sweetened all his other powers. He has finished a glorious course, and
has gone to his reward.

       *       *       *       *       *

REV. CHAS. C. PAINTER.


The recent death of Prof. Painter has removed a most useful and
efficient worker in behalf of the Indians. He died at his home in
Washington, of heart disease, after an illness of only twelve hours. He
was sixty-two years old, born in Virginia, but resident for most of his
life in New England, where he was an acceptable pastor. He was called
from that position into the service of the American Missionary
Association, acting for a time as Professor in Fisk University. He,
however, soon gave his life to promoting the education and civilization
of the Indians, and for ten years was connected with the Indian Rights
Association. It was a tribute to his knowledge and service in the Indian
work that about a year ago he was appointed a member of the Board of
Indian Commissioners.

       *       *       *       *       *

ONE MISSIONARY DAY.

MISS S.E. OBER, EVARTS, KY.


At work again. Back from the rest and change of the summer vacation.
Leaving behind friends and home, comforts and pleasures, and nearly all
the advantages of civilization. But coming to a greater joy, a higher
privilege than any of these can afford--the "high calling" of our
Master, to minister to poor, needy souls in His name.

So with great happiness we gather up the loose threads and the dropped
stitches of last year's work, and start anew. Come with us through one
day, and taste a few of a missionary's joys. After our household tasks
are over, and we have gained new power from our daily devotions, we
start out on our work. Over one hundred boys and girls give us bright
greetings as we ride past. We must go on horseback, as there are no
_good_ roads in our vicinity.

We are entirely compassed about with mountains; on every side they lift
their grand heads in everlasting testimony of the wonderful handiwork of
the Almighty. But we have little time to gaze upon their beauty, for
more precious creations of the same great Hand are needing our
attention.

See this little hovel, built of rough logs, scarcely serving to keep out
the wind or the rain. Let us enter. A most pitiful sight awaits us. The
fever has been before us. For months it has raged, and two human souls
have been taken from the family which dwells here. On a rude filthy bed
lies the wasted frame of a once stalwart man. He is as feeble as the
infant; a wan child is sitting near by. The mother, in tattered
garments, totters about her work, so enfeebled by the disease that her
strength is inadequate for her tasks. Three of the children are nothing
but skeletons, and sit listlessly on the floor, taking but little
notice of anything going on about them.

The thin faces light up at sight of us, and a cordial welcome is
extended. The only whole chair is brought forward for our use. You might
expect a torrent of complaints from these poor creatures. But no,
instead come words of praise to God that He had spared so many of their
lives, that He had been _with_ them in their sufferings.

A year ago, when we visited this hut, we found them stolid and
indifferent, caring nothing for spiritual things. The woman sat smoking
over the fire, scarcely vouchsafing us a word, and muttered to a crony,
"Wot's thet thar woman nosing 'bout yere for? She'd er heap sight better
let we uns erlone."

It was very hard to ask permission to hold prayers with them in such a
hostile atmosphere, but it is our duty to "sow beside _all_ waters," so
we proffered our request.

"Yer kin ef yer mines ter. I haint er carin'," was the ungracious reply.

But what a change _now_. The woman's face glows with a light that only
comes from the "light of the world." "God's been mighty good ter we
uns," she says. "Ef hit hedn't ben fer Him we'd er died. An' we uns air
bound ter do ez near right ez we kin, an' serve ther Lord, ther hull lot
on us."

Does it not make our own hearts glow to hear such words, and see the
wonders God hath wrought? And with thanksgiving we read and pray with
them, and strengthen their faith with God's Word. After noting their
needs, and promising to supply them from the articles sent us by
generous Northern friends, we go on to the next house.

We find the same sad state of affairs; fever-worn men and women, wasted
children, and starvation and want staring them in the face. But we find
also the same great change. God's Spirit has been working among them,
and hearts are softened and lives changed by His power. So we go from
hut to hut, until the way becomes too steep to ride, and we leave our
horses and climb, on foot, the lofty, rocky ridges.

We find men who were reckless and bad ready to listen to God's Word, and
in broken voices asking for prayers. We find women who have lived lives
of open shame penitent and contrite, showing by their abandonment of
their evil ways that they are sincere when they say, oh so earnestly,
"We uns air tryin' ter do right."

But all is not so encouraging. We must visit homes where vice reigns
supreme; where women are lost to shame, and glory in their sin; where
even the children have the "trail of the serpent" upon their young
faces; where the men are brutal and beastly, and even sickness does not
_touch_ them.

Let us call at this old log house as we pass; nestled under a high
cliff, with the creek flowing past, it looks like some ugly blot on the
"face of nature." But it is a _school-house_. There is no window, no
chimney, only a hole in the side of the house, opening into a sort of
pen of rocks, in which the fire is built; an admirable arrangement to
send all the heat out of doors, and the smoke into the house. Several
rough benches (that do not invite to ease or comfort) and an ancient
chair complete the furniture of the room. Several boards painted black
form the "blackboards." Here we find two tattered urchins and three tiny
girls, whose faces have evidently not made the acquaintance of soap and
water for some days.

The teacher is one of the advanced pupils of our academy--a bright young
man, who will attend our school when his is completed. We ask where the
rest of the scholars are.

"Pulling fodder or stripping cane," is the reply. And the children have
to work so much in the fields that they seldom have the chance of
attending school. Out of fifty or sixty scholars only a very few ever
attend these public schools. But it is growing late, and we have a long,
rough way before us, so we spur on toward home, reaching it just as the
glow of the sunset dies away from the last distant peak and the dusky
twilight settles down over the whole land.

A hurried supper and then to the church prayer meeting. Here are
gathered quite a number, and we have a very good meeting, feeling the
presence of our Saviour in our midst. So closes one of our days, and
wearied in body, but refreshed and strengthened in spirit, we go to
rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUTHERN FIELD NOTES.

REV. GEORGE W. MOORE.


The mission station recently opened at La Pine, in the black belt of
Alabama, is a door of hope to that needy people. The people came for
miles around to greet the missionary and to hear the Gospel. At another
point in Alabama we found a promising field which one of our theological
graduates from Talladega had opened. He began the work in a rented hall
at his own cost, and after he had gathered a congregation and found it a
needy and at the same time a hopeful field he raised the "Macedonian
cry" to the American Missionary Association for help. The Pauline
heroism of this brother in preaching the Gospel in his own hired house
is shared by our brethren in various parts of our Southern field. The
work is so large and the needs of the people are so great that this
spirit of Christ must be more fully expressed, both in gifts and
service, to reach the pressing calls for help.

I met three interesting characters in the black belt of Georgia. The
first was named Moses. On meeting him he addressed me with "You don't
knows me, does you? My name is Moses." His friend "Uncle Plenty" lived
in a little cabin by the roadside. He had heard of the Association, and
was glad to greet me as one of its missionaries. He told me that he felt
so thankful for what the Northern friends had done for his people that
he wished his little cabin and half acre lot to be bequeathed to the
American Missionary Association. I dined with "Uncle Plenty" and met
Father Joshua, a poor old blind man ninety years of age, in his cabin.
They told me the story of their lives in slavery and how they had prayed
to see this day of freedom and light.

Moses and Joshua and "Uncle Plenty" are types of the old people and
times that are giving place to a new generation and a brighter day.

Among the new enterprises reported at the meeting of the Georgia
Association at Thomasville, Ga., were two churches and several missions
from the vicinity of Columbia, S.C.

I spent Thanksgiving Day at Lowell, N.C. Our mission at this point is
the only church in that vicinity. It was the first Thanksgiving service
they had ever enjoyed or even heard of. It was held in a log cabin.

Lowell is the center of a large negro settlement; the people have had a
hard lot, and but little opportunity to improve their condition. They
are very grateful to hear the Gospel.

Forefather's day was observed by the Nashville churches in the
theological hall of Fisk University. We "spiritual children" of the
Pilgrims honor the fathers whose descendants have enriched us through
the A.M.A. by the schools and churches that have been planted among us.
The church at Lexington, Ky., had a season of "refreshing" in December,
when several heads of families united with it. Howard church, Nashville,
also had an awakening with good results. This church has increased its
membership fifty per cent. in fifteen months. Jackson Street Church,
Nashville, held a recognition service for its new pastor in January.

We were glad to greet the churches and brethren of Louisiana after an
absence from them of two years. The Spain Street Church at New Orleans
held a series of Gospel meetings in which a number avowed their faith in
the Saviour, and the church was strengthened.

Straight University is crowded with an earnest class of students.

This school is doing a great work for the people of Louisiana and
surrounding States. In spite of the hard times, which are very severe in
the South (laborers in Louisiana and some other States receive only
fifty cents a day and board themselves), the people are making great
sacrifices for the education of their children, and our pastors and
teachers are making heroic struggles that the work in school and church
may go forward.

The need of the continuance of the work was never greater and the
results of the service of our workers were never better. To retrench
further at this time would not only cripple the work among the needy
peoples of our field, but shut the door of opportunity in many places,
and injure the people in their efforts to rise, and discourage our
self-sacrificing missionaries. The people are grateful for these schools
and churches and need more of them. We appeal to our Northern friends to
come to the rescue of the American Missionary Association at this time.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SCHOOLBOY'S COMPOSITION.


A little lad six years of age in the primary grade of Knox Institute,
Athens, Ga., attended rhetoricals in which several pupils read
compositions on the subject of America. He was greatly impressed, went
home, and wrote without supervision the composition below. Although he
has put the raccoon, lion and tiger among the birds, it is certainly a
pretty good composition for the first one written by a child six years
of age. Could any of the children six years old to whom THE AMERICAN
MISSIONARY may come do better than this little black boy?

AMERICA.

America is a large country, and it has many large rivers, and it has
many animals, and has wild creatures.

America is a most important country. And many a people like to go there.
And it has many wild birds--mocking birds, nightingale, raccoon, and
also the opossum and lion, tiger, elephant, and the rhinoceros.

And in America there are lakes, seas, and the bushes are so thick that
you can hardly tell when a human is beside them.

The States in America are so large that ten hundred can get in these.
But if one of the animals was to seize you once you would never want to
go there any more, for if one of them get hold of you you would hollow
like anything. It would settle your hash. It would frighten you so much
you never would want to see one of them.

HALL JOHNSON,
Age 6, December 16, 1894.

       *       *       *       *       *

WOMAN'S STATE ORGANIZATIONS.


MAINE.

WOMAN'S AID TO A.M.A.

_State Committee_--Mrs. Ida Vose Woodbury,
  Woodfords; Mrs. A.T. Burbank, Yarmouth;
  Mrs. Helen Quimby, Bangor.


NEW HAMPSHIRE.

FEMALE CENT. INSTITUTION AND HOME MISS. UNION.

  President--Mrs. Cyrus Sargeant, Plymouth.
  Secretary--Mrs. John T. Perry, Exeter.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie A. McFarland, Concord.


VERMONT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.H. Babbitt, W. Brattleboro.
  Secretary--Mrs. M.K. Paine, Windsor.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Wm. P. Fairbanks, St. Johnsbury.


MASS AND R.I.

[A]WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. C.L. Goodell, Boston Highlands, Mass.
  Secretary--Mrs. Louise A. Kellogg, 32 Congregational House, Boston.
  Treasurer--Miss Annie C. Bridgeman, 32 Congregational House, Boston.


CONNECTICUT.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Ellen R. Camp, 9 Camp St., New Britain.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.T. Millard, 36 Lewis St., Hartford.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, 19 Spring St., Hartford.


NEW YORK.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Wm. Kincaid, 483 Green Ave., Brooklyn.
  Secretary--Mrs. Wm. Spalding, 511 Orange St., Syracuse.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.J. Pearsall, 230 Macon St., Brooklyn.


NEW JERSEY.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION OF THE N.J. ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. A.H. Bradford, Montclair.
  Secretary--Mrs. R.J. Hegeman, 32 Forest Street, Montclair.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.H. Dennison, 150 Belleville Ave., Newark.


PENNSYLVANIA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.H. Claflin, 274 Manhattan St., Allegheny.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.F. Jennee, Ridgeway.
  Treasurer--Mrs. T.W. Jones, 511 Woodland Terrace, Philadelphia.


OHIO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President:--Mrs. Sidney Strong, Lane Seminary Grounds, Cincinnati.
  Secretary--Mrs. J.W. Moore, 836 Hough Ave., Cleveland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G.B. Brown, 2116 Warren St., Toledo.


INDIANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W.A. Bell, 221 Christian Ave., Indianapolis.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.E. Mossman, Fort Wayne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F.E. Dewhurst, 28 Christian Ave., Indianapolis.


ILLINOIS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Isaac Claflin, Lombard.
  Secretary--Mrs. C.H. Taintor, 151 Washington St., Chicago.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.A. Field, Wilmette.


IOWA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. T.O. Douglass, Grinnell.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.H. Robbins, Grinnell.
  Treasurer--Miss Belle L. Bentley, 300 Court Ave., Des Moines.


MICHIGAN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. George M. Lane, 179 West Alexandrine Ave., Detroit.
  Secretary--Mrs. J.H. Hatfield, 301 Elm Street, Kalamazoo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Greenville.


WISCONSIN.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. E.G. Updike, Madison.
  Secretary--Mrs. A.O. Wright, Madison.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.M. Blackman, Whitewater.


MINNESOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Katherine W. Nichols, 230 East Ninth Street, St. Paul.
  Secretary--Mrs. A.P. Lyon, 17 Florence Court, S.E., Minneapolis.
  Treasurer--Mrs. M.W. Skinner, Northfield.


NORTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W.P. Cleveland, Caledonia.
  Secretary--Mrs. Silas Daggett, Harwood.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Fisher, Fargo.


SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. A.H. Robbins, Bowdle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.H. Thrall, Huron.
  Treasurer--Mrs. F.H. Wilcox, Huron.


BLACK HILLS, SOUTH DAKOTA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.B. Gossage, Rapid City.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.H. Gilchrist, Hot Springs.
  Treasurer--Miss Grace Lyman, Hot Springs.


NEBRASKA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.T. Duryea, 2402 Cass Street, Omaha.
  Secretary--Mrs. S.C. Dean, 636 31st Street, Omaha.
  Treasurer--Mrs. G.J. Powell, 30th and Ohio Streets, Omaha.


MONTANA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. O.C. Clark, Missoula.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.S. Bell, 410 Dearborn Ave., Helena.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Herbert E. Jones, Livingston.


MISSOURI.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Henry Hopkins, 916 Holmes Street, Kansas City.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.C. Ellis, 2456 Tracy Ave., Kansas City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. K.L. Mills, 1526 Wabash Ave., Kansas City.


KANSAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. F.E. Storrs, Topeka.
  Secretary--Mrs. George L. Epps, Topeka.
  Treasurer--Mrs. D.D. DeLong, Arkansas City.


OREGON.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John Summerville, 108 Second Street, Portland.
  Secretary--Mrs. George Brownell, Oregon City.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.D. Palmer, 546 Third Street, Portland.


WASHINGTON.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. A.J. Bailey, 323 Blanchard Street, Seattle.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.C. Wheeler, 424 South K Street, Tacoma.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.W. George, 620 Fourth Street, Seattle.


CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY SOCIETY.

  President--Mrs. E.S. Williams, 572 12th Street, Oakland.
  Secretary--Mrs. L.M. Howard, 91 Grove Street, Oakland.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.M. Havens, 1329 Harrison Street, Oakland.


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. W.J. Washburn, 510 Downey Ave., Los Angeles.
  Secretary--Mrs. P.J. Colcord, Claremont.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Mary M. Smith, Public Library, Riverside.


NEVADA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. L.J. Flint, Reno.
  Secretary--Miss Margaret N. Magill, Reno.
  Treasurer--Miss Mary Clow, Reno.


INDIAN TERRITORY.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. John McCarthy, Vinita.
  Secretary--Mrs. Fayette Hurd, Vinita.
  Treasurer--Mrs. R.M. Swain, Vinita.


NEW MEXICO.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C.E. Winslow, Albuquerque.
  Secretary--Mrs. E.W. Lewis, 301 So. Edith Street, Albuquerque.
  Treasurer--Mrs. A.W. Jones, Albuquerque.


MISSISSIPPI.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. C.L. Harris, 1421 31st Avenue, Meridian.
  Secretary--Mrs. Edith M. Hall, Tougaloo Univ., Tougaloo.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.H. Turner, 3012 12th Street, Meridian.


LOUISIANA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Miss Bella W. Hume, corner Gasquet and Liberty Streets,
    New Orleans.
  Secretary--Mrs. Matilda Cabrère, New Orleans.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.H. Crawford, Hammond.


ALABAMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. G.W. Andrews, Talladega.
  Secretary--Mrs. J.S. Jackson, Montgomery.
  Treasurer--Mrs. E.C. Silsby, Talladega.


FLORIDA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. S.F. Gale, Jacksonville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Nathan Barrows, Winter Park.
  Treasurer--Mrs. W.D. Brown, Interlachen.


TENNESSEE, KENTUCKY AND ARKANSAS.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION OF THE TENNESSEE
ASSOCIATION.

  President--Mrs. G.W. Moore, Box 8, Fisk Univ., Nashville.
  Secretary--Mrs. Jos. E. Smith, 304 Gilmer Street, Chattanooga.
  Treasurer--Mrs. J.E. Moreland, 216 N. McNairy Street, Nashville.


COLORADO.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. B.C. Valentine, Highlands.
  Secretary--Mrs. Chas. Westley, Box 508, Denver.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Horace Sanderson, 1710 16th Ave., Denver.


WYOMING.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. G.S. Ricker, Cheyenne.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.C. Whipple, Cheyenne.
  Treasurer--Mrs. H.N. Smith, Rock Springs.


OKLAHOMA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.H. Parker, Kingfisher.
  Secretary--Mrs. L.E. Kimball. Guthrie.
  Treasurer--Mrs. L.S. Childs, Choctaw City.


UTAH (Including Southern Idaho).

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. Clarence T. Brown, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary--Mrs. W.S. Hawkes, 135 Sixth Street, E., Salt Lake City,
    Utah.
  Treasurer--Mrs. Dana W. Bartlett, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  Secretary for Idaho--Mrs. Oscar Sonnenkalb, Pocatello, Idaho.


NORTH CAROLINA.

WOMAN'S MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.W. Freeman, Dudley.
  Secretary and Treasurer--Miss A.E. Farrington, High Point.


TEXAS.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. J.M. Wendelkin, Dallas.
  Secretary--Mrs. H. Burt, Lock Box 563, Dallas.
  Treasurer--Mrs. C.I. Scofield, Dallas.


GEORGIA.

WOMAN'S HOME MISSIONARY UNION.

  President--Mrs. H.B. Wey, 253 Forest Avenue, Atlanta.
  Secretary--Mrs. H.A. Kellam, Atlanta.
  Treasurer--Miss Virginia Holmes, Barnesville.

[FOOTNOTE A: For the purpose of exact information we note that, while
the W.H.M.A. appears in this list as a State body for Mass. and R.I., it
has certain auxiliaries elsewhere.]

       *       *       *       *       *

RECEIPTS FOR JANUARY, 1895.

_THE DANIEL HAND FUND
For the Education of Colored People._

Income for January.                            $1,112.50
Previously acknowledged.                       17,210.00
                                              ----------
                                              $18,322.50
                                              ==========


CURRENT RECEIPTS.


MAINE, $1,207.42.

Andover. Mrs. Haskell Bailey, _for
  Blowing Rock, N.C._                               1.00

Auburn. High St. Cong. Ch. (35 of
  which from Ladies of the Woman's
  Branch).                                         50.00

Bath. "A Friend".                                  10.00

Bath. "A Friend," _for Student Aid,
  Talladega, Ala._                                 10.50

Bath. Mrs. Mary A. Fiske, Pkg., _for
  Nat, Ala._, and Pkg. Goods, _for High
  Point, N.C._

Bangor. Indian Rights Assn., by Mrs.
  Denio, _for Hospital, Standing Rock,
  N.D._                                            50.00

Bangor. Central Cong. Ch.                          50.00

Belfast. North Ch., C.E. Soc., _for
  Mountain Work_.                                   5.00

Belfast. First Cong. Ch., Junior End.
  Soc., _for Reindeer, Alaska M._                   1.00

Belfast. Miss Cutter, material for Sewing
  Class, _Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._

Bluehill. H.A. Fisher.                              1.50

Brewer. Manly Hardy.                               10.00

Gardiner. Miss Eleanor Cannard.                   500.00

Hallowell. Mrs. S.B. Gilman, _for
  Thunderhawk M._                                   1.00

Holden. Jun. C.E. Soc, Bbl. C., _for
  High Point, N.C._

Kennebunkport. South Ch., 7; First
  Ch., 3.                                          10.00

Limington. Cong. Ch.                               12.00

Litchfield Center. Mrs. D.T. Smith, _for
  Blowing Rock. N.C._                               2.00

Machias. Box C., _for Marion, Ala._

Madison. Freight to Marion, Ala.                    2.50

Orland. H.T. and S.E. Buck.                        20.00

Portland. State St. Cong. Ch., 190; High
  St. Cong. Ch., 77.51; St. Lawrence St.
  Ch., 5.                                         272.51

Portland. Williston Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Mission S.S., Lexington, Ky._, 2.50;
  Williston Ch. C.E.S., Box Christmas
  Goods, _for Lexington, Ky._                       2.50

Portland. Y.P.S.C.E., Williston Ch.,
  Bbl. C. and Papers, _for High Point, N.C._

Portland. "Friends," Box Christmas
  Goods, _for Marion, Ala._

Saco. Cong. Ch., 7.20; J.W. Littlefield,
  2.50.                                             9.70

Skowhegan. Mrs. L.W. Weston and her
  Sab. Sch. Class (Chinese).                        2.50

Skowhegan. Mrs. L.W. Weston, Bbl. C.
  and Pkg. Christmas Gifts, _for High
  Point, N.C._

South Berwick. Mrs. K.B. Lewis and
  Mrs. Hayman's S.S. Classes, _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                    11.00

South Gardiner. Jun. C.E. Soc., Box C.,
  _for Marion, Ala._

Temple. Cong. Ch.                                   6.51

Westbrook. Cumberland Mills Cong.
  Ch.                                             118.70

Wilton. Cong. Ch.                                   5.75

Winslow. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                       10.00

Yarmouth. Bbl. C., _for High Point, N.C._

_Received for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga._:

    Bangor. Hammond St. Sab.
      Sch.                             10.00

    Bangor. Miss Hattie Mosher,
      Bbl. C.

    Brewer. Y.P.S.C.E.,
      Bbl. C.

    Castine. Elsie Storer, Pkg.
      Christmas Cards.

    Eastport. Mrs. R.H.
      Reynolds, Pkg. Christmas
      Cards.

    Sandy Point. Mrs. Robert
      French, Pkg. Handk'fs.

    Wintersport. Mrs. Emma
      A. Smith, Bbl. C.
                                      ------       10.00


Maine Woman's Aid to A.M.A., by Mrs.
  Ida S. Woodbury, Treas., _for Woman's
  Work_:

    Deer Isle. L.M. Soc.                8.75

    Woodford's. L.M.S.                 13.00
                                       -----       21.75


NEW HAMPSHIRE, $901.96.

Acworth. W. Thayer.                                 5.00

Boscawen. Mrs. P.M. Webster, 2 Bbls.
  C., 2 _for Freight, for Pleasant Hill
  Acad., Tenn._                                     2.00

Candia. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                         15.67

Charlestown. Mrs. Wm. M. Holden.                    1.50

Chester. Cong. Ch. and Soc., 16.22; "A
  Friend," 2.50.                                   18.72

Chester. Miss Isabella Fitz, Pkg. of
  Christmas Cards, _for Thomasville, Ga._

Concord. "A Friend," 5; "A Friend,"
  50c.                                              5.50

Concord. Granite Mission Band, _for
  Student Aid, Gregory N. Inst., Wilmington,
  N.C._                                             5.00

Concord. Box Bedding and Table Linen,
  _for King's Mountain, N.C._

Deerfield. First Cong. Ch.                         16.25

Dunbarton. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., _for
  Gregory Inst._                                    5.25

East Alstead. Cong. Ch., by W.H. Spalter,
  Co. Treas.                                        3.59

East Derry. Ladies' Soc. Cong. Ch., _for
  Freight to Wilmington, N.C._                      2.00

Exeter. Rev. Jacob Chapman.                       100.00

Francestown. Cong. Ch., 7; Dea. M.B.
  Fisher, 5.                                       12.00

Hanover. Dartmouth Sab. Sch., 20, _for
  Indian M._, and 15 _for Mountain Work_.          35.00

Keene. First Cong. Ch., by W.H. Spalter,
  Co. Treas., 50; Sab. Sch. Second
  Cong. Ch., 20.                                   70.00

Lebanon. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        36.00

Lyndeborough. Ladies' Sewing Soc.                  10.00

Manchester. Franklin St. Ch.                       80.23

Milford. Ladies' Charitable Soc., Cong.
  Ch., _for Student Aid, Tougaloo U._              12.00

Newport. Miss Eugenie E. Waite, _for
  McIntosh, Ga._                                    2.50

Penacook. Cong. Ch.                                 4.60

Pittsfield. First Cong. Ch.                        20.16

Plainfield. "S.R.B."                                2.00

Portsmouth. Mission Circle of Little
  Folks, by Miss K. Sweetser, Christmas
  Box, _for Cappahosic, Va._

Rindge. Cong. Ch., by W.H. Spalter,
  Co. Treas.                                       25.25

Rochester. Sab. Sch. of First Cong. Ch.            20.00

Rye. Cong. Ch.                                     20.00

Sanbornton. Cong. Ch.                              21.80

Somersworth. Cong. Ch.                             18.89

South Barnstead. J.O. Tasker, 10; Mrs.
  J.O. Tasker, 5.                                  15.00

Temple. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                         7.55

Tilton. Cong. Ch.                                  32.00

Warner. Cong. Ch.                                   4.00

Webster. Christmas Bbl., _for Kings
  Mountain, N.C._; 1.50 _for Freight_.              1.50

West Manchester. South Main St. Cong.
  Ch.                                              11.00

New Hampshire Female Cent Inst. and
  Home Missionary Union, by Miss
  Annie McFarland, Treas., _for Woman's
  Work_:

    Concord. Y.P.S.C.E. of
      South Ch., _for a Pupil,
      Nat, Ala._                       10.00

    Tamworth. Mrs. Amanda
      M. Davis, _for Negro
      Sch'p_.                          50.00
                                      ------       60.00
                                                 -------
                                                 $701.96

ESTATE.

Rindge. Estate Mersylvia Hubbard, by
  R.A. Hubbard, Executor.                         200.00
                                                 -------
                                                 $901.96


VERMONT, $873.37.

Barnet. Cong. Ch.                                  33.56

Bennington. Second Cong. Ch.                       42.50

Brattleboro. Mary L. Hadley.                       25.00

Burlington. College St. Cong. Ch.                  55.33

Damon's Crossing. Geo. A. Appleton.                10.00

East Poultney. Mrs. Jane G. Wilcox.                10.00

Granby. Infant Class, Mite Boxes, by
  Mrs. J.L. Wells, Teacher. _for Rosebud
  Indian M._                                        1.50

Hardwick. Mrs. E.F. Strickland, _for
  Indian M., Grand River N.D._                     10.00

Lyndon. Mr. Cobb, 1; Rev. P.B. Fisk,
  2, _for Student Aid, Tillotson Inst._             3.00

Middlebury. Mrs. C.S. Burdett, 4; "A
  Friend," 1.                                       5.00

Milton. Y.P.S.C.E. Cong. Ch., _for
  Alaska M._                                        3.10

North Bennington. Y.P.S.C.E., Cong.
  Ch., _for Mountain Work_.                         5.00

North Bennington. Mrs. and Rev. H.D.
  Hall, Bbl. C., _for Grand View,
  Tenn._

North Craftsbury. Cong. Ch.                         5.00

Northfield. "A Friend," to const.
  CHARLES M. DAVIS, GEORGE DENNY
  and CHARLES P. LEONARD L.M.'s.                  100.00

North Springfield. Mrs. C.S. Davis.                 1.00

North Thetford. Cong. Ch.                          12.00

Norwich. Mrs. H. Burton.                            2.00

Post Mills. Cong. Ch.                               6.25

Rutland. John Howard.                               4.00

Saint Albans. Cong. Ch.                            78.47

Saint Johnsbury. North Cong. Ch.                  120.50

South Fairlee. "Christian," _for Thunderhawk
  M._                                               1.00

South Newbury. "Friends," Bbl. C.,
  _for Meridian, Miss._

West Brattleboro. Mrs. Elvira Stedman,
  30, to const. MARIA L. STEDMAN L.M.;
  Cong. Ch., 23.19.                                53.19

West Rutland. Cong. Ch.                            15.00

Woodstock. Cong. Ch.                               12.60

_Received for Dorchester Acad., McIntosh, Ga_:

    Barre. L.M. Soc. Cong.
      Ch., Bbl. C., 1.68 _for
      Freight_.                         1.68

    Barton Landing and Brownington.     2.00

    Berlin. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.,
      Freight paid.

    Brookfield. Cong. Ch.               1.33

    Burlington. Y.P.S.C.E.,
      Box reading matter.
      _Freight paid_.

    Ludlow. L.H.M. Soc.                 2.00

    Manchester. H.M. Soc.               1.58

    Milton. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.,
      2 _for Freight_.                  2.00

    Saint Johnsbury. South
      Ch., _for Freight_.               2.00

    Waitsfield. "Home Circle,"
      Bbl. C., 2 _for
      Freight_.                         2.00

    West Glover. _For freight_.         2.00

    Westminster. Mrs. Arabella
      G. Thompson, 1 and
      Pkg. Pictures, etc.               1.00
                                      ------       17.59

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Vermont, by Mrs. William P. Fairbanks,
  Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

    Bellow's Falls. Jun. C.E.,
      _for Indian Sch'p_.              10.00

    Brattleboro West. Jun. C.E.,
      _for Indian Sch'p_.               5.00

    Burlington. First Ch.,
      W.H.M.S.                         20.00

    Clarendon. Sab. Sch., _for
      Indian Sch'p_.                    1.00

    Montpelier. Jun. C.E., _for
      Indian Sch'p_.                   10.00

    Morrisville. United Workers.        5.00

    New Haven. Munger
      Band, _for Indian Sch'p_.         6.25

    North Pownal. Sab. Sch.,
      _for Indian Sch'p_.               1.00

    Norwich. Sab. Sch., _for
      Indian Sch'p_.                    6.00

    Olcott. Sab. Sch., _for
      Indian Sch'p_.                    5.00

    Rutland. W.H.M.S.                  30.00

    Saint Albans. W.H.M.S.             25.00

    Saint Johnsbury. North
      Ch.                              93.22

    Saint Johnsbury. North
      Ch. S.S. Class, _for Indian
      Sch'p_.                           2.31

    Westminster. W.H.M.S.               3.00
                                      ------      222.78
                                                 -------
                                                 $855.37

ESTATE.

Jericho. Estate of Hosea Spaulding, C.M.
  Spaulding, 10; A.C. Spaulding, 5;
  E.J. Spaulding, 3.                               18.00
                                                 -------
                                                 $873.37


MASSACHUSETTS, $9,182.93.

Amesbury. Union Evan. Ch.                           5.50

Amesbury. Main St. Cong. Ch., by Rev.
  Geo. L. Richmond, _for Indian Sch'p,
  Santee Sch., Neb._                               60.00

Amherst. South Ch.                                 12.00

Andover, South Cong. Ch., 137.54;
  West Cong. Ch., 42.95; West Cong. Sab.
  Sch., 52.40; Free Christian Ch., 10.50.         243.39

Andover. "A New England Aunt," _for
  Thunderhawk M._                                   5.00

Andover. Young Ladies' Soc. Christian
  Workers, So. Ch., _for Straight U._               5.00

Arlington. Cong. Ch.                               50.60

Athol. Cong. Ch.                                  100.07

Auburndale. King's Daughters 2 and
  Bbl. C., _for Blowing Rock, N.C._                 2.00

Bedford. Cong. Ch.                                  0.84

Beverly. North Cong. Ch., _for Evarts,
  Ky._                                             38.56

Beverly. "A Friend," 5; A. Haskell,
  50c.                                              5.50

Blandford. "Willing Hands Circle," _for
  A.G. Sch., Moorhead Miss._                       10.00

Boston. Union Ch.                     154.94

    W.G. Means.                       125.00

    "A Steward of the Master,"
      30, _for Bible Sch., Grand
      View, Tenn._; and 30, _for
      La Moyne Inst., Memphis,
      Tenn._, to const.
      RALPH A. FIELD and Miss
      S. ELLEN HOBART L.M.'s.           60.00

    Benj. F. Dewing.                   50.00

    Sab. Sch. Union Cong. Ch.,
      _for Student Aid, Pleasant
      Hill Acad., Tenn._               50.00

    Mrs. Frederick Jones, 25.25;
      and Bbl. Goods, _for Gloucester
      Sch., Cappahosic,
      Va._                             25.25

    "A Young Friend," _for
      Indian Girl, Santee, Neb._        1.50

    The Whatsoever Band, _for
      Student Aid, Gregory N.
      Inst., Wilmington, N.C._          1.00

    Woman's Soc. Central Ch.,
      Bbls. C., _for Nat, Ala._

    Allston. Mrs. R.H. Bird,
      _for Indian M._                   5.00

    Brighton. Chas. A. Barnard.       200.00

    Dorchester. Second Cong.
      Ch.                             117.68

    Dorchester. Ladies of Pilgrim
      Ch.                               0.50

    Dorchester. Second Ch.,
      B.C. Hardwick.                   75.00

    Neponset, Y.P.S.C.E.
      Trinity Ch.                       6.00

    Roxbury. Walnut Av. Cong.
      Ch.                             131.25

    Roxbury. Sab. Sch., Intermediate
      Dept., Highland,
      Cong. Ch., _Birthday gift
      for Rev. A.A. Myers_.             7.89

    South Boston. Y.L.M.S.
      of Phillips Ch.                   5.00

    West Roxbury. "Helping
      Hands," _for Student Aid,
      Santee Indian Sch._              10.00
                                    --------    1,026.01

Boxboro. Cong. Ch.                                 10.00

Boxford. Mary A. Peabody, Library
  books, _for Moorhead, Miss._

Bridgewater. Central Sq. Cong. Ch.                 22.87

Brimfield. Second Cong. Ch.                         8.57

Brockton. Mrs. Thomas C. Perkins.                   1.50

Brookfield. Cong. Ch.                               6.91

Brookline. Harvard Cong. Ch.                      151.74

Campridgeport. Sab. Sch. Prospect St.
  Cong. Ch., 50, _for Santee Indian M._;
  50 _for Fort Berthold Indian M._; 100
  _for Christian Endeavor Hall, McIntosh,
  Ga._                                            200.00

Cambridgeport. Pilgrim Ch., 33.94: "R.L.S.,"
  25.                                              58.94

Cambridgeport. C.E., 2 Bbls. C., _for
  Marion, Ala._

Campello. Mrs. A. Leach.                            0.50

Chelsea. Soc. of Women Workers,
  Central Cong. Ch., to const. Mrs. DORA
  D. WYLLIE L.M., 37.50; First Ch., 5.             42.50

Chicopee. Y.P.S.C.E. of Third Cong.
  Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
  La._                                             15.00

Dalton. Mrs. James B. Crane, to const.
  MRS. SAMUEL E. GATES, MRS. R.D.
  GAHAN and GEORGE N. PERKINS L.M.'s.              100.00

Dalton. Mrs. Zenas Crane, to const.
  MRS. FRED. PRICE, MRS. LIZZIE L.
  SMITH and MISS JENNIE E. PIERCE
  L.M.'s.                                          100.00

Dalton. Sab. Sch., _for School Building,
  Cumberland Gap, Tenn._                           25.00

Deerfield. "A Friend" in Orthodox Cong.
  Ch., 10; Cong. Ch., ad'l, 2.                     12.00

East Douglas. Second Cong. Ch. and
  Soc.                                             24.83

East Somerville. Mrs. Henry Howard.                10.00

East Weymouth. Cong. Ch.                           27.00

Enfield. Cong. Ch.                                 18.03

Fall River. First Cong. Ch. (15 of which
  _for Indian M._)                                102.72

Fitchburg. Rollstone Cong. Ch., to
  const MRS. ANNIE Z. HITCHCOCK, L.M.              42.00

Foxboro. Mrs. M.N. Phelps.                         50.00

Foxboro. S.S. Children Prim. Dept., _for
  A.G. Sch., Moorhead, Miss._                       7.00

Foxboro. Benevolent Circle, Bbl. C.,
  _for Moorhead, Miss._

Framingham. Plymouth Ch., 26.25; "A
  Friend in So. Cong. Ch," 5.                      31.25

Framingham. "A Friend" _for Indian
  M._                                               5.00

Franklin. First Cong. Soc.                          8.10

Franklin. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C., _for
  Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._

Gardner. First Cong. Ch.                           25.00

Georgetown. Mem. Cong. Ch., 2 Bbls.
  Books, _for Albany, Ga._

Gilbertville. Sab. Sch., _for School Building,
  Cumberland Gap, Tenn._                           20.00

Gilbertville. W.H. Caldwell, _for Student
  Aid, Harrow Sch., Cumberland
  Gap, Tenn._                                      11.00

Gilbertville. Cong. Ch.                             2.60

Gloucester. Trinity Cong. Ch.                      93.97

Hadley. First Cong. Ch., 15.82; Sab.
  Sch. of First Cong. Ch., 16.56.                  32.38

Haverhill. North Cong. Ch., 200.00;
  West Parish Cong. Ch., 13.                      213.00

Haverhill. Sab. Sch. West Parish Cong.
  Ch. (5 of which from "Class One," _for
  Fisk U._)                                        14.55

Haverhill. Y.P.S.C.E, West Ch.
  (Extra cent-a-day)                                6.95

Haverhill. S.S. Class, West Cong. Ch.,
  Lesson Picture Roll, _for Thomasville,
  Ga._

Haydenville. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     6.18

Ipswich. South Cong. Ch.                           40.00

Lancaster. Evan. Sab. Sch.                          8.36

Lawrence. Cong. Ch.                                10.00

Leicester. First Cong. Ch.                         50.29

Leicester. C.E., _for Sch. Building,
  Cumberland Gap, Tenn._                            2.00

Leominster. Geo. H. Wheelock.                       5.01

Lexington. Hancock Cong. Ch.                       11.01

Lowell. Kirk St. Cong. Ch., 83.45; First
  Cong. Ch., 59.; Mrs. Mary Stetson,
  5.15.                                           147.60

Lowell. Mrs. Frederick Bailey's S.S.
  Class, _for Student Aid, Ballard Normal
  Inst._                                           27.00

Lowell. A.D. Carter, _for Sufferers in
  Nebraska_.                                       25.00

Ludlow. Junior Soc. C.E. Union Ch., 5,
  _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill Acad.,
  Tenn., 5 for Allen Normal Sch.,
  Thomasville, Ga._                                10.00

Malden. Mrs. E.P. Forster.                         10.00

Malden. Jun. Soc. C.E. First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Indian M., Standing Rock, N.D._              5.00

Malden. Mrs. J.C.K. Ivy and Friends,
  Bbl. C.; Mrs. R.P. Kemp, and Friends,
  Bbl. C., etc., _for Cappahosic, Va._

Maplewood. Two Bbls. C. and Box
  Books, _for High Point, N.C._

Marblehead. First Cong. Ch.                        17.00

Medford. W.M. Soc. of Union Cong.
  Ch., 5; Union Cong. Ch., 3.25.                    8.25

Medway. Village Cong. Ch.                          25.00

Methuen. Wide Awake Mission Band of
  First Cong. Ch., _for repairs on Church
  Steeple, Abbeville, La._                         11.00

Methuen. Mrs. S.J. Searle.                          1.00

Middleboro. Mrs. A.B. Carleton, _for
  Thunderhawk U._                                   1.00

Middleton. Willing Workers, _for Student
  Aid, Harrow Sch., Cumberland
  Gap, Tenn._                                       3.00

Milford. Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E.,
  Christmas Box, _for Grand View, Tenn._

Milford. Mrs. Hulda E. Woodbury,
  Articles _for Woodbury and Denison
  Rooms, Grand View Nor. Inst., Tenn._

Milton. ---- _for Student Aid, Lincoln
  Acad., King's Mt., N.C._                          2.75

Millbury. M.D. Garfield.                           15.00

Monson. Miss Sarah E. Bradford, 5; Mrs.
  C.O. Chapin, 5.                                  10.00

Monterey. Extra Cent-a-day Band, by
  Miss Jessie A. Townsend.                          7.00

Natick. First Cong. Ch.                           100.00

New Bedford. Mrs. I.E. Jenney, _for
  Mountain Work_.                                   5.00

New Bedford. Miss E.F. Leonard, Toys
  for Christmas, _Thomasville, Ga._

New Boston. "Ten Endeavorers".                      6.00

Newburyport. Miss M.W. Tilton.                      5.00

Newburyport. Mrs. M.J. Green, 2 Bbls.
  C., _for Albany, Ga._

Newton. Eliot Ch.                                  51.99

Newton. J.W. Davis, _for Indian M.,
  Grand River, N.D._                               50.00

Newton Center. First Cong. Ch., 81.20;
  Miss M.E. Eaton, 10.                             91.20

Newton Highlands. "Two Friends,"
  _bal. Sch'p, Pleasant Hill, Tenn._               42.00

Northampton. Mrs. Lucy S. Sanderson,
  _for Thunderhawk M._                             50.00

Northampton. Miss F.A. Clark.                      25.00

Northampton. Miss Fanny Clark, Box
  C., _for Lexington, Ky._

North Beverly. Mrs. M.A. Baker, Bbl.
  C., _for Students, Grand View, Tenn._

North Brookfield. First Cong. Ch.                  35.51

North Falmouth. Mrs. H.A. Nye.                      0.25

North Weymouth. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                  15.00

Norton. Mrs. E.B. Wheaton.                        100.00

Norwood. First Cong. Ch.                          113.05

Oxford. Cong. Ch., to const. MISS LAURA
  D. STOCKWELL L.M.                                57.45

Pepperell. Cong. Ch., 31.06; Mrs. J.H.
  Hall _for Orange Park, Fla._, 4.50.              35.56

Pittsfield. Miss Martin, 20; Miss Mary
  L. Adam, 2 _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
  La._                                             22.00

Quincy. Evan. Cong. Ch., 70, and Sab.
  Sch., 11 (of which 1 from Mr. Wason's
  Class), 81; Woman's Miss. Soc., 2.               83.00

Reading. Cong. Ch.                                 22.10

Richmond. King's Daughters, _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                    30.00

Rockland. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. J.S.
  GRAY L.M.                                        40.00

Rehoboth. Cong. Ch.                                10.00

Salem. South Cong. Ch., Primary Class
  and Teacher, _for Student Aid, Gregory
  N. Inst., Wilmington, N.C._                       3.00

Sharon. Cong. Ch., bal. to const. ROBERT
  HAMILTON L.M.                                    21.50

Shelburne. Cong. Ch.                               41.00

Southampton. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., to
  const. ELLA M. TIFFANY L.M.                      33.11

Southampton. Bbl. and Box Bedding,
  etc., _for King's Mountain, N.C._

South Ashburnham. Bbl. C., _for King's
  Mountain, N.C._

Southbridge. Cong. Ch., 33.54; Mrs.
  Franklin Carter. 50c.                            34.04

South Deerfield. Lucelia E. Williams.               1.00

South Hadley. Mount Holyoke College,
  _for Student Aid, Fisk U._                       35.00

South Hadley Falls. Cong. Ch. Jun. C.E.S.,
  Bbl. C., etc., _for Wilmington, N.C._

Spencer, "Extra Cent-a-day Band,"
  First Cong. Ch.                                  30.00

Springfield. Park Cong. Ch., 29.15;
  ----, 1.                                         30.15

Springfield. Mrs. C.F. Hobart, _for
  Mountain Work_.                                  50.00

Springfield. Sab. Sch. Hope Ch., _for
  Sch. Building, Cumberland Gap, Tenn._             5.00

Springfield. Miss Helen M. Towne, Bbl.
  C., _for Moorhead, Miss._

Stockbridge. Miss Alice Byington, 250
  _for Chapel, Rock Creek, N.D._, and 250
  _for Thunderhawk M._                            500.00

Stockbridge. Miss Brewer, _for Thunderhawk
  M._                                              10.00

Swampscott. Cong. Ch., to const. JAMES
  M. POPE L.M.                                     30.00

Tapleyville. Miss Sarah Richmond, _for
  Campton, Ky._                                     3.00

Tapleyville. May P. Grover.                         1.00

Taunton. Mrs. David Pollard, _for Indian
  M._                                              10.00

Turners Falls. Christmas Offering, Cong.
  Y.P.S.C.E., _for Central Ch., New
  Orleans, La._                                     6.00

Wakefield. "Opportunity Circle," _for
  Thunderhawk M._                                   5.00

Walpole. Rev. Geo. Langdon.                         1.00

Waltham. Trin. Cong. Ch.                            9.55

Ware. Sab. Sch. East Cong. Ch., _for
  Mountain Work_.                                    40.00

Ware. Primary Dept. Sab. Sch., Cong.
  Ch., _for Children, Rosebud Indian M._              7.53

Ware. Sab. Sch., _for Christmas Tree,
  Meridian, Miss._                                  4.00

Ware. Miss Gage's S.S. Class, Cong.
  Ch., Bbl. C., _for Macon, Ga._

Warren. Cong. Ch., to const. MRS. NELLIE
  F. ADAMS, H. MELVERN UNDERWOOD,
  MISS MINNIE J. WASHBURN, MRS.
  REBECCA SHAW, FRANK E. GLEASON,
  MRS. EMMA F. CURTIS and MISS ELLEN
  F. CUTLER L.M.'s.                               200.00

Wellesley Hills. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                48.06

Wendell. Cong. Ch.                                  3.45

Westboro. Ladies' Freedmen's Assn.
  and "Friends," 20 _for Pleasant Hill,
  Tenn._; 20 _for Tougaloo U._, and to const.
  MISS AMELIA HARRINGTON L.M.                      40.00

Westboro. "Life Member".                            1.00

Westboro. Freedmen's Aid Soc., Cong.
  Ch., Pkg. Christmas Cards, _for Thomasville,
  Ga._, and Bbl. C., _for Saluda,
  N.C._

West Boxford. Cong. Ch. Ladies' Aid
  Soc., _for Student Aid, Chandler Sch.,
  Lexington, Ky._                                   9.00

West Brookfield. Cong. Ch., bal. to
  const. MRS. JENNIE K. LIVERMORE
  L.M.                                             26.52

West Medford. Mrs. Stebbins.                        1.00

West Medway. Dorcas H.M. Soc.,
  Third Cong. Ch., _for Nat, Ala._                  2.00

Westport. Pacific Union Cong. Ch.                  12.50

West Springfield. Mrs. E.D. Bliss, 2 of
  which _for Tougaloo U._ and 2 _for Santee
  Indian M._                                        8.00

Weymouth Heights. Y.P.S.C.E. and
  "Other Friends," _for Nat, Ala._                 11.00

Whitinsville. Sab. Sch. of Cong. Ch.              101.26

Williamstown. First Cong. Ch.                      25.07

Winchester. First Cong. Ch. (1 of which
  _for Indian M._)                                138.09

Winchester. "Friends," 3 Bbls. C., etc.,
  _for Meridian, Miss._

Woburn. First Cong. Ch.                           157.75

Wollaston. Money Order.                             0.50

Worcester. Union Ch., 104.34; Piedmont
  Ch., 50; Mrs. Wm. H. Sanford, 2.                156.34

Worcester. Plymouth Ch., _for Campton,
  Ky._                                             22.00

---- "A Friend".                                  100.00

Hampden Benevolent Association, by
  George R. Bond, Treas.:

    South Hadley Falls.                 5.24

    West Springfield. Ladies'
      First Cong. Ch., _for
      Central Ch., New Orleans,
      La._                             10.00
                                      ------       15.24

_Received for Dorchester Academy, McIntosh,
  Ga._:

    Athol. W.C.T.U., Bbl. C.

    Curtisville. Bbl. C., 75c. _for
      Freight_.                         0.75

    Dorchester. Rev. Hiram
      Houston, 2 Bbls. C.

    Great Barrington. Y.P.S.C.E.,
      _for Student Aid_.               14.00

    Maplewood. Mrs. Frank
      Parker, Bbl. C.

    North Brookfield. Miss
      Laura Miller, Bbl. C.
                                      ------       14.75

Woman's Home Missionary Association
  of Mass. and R.I., Annie C. Bridgman,
  Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

    W.H.M.A., _for Salaries
      of Teachers_.                   338.47

    Melrose Highlands. Aux.             6.50

    Roxbury. Walnut Av. Ch.
      Aux.                             58.50

    Roxbury. Walnut Av. Ch.            20.56
                                     -------      424.03
                                               ---------
                                               $6,941.38

                 ESTATES.

Enfield. Estate of Mrs. Sarah H. Blodgett,
  by Daniel B. Gillett, Executor.               1,000.00

Enfield. Estate of J.B. Woods, by
  Robert M. Woods, Trustee.                        80.00

Greenfield. Estate R.W. Cook.                      62.50

Greenfield. Estate of Hon. William B.
  Washburn, Wm. N. Washburn and
  Franklin G. Fessenden, Executors.                22.93

Holliston. Estate of George Batchelder,
  by J.M. Batchelder, Agent.                       26.12

North Brookfield. Estate of Mrs. Eliza
  W. Johnson, by Abbie W. Whiting,
  Executrix.                                       50.00

Topsfield. Estate of Charles Herrick, by
  Robert Lake, Executor.                        1,000.00
                                               ---------
                                               $9,132.93

CLOTHING, BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED AT BOSTON
  OFFICE:

Lyndeboro, N.H. Cong. Ch., Communion
  Service, _for Big Creek Gap, Ky._

Lynn, Mass. Geo. H. Martin, Box Sch.
  Books, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Northboro. Miss A.M. Small, Picture
  Rolls, _for Pleasant Hill, Tenn._

Weymouth. Rev. John M. Lord, 2 Boxes
  Books, _for Straight U._


RHODE ISLAND, $178.99.

Chepachet. Cong. Ch.                               30.00

East Providence. Children's Band of
  Newman Cong. Ch.                                  2.50

Little Compton. United Cong. Ch.                   24.64

Newport. United Cong. Ch.                          14.54

Pawtucket. Cong. Ch.                               52.36

Providence. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., 34.20;
  Woman's F.H.M. Union, 8; Free
  Evan. Cong. Ch., 10; Y.P.S.C.E.,
  North Cong. Ch., 1.75; Union Cong.
  Ch., ad'l, 1.                                    54.95


CONNECTICUT, $5,579.84.

Berlin. Second Cong. Ch.                           27.00

Bethel. First Cong. Ch., 50.87; "A
  Friend," 5.                                      55.87

Bloomfield. Cong. Ch.                               5.84

Bridgeport. Olivet Ch., Mizpah Circle,
  K.D., Bbl. Christmas Goods, _for Marion,
  Ala._

Bristol. Cong. Ch.                                 50.00

Brooklyn. Young Mission Workers, by
  Philip Trumbull White, Treas., _for
  Alaska M._                                        2.00

Chester. G.M. Turner, _for Christmas,
  King's Mountain, N.C._                            5.00

Cornwall. First Cong. Ch.                          56.56

Cornwall. Sab. Sch. of First Ch., _for
  Allen Normal Sch., Thomasville, Ga._             47.06

Danbury. First Cong. Ch.                           27.24

Danielsonville. Westfield Cong. Ch. and
  Soc.                                             33.45

Deep River. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                     21.28

East Hartford. First Cong. Ch.                    114.05

East Hartford. Benev. Soc., by Mrs. M.A.
  Street, Sec., Bbl. C., _for Grand
  View, Tenn._

East Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                      12.39

Enfield. First Cong. Ch.                           27.80

Farmington. First Cong. Ch., Henry D.
  Hawley, to const. PAUL WALENBURG and
  JAMES PATTERSON L.M.'s.                         100.00

Goshen. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Grand
  View, Tenn._

Guilford. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  SAMUEL D. BLATCHLEY L.M.                         30.00

Haddam. Cong. Y.P.S.C.E., _for Central
  Ch., New Orleans, La._                            2.25

Hamden. Mrs. E.D. Swift.                            2.00

Hartford. Asylum Hill Cong. Ch.,
  313.94; First Cong. Ch., 109.08; Fourth
  Cong. Ch., 21.23.                               444.25

Hartford. Sab. Sch., Pearl St. Cong. Ch.,
  _for Industrial Work, Fisk U._                   40.00

Hartford. Mrs. E.R. Rexford, _for Student
  Aid, Saluda Sem. N.C._                           25.00

Hartford. Sab. Sch., Central Ch., _for
  Central Ch., New Orleans, La._                   18.00

Hebron. Ladies' Benev. Soc. First Cong.
  Ch., Bbl. C., _for Thomasville, Ga._

Kensington. Cong. Ch., 26.08; William
  Upson, 10; Miss Mary H. Upson, 5.                41.08

Kent. Mrs. Randolph Frisbie, Box C.,
  _for Thomasville, Ga._

Lakeville. Mrs. S.P. Robbins, _for
  Mountain Work_.                                   4.50

Ledyard. Cong. Ch., 25; Sab. Sch. Cong.
  Ch., 2.10.                                       27.10

Lyme. First Cong. Ch., 50; "A Friend,"
  5.                                               55.00

Meriden. First Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                    50.00

Meriden. Member First Cong. Ch., _for
  Indian M._                                        5.00

Meriden. "A Friend".                               10.00

Middletown. Sab. Sch. First Ch.                    35.00

Montville Center. Cong. Sch.                        7.50

Morris. Cong. Ch.                                  10.00

Mount Carmel. Cong. Ch.                            24.22

Mount Carmel. Cong. Ch., _for Indian M._            6.60

Mystic. Cong. Ch.                                  20.45

Nepaug. Cong. Ch.                                   7.00

New Britain. South Cong. Ch., 173.79;
  First Ch. of Christ, to const. MISS ELLEN
  N. TRACY and JOHN NORTHEND L.M.'s,
  67.67.                                          241.46

New Britain. Sab. Sch., South Ch., _for
  Mountain Work_.                                  25.00

New Britain. First Ch. "Mission
  Helpers," Box C., _for Saluda, N.C._

New Canaan. Sab. Sch., Cong. Ch., _for
  a Teacher, Santee Indian Sch._                  100.00

New Canaan. F.H. Gleason.                          10.00

New Haven. Mrs. H. Farnum, _for
  Thunderhawk M._                                  50.00

New Haven. Second Cong. Ch., 41.95;
  Sab. Sch., College St. Cong. Ch., 15.            56.95

New Haven. Friends in Y.P.S.C.E.,
  United Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
  La._                                              3.00

New Haven. Y.P.S.C.E., Ch. of the
  Redeemer, ad'l _for Central Ch., New
  Orleans, La._                                     1.00

New Haven. Children of Orphan Asylum,
  2 Pkgs. Cards, _for McIntosh, Ga._

New London. First Church of Christ.                45.76

New London. "A Friend in First Ch. of
  Christ".                                         25.00

New London. Chinese and Teachers,
  First Ch. of Christ, by Mary G. Brainard,
  _for Cal. Chinese M._                            10.00

New Preston. Mrs. E.C. Williams.                    2.00

Newtown. Cong. Ch.                                  7.00

Norfolk. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                       123.85

North Granby. First Cong. Ch.                       4.51

Norwalk. First Cong. Ch., to const. MRS.
  GEORGE R. HENDRICKSON, L.M.                      52.35

Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., 71.50;
  First Cong. Ch., 55.27; Greenville
  Cong. Ch., 20.                                  146.77

Norwich. Sab. Sch., Broadway Cong.
  Ch., _for Mountain Work in Tenn._                25.00

Norwich. Sab. Sch., Greenville Cong.
  Ch., _for Mountain Work_.                         9.00

Norwich. Park Ch. Y.P.S.C.E., Bbl.
  C., _for Grand View, Tenn._

Norwich. Second Cong. Ch., Christmas
  Box, _for Athens, Ala._

Norwich. L.H.M.S., Greenville Ch.,2
  Bbls. C., _for McIntosh, Ga._

Old Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                64.20

Orange. Mrs. E.C. Russell's S.S. Class,
  _for Indian M._                                   3.25

Orange. Ladies' Soc., 1.50 and Dining
  Room Carpet, _for Knoxville, Tenn._               1.50

Plainfield. Miss S.E. Francis, Bbl. C.,
  _for Students, Grand View, Normal
  Inst., Tenn._

Pomfret. Cong. Ch.                                 41.67

Preston City. Cong. Ch.                            14.60

Ridgefield. First Cong. Ch.                        30.00

Roxbury. Cong. Ch.                                  5.20

Salisbury. Cong. Ch.                               57.95

Scitico. "A Friend," _for Indian M._                3.00

Somers. "A Friend".                                10.00

Sound Beach. Pilgrim Cong. Ch., Jun. Y.P.S.C.E.,
  _for King's Mountain, N.C._                       2.00

South Hartford. Cong. Ch. Ladies' Sew.
  Soc., Bbl. C., _for Wilmington, N.C._

Southington. ----, _for ed. of "Little
  Mary," Gregory Inst._                             5.00

Southington. First Cong. Ch., Bbl. C.,
  _for Grand View, Tenn._

Southport. "A Friend," _for Mountain
  Work_.                                           50.00

South Windsor. First Cong. Ch.                     39.35

Suffield. Mission Band, First Ch., Bbl.
  C., _for Grand View, Tenn._

Talcottville. Mrs. Rose J. Talcott,
  Christmas Cards, _for Grand View,
  Tenn._

Thomaston. First Cong. Ch.                         11.28

Thomaston. Primary Dept. Sab. Sch.
  First Cong. Ch., _for the Children of
  Rosebud Indian M._                               11.00

Torrington. Junior End. Soc. Third
  Cong. Ch., _for Central Ch., New Orleans,
  La._                                              2.00

Unionville. First Church of Christ, 30;
  Mrs. James A. Smith, 25.                         55.00

Wallingford. "S.H.B."                              20.00

Warrenville. "A Friend".                            5.00

Westbrook. "A Lady".                                5.00

Westchester. Christian Bees (H.W.S.),
  Bbl. C., _for Moorhead, Miss._

West Hartford. Anson Chappell.                     12.00

West Hartford. Mrs. M.L. Whitman,
  _for Saluda, N.C._                                1.72

West Hartford. Christian Workers Assn.,
  H.M. Dept., Box C., _for Saluda, N.C._

West Haven. Cong. Ch., and Soc.                    18.75

Westport. Saugatuck Cong. Ch.                      25.58

Winsted. Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch., _for
  Industrial Work, Fisk U._                        26.66

West Winsted. Mrs. C.J. Camp, _for
  furnishing New Hall, Tillotson Inst._             2.00

Windsor. First Cong. Ch., to const. MRS.
  WM. O. HAYDEN and MRS. WALTER
  LOOMIS L.M.'s.                                    70.00

Woodbridge. Cong. Ch.                              11.24

Woodbury. First Cong. Ch.                           5.00

Woman's Cong. Home Missionary Union
  of Conn., Mrs. W.W. Jacobs, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Hartford. "A Friend, First
      Ch.," Jun. Aux.                  30.00

    Kent. Sab. Sch. Cong.
      Ch.                              10.00

    Manchester. First Ch. L.B.
      Soc.                             22.00

    New Haven. United Ch.
      Ladies' Aid Soc., _for Central
      Church, New Orleans_.            27.50

    Norwalk. S.S. Circles
      Aux. to L.B. Assn. of
      First Ch., _for Student
      Aid, Grand View, Normal
      Sch._                            35.00

    Suffield. Y.L.M. Circle.           12.50

    Thompson. Aux.                     18.00
                                      ------      155.00
                                               ---------
                                               $3,154.09

ESTATES.

Cornwall. Estate of S.C. Beers.                   106.55

Groton. Estate of Mrs. B.N. Hurlbutt.             319.20

Simsbury. Estate of Cordelia E. Wilcox,
  by C.H. Eno, Executor.                          500.00

West Hartford. Estate of Nancy S. Gaylord,
  Francis H. Parker, Executor.                  1,500.00
                                               ---------
                                               $5,579.84


NEW YORK, $6,136.78.

Albany. Miss A. Van Vrankin, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                 2.75

Batavia. Miss F.P. Rice, _for A.G. Sch.,
  Moorhead, Miss._                                  5.00

Bayshore, L.I. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                  6.73

Berkshire. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong. Ch.                  4.98

Binghamton. Mrs. J.E. Bean, _for
  Indian M._                                       10.00

Brockport. Normal Sch., _for Lincoln
  Normal Sch., Marion, Ala._                        2.00

Brooklyn. Clinton Ave. Cong. Ch.                  300.00

Brooklyn. Clinton Ave, Cong. Sab. Sch.,
  _for Student Aid, Pleasant Hill Acad.,
  Tenn._                                           50.00

Brooklyn. Miss Ellen Thurston, _for
  Santee Indian Sch._                              50.00

Brooklyn. Sab. Sch. Central Cong. Ch.,
  _for Teacher, Santee Indian Sch._                37.50

Brooklyn. Evangel. Circle of Lewis Av.
  Cong. Ch.                                         1.00

Brooklyn. Young Ladies' Guild Clinton
  Ave. Cong. Ch., Box, _for the Home, Lexington,
  Ky._; New Eng. Ch., Christmas
  Box, _for Athens, Ala._; New Eng. Ch.
  Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C. and Christmas
  Goods, _for Marion, Ala._; Lee Av.
  Cong. Ch., 2 Boxes C., _for Kings Mountain,
  N.C._

Buffalo. People's Ch.                               8.09

Cambridge. H. Cornelia Gilbert.                     6.00

Camden. Cong. Ch., Large Box C.,
  _for Hillsboro, N.C._

Canandaigua. First Cong. Ch., of which
  50.45 _for Santee Indian M._                     64.09

Chittenango. Mrs. Amelia L. Brown.                  5.00

Clifton Springs. "A Friend".                        8.00

Cohoes. Special Meeting, First Baptist
  Ch., _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic,
  Va._                                             40.83

Coventry. Mrs. S.A. Beardslee.                     10.00

Elizabethtown. Cong. Ch.                           17.35

Fairport. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                      10.00

Fillmore. L.L. Nourse.                              4.00

Franklin. Cong. Ch.                                18.85

Gloversville. Mrs. Catherine Van Voast,
  by Rev. W.E. Park.                                2.00

Granby Center. Mrs. J.C. Harrington.                5.00

Haverstraw. Rev. A.S. Freeman, _for
  Student Aid, Fisk U._                             5.00

Jamestown. ----, _for Student Aid,
  Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._                       2.00

Lebanon. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                        5.00

Le Roy. Miss D.A. Phillips.                        10.00

Little Falls. Mrs. F.D. Emerson, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                 2.00

Lockport. First Cong. Ch., W.H.M.S.
  and Sab. Sch., Box Christmas Goods,
  _for Marion, Ala._

Millers Place. S.B. Jones.                          2.00

Moravia. _For Freight_.                             2.00

Morrisania. Fourth Ave. Cong. Ch. C.E.
  Soc.                                             25.00

Mount Morris. Cypress Band, Bbl. C.,
  _for Moorhead, Miss._

Mount Vernon. Cong. Ch., 11.12; Sab.
  Sch. Cong. Ch., 11.88.                           23.00

New York. Sab. Sch. Missionary. Assn.,
  Broome St. Tab., 25 _for One Share_;
  His Willing Circle of King's Daughters,
  Broome St. Tab., 9.12, by Miss C.A.
  Freeman.                                         34.12

New York. Mrs. L.H. Spelman, _for
  Central Ch., New Orleans, La._, and to
  const. MRS. JESSIE TAYLOR L.M.                   30.00

New York. Miss D.E. Emerson, _for A.G.
  Sch., Moorhead, Miss._, and to const.
  MRS. MARY CORA BENNER L.M.                       30.00

New York. Mrs. M.D. Wicker.                        25.00

New York. M.M. Snowden, _for Gloucester
  Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                            1.00

New York. Mrs. Fred. Billings, 2 doz.
  pieces Practice Cloth, _for Macon, Ga._

New York. B. Van Wagenen, Box Candy,
  _for Marion, Ala._

North Walton. Union Miss. Soc.                     15.90

Ogdensburg. ---- Soc., Box Bedding,
  Freight paid, _for Knoxville, Tenn._

Orient. Cong. Ch.                                   7.60

Oswego Falls. First Cong. Ch.                       4.50

Port Chester. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                   5.00

Poughkeepsie. First Cong. Ch.                      23.28

Rushville. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Greenwood,
  S.C._

Sayville. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                      12.97

Sidney. Cong. Ch.                                  19.75

Sherburn. Mrs. Tucker, Christmas Gifts,
  _for Jonesboro, Tenn._

Spencerport. Miss Mary E. Dyer.                     5.00

Syracuse. Plym. Cong. Ch.                          23.84

Troy. Mrs. S. Tappins, 2; Mrs. D.
  Baldwin and Friends, Bbl., _for Cappahosic,
  Va._                                              2.00

Vernon Center. Rev. G.C. Judson.                    5.00

Verona. E. Day.                                    10.00

Warsaw. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Intermediate
  Dept., _for Student Aid, Big
  Creek Gap, Tenn._                                 9.00

West Bloomfield. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                5.15

West Winfield. Cong. Ch.                           17.75

Woodhaven. Junior C.E. Soc., Bbl. C.,
  _for Moorhead, Miss._

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.Y.,
  by Mrs. J.J. Pearsall, Treas., _for
  Woman's Work_:

    Albany. First Cong. Ch.,
      C.E.                             10.00

    Aquebogue. H.M.U.                  18.00

    Barryville. W.M.S.                  2.00

    Brooklyn. Park Ch., L.M.S.          6.00

    Churchville. Sab. Sch.
      Mission Circle.                   5.00

    Flushing. S.S. of First
      Cong. Ch.                        36.00

    Ithaca. W.H.M.S.                   10.00

    New York. Broadway Tab.
      Ch. Soc.                         93.25

    Syracuse. Geddes Ch., W.M.S.       14.00

    Warsaw. C.E.                       10.50
                                      ------      204.75
                                               ---------
                                               $1,236.78

ESTATE.

Lockport. Estate of Edward Simmons.             4,900.00
                                               ---------
                                               $6,136.78


NEW JERSEY, $239.50.

Chatham. Sab. Sch. Stanley Cong. Ch.               10.00

Colts Neck. Reformed Ch.                            3.43

Hammonton. Miss Carrie E. Alden, _for
  Student Aid, Dorchester Acad., McIntosh,
  Ga._                                              4.00

Monroe. "Temperance Legion," Pkg.
  Papers and Cards, _for Beach Inst.,
  Savannah, Ga._

Roselle. "A Friend" (50 of which _for
  Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn., Girls
  Dept._)                                         150.00

Trenton. Mrs. O.S. Fuller.                          5.00

Upper Montclair. Sab. Sch. Christian
  Union Cong. Ch.                                  34.87

Westfield. Ministering Children's
  League, Box Gifts, _for McIntosh, Ga._
  ----. "M.N.E."                                   10.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of the
  N.J. Assn., by Mrs. J.H. Denison,
  Treas., _for Woman's Work_:

    Bound Brook. Sunbeam
      Mission Circle.                   6.04

    Philadelphia, Pa. Central
      Cong. Ch., W.H.M.S.              11.16

    Washington, D.C. Missionary
      Circle and Juniors,
      Plymouth Cong. Ch.                5.00
                                      ------       22.20


PENNSYLVANIA, $43.34.

Coudersport. John S. and Mary W.
  Mann.                                             5.00

Edwardsdale. Welsh Cong. Ch.                        5.00

Germantown. Mrs. B.R. Smith, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                 2.34

Germantown. Mrs. B.R. Smith and
  Friends, Bbl., _for Cappahosic, Va._

Guy's Mills. Mrs. F.M. Guy.                         5.00

Philadelphia. Mrs. Rebecca White, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                10.00

Scranton. Providence Welsh Cong. Ch.                2.00

Scranton. F.K. Tracy, _for Blacksmith
  Shop, Selma, Ala._                                5.00

South Bethlehem. Charles E. Webster.                4.00

Tarentum. Ref. Presb. Ch., L.M.S.,
  Bbl. C., _for Marion, Ala._

Wilkesbarre. Puritan Cong. Ch.                      5.00


OHIO, $1,120.46.

Akron. First Cong. Ch.                              6.00

Akron. Sab. Sch. West Cong. Ch.                     5.00

Bellevue. Jun. C.E.S., by Mrs. Rev. C.K.
  Swartz, Box Dolls, etc., _for Grand
  View, Tenn._

Cincinnati. Lawrence St. Cong. Ch., 31;
  Columbia Cong. Ch., 10.51.                       41.51

Cincinnati. Storrs Cong. Ch., _for Campton,
  Ky._                                              4.45

Claridon. Mrs. Bruce, _for Thunderhawk
  M._                                              25.00

Cleveland. Lewis Ford, 200; Pilgrim
  Ch., 100.85; Sab. Sch. First Cong. Ch.,
  20.30; Lorain St. Mission, 5; Olivet
  Cong. Ch., 2.01; Mrs. Fanny W. Low, 5.          333.16

Cleveland. L.H.M. Soc. Euclid Av.
  Ch., Bbl. C., _for Hillsboro, N.C._

Cleveland. Mrs. A.J. Smith, Box C.;
  Mothers' Meeting. Pkg. C. _for Cumberland
  Gap, Tenn._

Conneaut. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                    25.00

Dover. Junior Soc., Christmas Gifts;
  Other Friends, Clothing, _for Jonesboro,
  Tenn._

Elyria. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                        20.00

Gustavus. First Cong. Ch., ad'l.                    1.00

Huntsburg. Cong. Ch. Sab. Sch., 5; C.E.,
  1.                                                6.00

Kingsville. "A Friend," 30; Miss Eliza
  S. Comings, 10.                                  40.00

Lyme. Cong. Ch.                                    16.82

Mansfield. First Cong. Ch. (1 of which
  _for Indian M., Santee, Neb._) and to
  const. MRS. LEWIS BOWERS, MRS. V.M.
  DICKSON, PROF. A.J. SCHANCK and DR.
  J. LILLIAN MCBRIDE L.M.'s.                      140.27

Marysville. Bbl. C., 1 _for Freight, for
  Marion, Ala._                                     1.00

Mesopotamia. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C. and
  Bedding, _for Cumberland Gap, Tenn._

North Fairfield. G.M. Keeler.                       1.00

North Fairfield. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C.,
  _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._

Oak Hill. King's Daughters, Patchwork,
  _for Macon, Ga._

Oberlin. First Cong. Ch., 71.43; Dr.
  Dudley Allen, 30, to const. REV. R.
  HICKS L.M.                                      101.43

Oberlin. Miss L.C. Wattles, _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                    20.00

Oberlin. Wm. M. Mead, 10; Mrs. Maria
  Goodale Frost, 5.                                15.00

Oberlin. Mrs. H.P. Kennedy, Bbl. C.,
  _for Moorhead, Miss._

Oberlin. Second Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for
  Wilmington, N.C._

Oberlin. First Ch. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C.,
  _for Tougaloo U._

Painesville. First Cong. Ch., 34.73; Enterprise
  Mission Circle by Mabel Curtiss,
  5.                                               39.73

Plain. Cong. Ch., 3.19; Sab. Sch. Cong.
  Ch., 5.30.                                        8.49

Saybrook. "Mission Band," by Louise
  Hilkert, Treas.                                   4.90

Shawnee. First Cong. Ch.                            3.50

Toledo. First Cong. Ch.                           112.50

Wauseon. Cong. Ch., Y.P.S.C.E., _for
  Student Aid, Williamsburg Acad.,
  Ky._                                              8.90

Wellington. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  MISS CLARA SMITH, L.M.                           48.80

Wooster. Mrs. James Mullins, _for Thunderhawk
  M._                                              10.00

Ohio Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. G.B. Brown, Treas., _for Woman's
  Work_:

    Andover. W.M.S.                     5.00

    Akron. Y.P.S.C.E.                   7.00

    Chatham Center. W.M.S.              5.00

    Cleveland. Euclid. Y.P.S.C.E.      10.00

    Columbus. P.S.A.                   20.00

    Hudson. W.M.S.                      9.00

    Jefferson. W.M.S.                   6.00

    Oberlin. First L.A.S.              14.00

    Wayne (Lindenville). W.M.S.         5.00
                                      ------       81.00


INDIANA, $17.00.

Michigan City. Bbl. C., _for Kings Mountain,
  N.C._

Terre Haute. First Cong. Ch.                       15.00

Valparaiso. "A Friend," _for Christmas,
  McIntosh, Ga._                                    2.00


ILLINOIS, $504.34.

Albion. Y.P.S.C.E.                                  2.50

Chicago. Y.P.S.C.E., Union Park Ch.,
  34; Clarence S. Pellet, 10.                      44.00

Cobden. Cong. Ch., 9.12; Cong. C.E.
  Soc, 88c.                                        10.00

Delevan. R. Hoghton.                               20.00

Elgin. First Cong. Ch.                             50.00

Evanston. Mrs. E.C. Reed.                          50.00

Galesburg. First Cong. Ch., 18.78; Old
  First Ch., 8.41.                                 27.19

Geneseo. Cong. Ch.                                 41.25

Geneseo. W.M.U. of Cong. Ch., Mrs.
  P. Huntington, by Mrs. P.H. Taylor,
  Treas.                                            9.50

Hyde Park. Mrs. M.A. Gould.                         0.50

Joy Prairie. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                   16.06

La Grange. First Cong. Ch.                         35.69

La Salle. Cong. Ch., Bbl. C., _for Tougaloo
  U._

Lowell. "A Friend".                                 1.00

Malden. Cong. Ch.                                   4.80

Moline. First Cong. Ch.                            29.50

Morrison. William Wallace.                         10.00

Ontario. Cong. Ch.                                  9.47

Peoria. Women's Miss. Soc. First Cong.
  Ch, _for Beach Inst._                            19.20

Poplar Grove. Cong. Ch.                            10.53

Seward. Cong. Ch.                                   8.00

Shabbona. Cong. Ch.                                35.50

Shabbona. "B.M.L.," _for Tuition,
  Moorhead, Miss._                                  3.00

----. Mrs. Stacy, Paper and Worsted,
  _for Trinity Sch., Athens, Ala._

Illinois Woman's Home Missionary
  Union, Mrs. L.A. Field, Treas., _for
  Woman's Work_:

    Chicago. New Eng. W.M.S.            7.50

    Chicago. Lincoln Park, Y.P.M.S.     2.50

    Jacksonville. Young L.
      Soc.                             10.00

    Oak Park. W.M.S.                   21.00

    La Salle. Y.P.S.C.E.                5.00

    Port Byron. W.M.S.                 11.15

    Princeton. Y.P.S.C.E.               5.00

    Rockford. Second Ch. W.M.S.         3.00

    Waverly. W.M.S.                     1.50
                                      ------       66.65


MICHIGAN, $235.46.

Allendale. Box Papers and Toys, _for
  Athens, Ala._

Bendon. Mrs. S.A.B. Carrier.                        1.00

Clinton. Y.P.S.C.E., of Cong. Ch., 6;
  Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., 4.                          10.00

Detroit. Sab. Sch., First Cong. Ch., 26.56;
  Fort St. Cong. Ch., 3.                           29.56

Detroit. Bbl. C., _for Athens, Ala._

Grand Rapids. Y.L.M. Soc. of Park
  Cong. Ch., _for Girls, Santee Indian
  Sch._                                            25.00

Jackson. Mrs. Rachel M. Bennett.                    2.00

Jonesville. R.D. Nichols.                           0.50

Kalamazoo. First Cong. Ch.                         11.00

Kalamazoo. First Pres. Ch., 50 copies
  "Songs for Social Worship," _for
  Thomasville, Ga._

Lansing. Plymouth Ch.                               5.00

Milford. Mrs. Wm. A. Arms, 5; Mrs. T.O.
  Bennett, 2; Collected at Family Reunion,
  3.                                               10.00

Muskegon. Christmas Box, _for Athens,
  Ala._

Olds. E.P. Gates.                                   1.00

Olivet. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Box Christmas
  Gifts, _for Lexington, Ky._

Port Huron. First Cong. Ch., to const.
  REV. THOMAS CHALMERS L.M.                        36.00

Tecumseh. James Vincent.                           10.00

Traverse City. Christmas Box, _for
  Athens, Ala._

Union City. Mrs. L.L. Lee, _for Indian
  M._ and to const. MRS. HATTIE S. MCCLELLAN
  L.M.                                             30.00

Watevliet. W.E. Syms, _for Student,
  Fisk U._                                         25.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Michigan, by Mrs. E.F. Grabill, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Ann Arbor. W.H.M.S.                15.00

    Ann Arbor. Mrs. Clara
      Peck (Memorial).                  5.00

    Churches Corners. W.H.M.S.          3.50

    Covert. L.M.S.                      5.00

    Greenville. Y.P.C.E.S.,
      _for Indian Boy, Santee
      Sch._                            10.00

    Irving. W.H.M.S.                    0.25

    Otsego. W.H.M.S.                    0.50

    Ovid. W.M.S.                        0.15
                                      ------       39.40


IOWA, $220.52.

Ames. Cong. Ch. Jun. C.E. Soc., Box
  Cards, Toys, etc., _for Beach Inst.,
  Savannah, Ga._

Anita. Cong. Ch., 7.40; Henry T.
  Chapin, 4.                                       11.40

Cedar Rapids. Busy Bees, _for Student
  Aid, Beach Inst., Savannah, Ga._                  1.50

Coldwater. Rudolph Landes.                          5.00

Creston. Cong. Ch.                                 18.32

Des Moines. North Park Cong. Ch., "A
  Friend".                                          9.50

Goldfield. C. Philbrook.                            5.00

Grinnell. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., to const.
  MISS MARY C. LOMBARD L.M.                        30.00

Grinnell. Mrs. Julia D. Brainard. Bbl.
  C., _for Kings Mountain, N.C._

Iowa Falls. Mrs. Robert Wright, Pkg.
  Pictures, _for Beach Inst., Savannah,
  Ga._

Manson. Cong. Ch.                                   7.25

Mitchell. Cong. Ch.                                 5.25

Monticello. Ladies' Soc., Bbl. C., _for
  Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._

Nashua. First Cong. Ch., C.E. Soc., 29
  Second-hand Singing Books, _for Beach
  Inst., Savannah, Ga._

Newell. Sab. Sch.                                   2.43

New Hampton. Jun. C.E. Soc., by
  Arthur Butler, _for Student Aid, Beach
  Inst., Savannah, Ga._                             4.50

Rockford. Cong. Ch.                                 9.18

Salem. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                          3.00

Spencer. C.E. Soc. of First Cong. Ch.,
  _for Pleasant Hill Acad., Tenn._                 25.00

Waterloo. Jun. Endeavors, _for Student
  Aid, Harrow Sch., Cumberland Gap,
  Tenn._                                            3.00

Waterloo. J. Leavitt, Single Carriage
  and Twenty-five Chairs, _for Cumberland
  Gap, Tenn._

Iowa Woman's Home Missionary Union,
  Miss Belle L. Bentley, Treas., _for
  Woman's Work_:

    Alpha. W.M.S.                       5.00

    Blairsburg. W.M.S.                  2.00

    Cherokee. W.M.S.                   10.00

    Decorah. W.M.S., 13;
      Y.P.S.C.E., 9.83; Jun.
      Y.P.S.C.E., 3.                   25.83

    Grinnell. W.H.M.U.                  8.70

    Independence. W.H.M.U.              2.00

    Independence. Summer
      Township. W.M.S.                  2.00

    Lewis. L.M.S.                       5.00

    Mason City. L.M.S.                  4.65

    Postville. "Willing Workers".       2.00

    Storm Lake. L.M.S.                  7.00

    Toledo. L.M.S.                      0.24

    Undesignated Funds.                 5.77
                                      ------       80.19


WISCONSIN, $238.13.

Baraboo. Jun. C.E. Soc., Box Christmas
  Goods, _for Lexington, Ky._

Beloit. Second Cong. Ch.                           19.35

Boscobel. Mrs. K.M. Jenney, from her
  Father's Estate.                                 20.00

Columbus. "The Juniors," by Mrs. H.J.
  Ferris, _for Indian Student Aid_.                10.32

Janesville. "Friends," by Miss Susie A.
  Jeffries, Bbl. Books, etc., 1 for Freight,
  _for Helena, Ark._                                1.00

Lake Geneva. First Cong. Ch.                       17.77

Madison. "Friends," Bbl. C., and Christmas
  Goods, _for Marion, Ala._

Menomonie. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                     10.00

Milwaukee. Plymouth Ch.                            20.96

Roberts. Cong. Ch., 5; L.B. Osgood,
  5.                                               10.00

Waukesha. First Cong. Ch.                          29.87

Wauwatosa. Cong. Ch.                               10.00

Watertown. Cong. Ch.                                3.32

Whitewater. Cong. Ch.                              49.54

Wisconsin Woman's Home Missionary
  Union, Mrs. C.M. Blackman, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Beloit. First Ch., W.M.S.           5.50

    Fort Atkinson. W.M.S.               1.50

    Milwaukee. Pilgrim Ch.,
      W.M.S.                           18.00

    Waukesha. W.M.S.                    1.00

    Whitewater. W.M.S.                 10.00
                                      ------       36.00


MINNESOTA, $192.08.

Alexander. Cong. Ch.                               12.06

Austin. First Cong. Ch.                             5.00

Glyndon. "The Church at Glyndon".                   4.20

Minneapolis. S.S. of First Cong. Ch.,
  14.48; Lyndale Cong. Sab. Sch., 2.31.            16.79

Osawatomie. Cong. Ch.                              20.00

Red Wing. D.C. Hill.                               10.00

Rochester. Cong. Ch., 29.05; Sab. Sch.
  Cong. Ch., 3.82; A. Gooding, 10.                 42.87

Saint Anthony Park. C.E., 7; "Friend,"
  2.50, _for Lincoln Normal Sch., Marion,
  Ala._                                             9.50

St. Paul. Pacific Cong. Ch.                         5.68

Wadena. Young Ladies' Miss. Band, _for
  Student Aid, Allen Normal Sch.,
  Thomasville, Ga._                                 9.00

Winona. First Cong. Ch.                            52.91

Worthington. Union Cong. Ch., 3.49,
  and Sab. Sch., 58c.                               4.07

Zumbrota. Sab. Sch., Box Christmas
  Goods, _for Marion, Ala._


KANSAS, $146.16.

Alma. Cong. Ch.                                     3.00

Alton. Cong. Ch.                                    2.60

Leavenworth. First Cong. Ch.                       57.00

Manhattan. Wm. E. Castle, 15; S.D.
  Moses, 10.                                       25.00

Stockton. Cong. Ch. and Soc.                        6.26

Topeka. Mrs. Ralph Gaw, Pkg. C., _for
  Meridian, Miss._

Topeka. Central Ch., Ladies, Bbl. C., _for
  Saluda, N.C._

Woman's Home Missionary Union of
  Kansas, by Mrs. E.K. De Long, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Carson.                             1.10

    Emporia.                           10.00

    Highland.                           5.00

    Kansas City. "Pilgrim".             2.00

    Kirwin.                             5.00

    Leavenworth.                        5.00

    Louisville.                         1.25

    Oneida.                             6.50

    St. Mary's.                         3.00

    Sterling.                           5.00

    Twelve Mile.                        1.45

    Wellington.                         5.00

    Western Park.                       2.00
                                      ------       52.30


MISSOURI, $140.80.

Ironton. Jesse Markham.                             1.50

Lebanon. Cong. Ch., Junior C.E.S.,
  Box Toys, _for Nat, Ala._

St. Joseph. Y.P.S.C.E. of Cong.
  Ch.                                               5.00

Saint Louis. Pilgrim Ch., 48.65; First
  Cong. Ch. 85.65.                                134.30


NEBRASKA, $31.63.

Franklin. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch.                       0.63

Nehawka.                                            5.00

Verdon. Cong. Ch.                                   6.00

----. "A Friend in Nebraska".                      20.00


NORTH DAKOTA, $8.00.

Dwight. First Cong. Ch., _for Indian
  M._                                               3.00

Wogansport. Miss M. Cooper, 3; Miss
  M.O. Osgood, 2.                                   5.00


SOUTH DAKOTA, $18.61.

Alcester. Cong. Ch.                                 2.75

Hot Springs. Cong. Ch.                              8.50

Ree Heights. Mr. and Mrs. Geo. L.
  Helms.                                            1.00

Spearfish. Sab. Sch. Cong. Ch., Birthday
  Box Off.                                          6.36


COLORADO, $58.09.

Colorado Springs. First Cong. Ch.                  56.09

Pueblo. First Cong. Ch.                             2.00


IDAHO, $6.45.

Boise City. Cong. Ch.                               6.45


CALIFORNIA, $677.58.

Campbell. Cong. Ch., 5; Y.P.S.C.E.,
  3.30.                                             8.30

Elsmore. "The Geo. M. Day Memorial".                5.00

Nordhoff. Cong. Ch.                                 5.00

Ontario. Cong. Ch., to const. MARGUERETA
  CRAWFORD L.M.                                    62.40

Pacific Grove. Mayflower Ch., by Miss
  M.L. Holman, Treas.                               2.38

Pomona. "A Friend".                                12.50

San Francisco. Receipts of the California
  Chinese Mission. (See items below)              558.00

San Francisco. "A Friend".                         20.00

Woman's Home Missionary Society of
  California, by Mrs. J.M. Haven, Treas.,
  _for Woman's Work_:

    Oakland. Mrs. Wirt.                             4.00


OREGON, $8.69.

Eugene. "A Friend," _for Mountain
  Work_.                                            0.50

Portland. First Cong. Ch.                           8.19


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, $8.15.

Takoma Park. Mrs. Rosa D. Sprague,
  _for Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._            8.15


MARYLAND, $108.00.

Baltimore. First Cong. Ch.                        107.00

Baltimore. Mrs. F. Byrd, _for Gloucester
  Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                           1.00


VIRGINIA, $14.56.

_Receipts for Gloucester School, Cappahosic,
  Va._

    Cappahosic. Ella Ashby.             1.25

    Churchland. Miss S.E.
      Edwards.                          1.00

    Ino. Mrs. Thomas Wright.            1.00

    Mathews. Miss Sada Harris,
      2.10; Ed. Thompson, 2;
      Miss C. Smith, 1.                 5.10

    Norfolk. Miss A.V. Bagwell.         1.00

    Richmond. Mrs. Sarah
      Bailey.                           1.00

    Tappahannock. Mrs. J.
      Hall.                             1.50

    Walkerton. Miss Rebecca
      Page.                             0.50

    Wareneck. Public School.            2.21
                                      ------       14.56


DELAWARE, $1.00.

Wilmington. Miss N.P. Goins, _for
  Gloucester Sch., Cappahosic, Va._                 1.00


KENTUCKY, $175.92.

Berea. "Ch. at Berea".                             16.02

Campton. "Friends," _for Campton_.                143.00

Lexington. "Friends," _for Mission S.S._            4.50

New Salem. Cong. Ch., _for Campton,
  Ky._                                              7.90

North New Salem. Cong. Ch., _for
  Campton, Ky._                                     4.50


TENNESSEE, $14.00.

Harriman. Pilgrim Cong. Ch.                        10.00

Pleasant Hill. Y.P.S.C.E., _for
  Blowing Rock, N.C._                               4.00


NORTH CAROLINA, $25.45.

High Point. Cong. Ch.                               2.00

Oaks. Cong. Ch.                                     2.50

Raleigh. Cong. Ch.                                  5.45

Saluda. Rev. E.W. Hollies.                         10.00

Strieby. Cong. Ch.                                  0.50

Tryon. Rev. A. Winter, _for Saluda,
  N.C._                                             5.00

Woman's Home Missionary Union of N.C.,
  Miss A.E. Farrington, Treas.:

    W.H.M.U., Six Comfortables,
      _for Kings
      Mountain, N.C._


GEORGIA, $20.46.

Atlanta. Mary L. Gaines, _for Student
  Aid, Fisk U._                                     5.00

Columbus. Rev. J.W. Roberts.                        0.25

McIntosh. Prof. Fred W. Foster, _for
  Student Aid_, 1; _for School Books_, 12.67;
  Unknown Source, Bbl. C.                          13.67

Woodville. Pilgrim Ch., 1.05; Rev. J.
  Loyd, 25c.; Rev. J.H.H. Sengstacke,
  24c.                                              1.54


FLORIDA, $18.00.

Avon Park. Union Evan. Ch.                          5.00

Macclenny. Rev. A.A. Stevens.                       3.00

Orange Park. Rev. T.S. Perry.                      10.00


ALABAMA, $18.42.

Athens. Cong. Ch., by Rev. M.S. Jones.              1.42

Kymulga. Cong. Ch., ad'l.                           2.00

Alabama Woman's Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. E.C. Silsby, Treas., _for Indian
  M._:

    Marion.                             3.50

    Talladega.                          6.50

    Talladega. "Little Helpers".        5.00
                                      ------       15.00


MISSISSIPPI, $51.00.

Tougaloo. A.H. Stone.                              50.00

Westside. Rev. B.F. Ousley.                         1.00


LOUISIANA, $32.01.

New Orleans. University Cong. Ch.                  21.01

Louisiana Woman's Missionary Union,
  by Mrs. C.S. Shattuck, Treas., _for
  Woman's Work_:

    Lake Charles. Aux.                  1.00

    New Orleans. University
      Ch., Aux.                        10.00
                                      ------       11.00


TEXAS, $16.20.

Austin. "Tradesmen of Austin," _for
  Blacksmith Shop, Tillotson Inst._                11.20

Waco. F.B. Hoisengton.                              5.00


----, $50.00.

----. G.F. Harvey, _for Thunderhawk
  M._                                              50.00

Oneida. Presb. Ch., Jun. C.E. Soc, Box
  Christmas Goods, _for Lexington, Ky._


CANADA.

Toronto. Western Cong. Ch., Bbl. and
  Box of Books, _for Hillsboro, N.C._


BULGARIA, $8.00.

Samokov. Mrs. Isabella G.D. Clarke.                 8.00


BOHEMIA, $5.00.

Prague. Rev. John S. Porter.                        5.00


SOUTH AFRICA, $10.00

Groutville, Natal. Miss Agnes M. Bigelow.          10.00
                                              ----------
Donations.                                    $18,759.00
Estates.                                        9,785.30
                                              ----------
                                              $28,544.30


INCOME, $1,302.50.

Avery Fund, _for Mendi M._            865.00

De Forest Fund, _for President's
  Chair, Talladega C._                185.62

C.F. Dike Fund, _for Straight
  U._                                  50.00

Graves Library Fund, _for Atlanta
  U._                                 112.50

General Endowment Fund.                50.00

Gen. C.B. Fisk Sch'p Fund, _for
  Fisk U._                             11.25

Haley Sch'p Fund, _for Fisk U._        22.50

Rice Memorial Fund, _for Talladega
  C._                                   5.63
                                     -------    1,302.50


TUITION, $3,370.17.

Cappahosic, Va. Tuition.                3.72

Lexington, Ky. Tuition.                57.45

Grand View, Tenn. Tuition.             49.00

Jonesboro, Tenn. Tuition.               4.15

Nashville, Tenn. Tuition.             479.70

Knoxville, Tenn. Tuition.              29.13

Pleasant Hill, Tenn. Tuition.          23.50

Beaufort, N.C. Tuition.                14.50

Blowing Rock, N.C. Tuition.            13.20

Hillsboro, N.C. Tuition.               19.35

Kings Mountain, N.C. Tuition.          27.50

Saluda, N.C. Tuition.                  15.62

Troy, N.C. Tuition.                     3.91

Whittier, N.C. Tuition.                 7.55

Wilmington, N.C. Tuition.             171.00

Charleston, S.C. Tuition.             330.10

Greenwood, S.C. Tuition.               62.16

Albany, Ga. Tuition.                  103.30

Atlanta, Ga. Storrs Sch., Tuition.    153.48

Macon, Ga. Tuition.                   512.42

McIntosh, Ga. Tuition.                136.57

Savannah, Ga. Tuition.                164.04

Thomasville, Ga. Tuition.              57.12

Woodville, Ga. Tuition.                 3.70

Athens, Ala. Tuition.                  37.90

Marion, Ala. Tuition.                  43.82

Nat, Ala. Tuition.                     57.90

Selma, Ala. Tuition.                  101.20

Orange Park, Fla. Tuition.             58.25

Jackson, Miss. Tuition.               100.00

Meridian, Miss. Tuition.               81.00

Moorhead, Miss. Tuition.               14.00

Tougaloo, Miss. Tuition.               52.75

New Orleans, La. Tuition.             238.83

Helena, Ark. Tuition.                  90.45

Austin, Tex. Tuition.                  51.90
                                    --------    3,370.17
                                              ----------
Total for January.                            $33,216.97
                                              ==========


SUMMARY.

Donations.                                    $62,375.31
Estates.                                       22,900.96
                                             -----------
                                              $85,276.27

Income.                                         4,370.00
Tuition.                                       11,655.01
                                             -----------
Total from Oct. 1 to Jan. 31.                $101,301.28
                                             ===========


FOR THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY.

Subscriptions for January.                       $165.92
Previously acknowledged.                          109.08
                                                 -------
Total.                                           $275.00
                                                 =======


RECEIPTS OF THE CALIFORNIA CHINESE MISSION,
  William Johnstone, Treas., from November 16
  to December 20, 1894:

  Fresno. Mon. Offs., 4.25; Rent
    of Rooms, 1.                        5.25

  Los Angeles. Mon. Offs.               2.70

  Marysville. Mon. Offs., 3; Rent
    of Rooms, 5.                        8.00

  Oroville. Mon. Offs., 2.05;
    Rent of Rooms, 24.65.              26.70

  Petaluma. Mon. Offs., 1.25;
    Rent of Rooms, 75c.                 2.00

  Riverside. Mon. Offs.                 0.20

  Sarcramento. Mon. Offs., 2.50;
    Rent of Rooms, 7.50.               10.00

  San Bernardino. Mon. Offs.            3.00

  San Diego. Mon. Offs., 3.40;
    Rent of Rooms, 1.                   4.40

  San Francisco. Central Missions
    Mon. Offs.                          7.85

  San Francisco. West Mission
    Mon. Offs.                          2.00

  Santa Barbara. Mon. Offs.,
    4.05; Rent of Rooms, 1.50.          5.55

  Santa Cruz. Mon. Offs., 2;
    Rent of Rooms, 5.                   7.00

  Stockton. Mon. Offs., 2.15;
    Rent of Rooms, 2.                   4.15

  Ventura. Mon. Offs., 2.50;
    Rent of Rooms, 1.50.                4.00

  Vernondale. Mon. Offs.                0.50

  Watsonville. Mon. Offs.               8.80
                                      ------      102.10

Albany, N.Y. "Friends of Chinese,"
  _for Mothers and Children_.                      17.00


RECEIPTS FOR THE EXPENSES OF FISCAL YEAR
  ENDED AUGUST 31, 1894:

  Fresno. Anniversary Pledges,
    9; Teacher and Helper, 52.50.      61.50

  Hanford. Anniversary Pledges.         2.00

  Los Angeles. Teacher.                15.70

  Marysville. Annual Member, 2;
    Teacher, 9.75.                     11.75

  Oakland. Tip Bow.                    25.00

  Sacramento. Teacher and
    Helper.                            75.20

  San Bernandino. "Helper".            26.40

  San Francisco. Supt., Teachers
    and Helpers.                      138.30

  San Francisco. Central. Annual
    Members, 7.50; Top Sing, 1;
    West Pin Dun, 2.                   10.50

  Santa Barbara. Teacher, 19.25;
    Anniversary Pledge, 1.50.          20.75

  Ventura. Teacher.                     8.85

  Watsonville. Annual Member,
    2.50; Helper, 3.95.                 6.45

  San Diego. Anniversary
    Pledges.                            2.50

  Oroville. Wang Hing.                  2.50

  Woodland. Yep Lee Pen.                3.00
                                     -------      410.40


FROM EASTERN FRIENDS:

  Portland, Me. Second Cong.
    Ch., Chinese S.S.                   3.50

  New Boston, N.H. Levi
    Hooper.                            25.00
                                     -------       28.50
                                                 -------
Total.                                           $558.00
                                                 =======

H.W. HUBBARD, Treas.,
Bible House, N.Y.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN MISSIONARY — VOLUME 49, NO. 03, MARCH, 1895 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


