The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Little Lame Prince and His Travelling Cloak
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Little Lame Prince and His Travelling Cloak

Author: Dinah Maria Mulock Craik

Illustrator: Hope Dunlap

Release date: June 15, 2014 [eBook #45975]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Kiwibrit and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE LAME PRINCE AND HIS TRAVELLING CLOAK ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Kiwibrit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration]

                         The Little Lame Prince

                             By Miss Mulock

                        Pictures By Hope Dunlap

[Illustration]


                               The Little

                              Lame Prince

                                  and

                          His Travelling Cloak

                                   by

                              Miss Mulock

                             With Pictures

                             by Hope Dunlap

                Rand McNally Co Chicago New York London




                          Copyright, 1909, by
                         Rand-McNally & Company
                          All rights reserved
                      Entered at Stationers' Hall
                            Edition of 1937





                           Made in U. S. A.




[Illustration : Contents]

                                Contents

                                          PAGE

                         Chapter I           9

                         Chapter II         19

                         Chapter III        31

                         Chapter IV         43

                         Chapter V          53

                         Chapter VI         65

                         Chapter VII        81

                         Chapter VIII       91

                         Chapter IX         99

                         Chapter X         113


[Illustration: "_Take care, don't let the baby fall again._" _Page 15._]




[Illustration: The Little Lame Prince]




                               CHAPTER I.


Yes, he was the most beautiful Prince that ever was born. Of course,
being a prince, people said this: but it was true besides. When he
looked at the candle, his eyes had an expression of earnest inquiry
quite startling in a new-born baby. His nose--there was not much of it
certainly, but what there was seemed an aquiline shape; his complexion
was a charming, healthy purple; he was round and fat, straight-limbed
and long--in fact, a splendid baby, and everybody was exceedingly
proud of him. Especially his father and mother, the King and Queen of
Nomansland, who had waited for him during their happy reign of ten
years--now made happier than ever, to themselves and their subjects, by
the appearance of a son and heir.

The only person who was not quite happy was the king's brother, the
heir-presumptive, who would have been king one day, had the baby not
been born. But as his Majesty was very kind to him, and even rather
sorry for him--insomuch that at the Queen's request he gave him a
dukedom almost as big as a county,--the Crown Prince, as he was called,
tried to seem pleased also; and let us hope he succeeded.

The Prince's christening was to be a grand affair. According to the
custom of the country, there were chosen for him four-and-twenty
godfathers and godmothers, who each had to give him a name, and promise
to do their utmost for him. When he came of age, he himself had to
choose the name--and the god-father or godmother--that he liked best,
for the rest of his days.

Meantime, all was rejoicing. Subscriptions were made among the rich to
give pleasure to the poor: dinners in town-halls for the working men;
tea-parties in the streets for their wives; and milk and bun feasts for
the children in the schoolrooms. For Nomansland, though I cannot point
it out in any map, or read of it in any history, was, I believe, much
like our own or many another country.

As for the Palace--which was no different from other palaces--it was
clean "turned out of the windows," as people say, with the preparations
going on. The only quiet place in it was the room which, though the
Prince was six weeks old, his mother the Queen had never quitted.
Nobody said she was ill, however; it would have been so inconvenient;
and as she said nothing about it herself, but lay pale and placid,
giving no trouble to anybody, nobody thought much about her. All the
world was absorbed in admiring the baby.

[Illustration: "_All the people in the palace were lovely too--or
thought themselves so, ...from the ladies-in-waiting down ..._"]

[Illustration: "_The poor little kitchenmaid ... in her pink cotton
gown ... thought doubtless, there never was such a pretty girl._"]

The christening-day came at last, and it was as lovely as the Prince
himself. All the people in the palace were lovely too--or thought
themselves so, in the elegant new clothes which the queen, who thought
of everybody, had taken care to give them, from the ladies-in-waiting
down to the poor little kitchenmaid, who looked at herself in her pink
cotton gown, and thought, doubtless, that there never was such a pretty
girl as she.

By six in the morning all the royal household had dressed itself in
its very best; and then the little Prince was dressed in his best--his
magnificent christening-robe; which proceeding his Royal Highness did
not like at all, but kicked and screamed like any common baby. When he
had a little calmed down, they carried him to be looked at by the Queen
his mother, who, though her royal robes had been brought and laid upon
the bed, was, as everybody well knew, quite unable to rise and put them
on.

She admired her baby very much; kissed and blessed him, and lay looking
at him, as she did for hours sometimes, when he was placed beside her
fast asleep; then she gave him up with a gentle smile, and saying "she
hoped he would be very good, that it would be a very nice christening,
and all the guests would enjoy themselves," turned peacefully over on
her bed, saying nothing more to anybody. She was a very uncomplaining
person--the Queen, and her name was Dolorez.

Everything went on exactly as if she had been present. All, even the
King himself, had grown used to her absence, for she was not strong,
and for years had not joined in any gaieties. She always did her royal
duties, but as to pleasures, they could go on quite well without her,
or it seemed so. The company arrived: great and notable persons in this
and neighboring countries; also the four-and-twenty godfathers and
godmothers, who had been chosen with care, as the people who would be
most useful to his Royal Highness, should he ever want friends, which
did not seem likely. What such want could possibly happen to the heir
of the powerful monarch of Nomansland?

They came, walking two and two, with their coronets on their
heads--being dukes and duchesses, prince and princesses, or the like;
they all kissed the child, and pronounced the name which each had given
him. Then the four-and-twenty names were shouted out with great energy
by six heralds, one after the other, and afterwards written down, to
be preserved in the state records, in readiness for the next time they
were wanted which would be either on his Royal Highness's coronation
or his funeral. Soon the ceremony was over, and everybody satisfied;
except, perhaps, the little Prince himself, who moaned faintly under
his christening robes, which nearly smothered him.

In truth, though very few knew, the Prince in coming to the chapel had
met with a slight disaster. His nurse--not his ordinary one, but the
state nursemaid, an elegant and fashionable young lady of rank, whose
duty it was to carry him to and from the chapel, had been so occupied
in arranging her train with one hand, while she held the baby with the
other, that she stumbled and let him fall, just at the foot of the
marble staircase. To be sure, she contrived to pick him up again the
next minute, and the accident was so slight it seemed hardly worth
speaking of. Consequently, nobody did speak of it. The baby had turned
deadly pale but did not cry, so no person a step or two behind could
discover anything wrong; afterwards, even if he had moaned, the silver
trumpets were loud enough to drown his voice.

It would have been a pity to let anything trouble such a day of
felicity.

So, after a minute's pause, the procession had moved on. Such a
procession! Heralds in blue and silver; pages in crimson and gold; and
a troop of little girls in dazzling white, carrying baskets of flowers,
which they strewed all the way before the nurse and child,--finally the
four-and-twenty godfathers and godmothers, as proud as possible, and so
splendid to look at that they would have quite extinguished their small
godson--merely a heap of lace and muslin with a baby-face inside--had
it not been for a canopy of white satin and ostrich feathers, which was
held over him wherever he was carried.

[Illustration: "_The procession had moved on. Such a procession!
Heralds in blue and silver; pages in crimson and gold._"]

Thus, with the sun shining on them through the painted windows,
they stood; the King and his train on one side, the Prince and his
attendants on the other, as pretty a sight as ever was seen out of
fairyland.

"It's just like fairyland," whispered the eldest little girl to the
next eldest, as she shook the last rose out of her basket; "and I think
the only thing the Prince wants now is a fairy godmother."

"Does he?" said a shrill but soft and not unpleasant voice behind; and
there was seen among the group of children somebody--not a child--yet
no bigger than a child: somebody whom nobody had seen before, and who
certainly had not been invited, for she had no christening clothes on.

She was a little old woman dressed all in grey: grey gown, grey
hooded cloak, of a material excessively fine, and a tint that seemed
perpetually changing, like the grey of an evening sky. Her hair was
grey and her eyes also; even her complexion had a soft grey shadow over
it. But there was nothing unpleasantly old about her, and her smile was
as sweet and childlike as the Prince's own, which stole over his pale
little face the instant she came near enough to touch him.

"Take care. Don't let the baby fall again."

The grand young lady nurse started, flushing angrily.

"Who spoke to me? How did anybody know?--I mean, what business has
anybody--?" Then, frightened, but still speaking in a much sharper tone
than I hope young ladies of rank are in the habit of speaking--"Old
woman, you will be kind enough not to say 'the baby,' but 'the Prince.'
Keep away; his Royal Highness is just going to sleep."

"Nevertheless, I must kiss him. I am his godmother."

"You!" cried the elegant lady nurse.

"You!!" repeated all the gentlemen and ladies in waiting.

"You!!!" echoed the heralds and pages--and they began to blow the
silver trumpets, in order to stop all further conversation.

The Prince's procession formed itself for returning--the King and his
train having already moved off towards the palace--but, on the topmost
step of the marble stairs, stood, right in front of all, the little old
woman clothed in grey.

She stretched herself on tiptoe by the help of her stick, and gave the
little Prince three kisses.

"This is intolerable," cried the young lady nurse, wiping the kisses
off rapidly with her lace handkerchief. "Such an insult to his Royal
Highness. Take yourself out of the way, old woman, or the King shall be
informed immediately."

"The King knows nothing of me, more's the pity," replied the old woman
with an indifferent air, as if she thought the loss was more on his
Majesty's side than hers. "My friend in the palace is the King's wife."

"Kings' wives are called queens," said the lady nurse, with a
contemptuous air.

"You are right," replied the old woman. "Nevertheless, I know her
Majesty well, and I love her and her child. And--since you dropped him
on the marble stairs (this she said in a mysterious whisper, which made
the young lady tremble in spite of her anger)--I choose to take him for
my own. I am his godmother, ready to help him whenever he wants me."

"You help him!" cried all the group, breaking into shouts of laughter,
to which the little old woman paid not the slightest attention. Her
soft grey eyes were fixed on the Prince, who seemed to answer to the
look, smiling again and again in causeless, aimless fashion, as babies
do smile.

"His Majesty must hear of this," said a gentleman-in-waiting.

"His Majesty will hear quite enough news in a minute or two," said the
old woman sadly. And again stretching up to the little Prince, she
kissed him on the forehead solemnly.

"Be called by a new name which nobody has ever thought of. Be Prince
Dolor, in memory of your mother Dolorez."

"In memory of!" Everybody started at the ominous phrase, and also at a
most terrible breach of etiquette which the old woman had committed. In
Nomansland, neither the king nor the queen were supposed to have any
Christian name at all. They dropped it on their coronation-day, and it
was never mentioned again till it was engraved on their coffins when
they died.

"Old woman, you are exceedingly ill-bred," cried the eldest
lady-in-waiting, much horrified. "How you could know the fact passes my
comprehension. But even if you did not know it, how dared you presume
to hint that her most gracious Majesty is called Dolorez?"

"_Was_ called Dolorez," said the old woman with a tender solemnity.

The first gentleman, called the Gold-stick-in-waiting, raised it to
strike her, and all the rest stretched out their hands to seize her;
but the grey mantle melted from between their fingers like air; and,
before anybody had time to do anything more, there came a heavy,
muffled, startling sound.

The great bell of the palace--the bell which was only heard on the
death of some of the Royal family, and for as many times as he or she
was years old--began to toll. They listened, mute and horror-stricken.
Some one counted: One--two--three--four--up to nine and twenty--just
the queen's age.

It was, indeed, the Queen. Her Majesty was dead! In the midst of the
festivities she had slipped away, out of her new happiness and her
old sufferings, neither few nor small. Sending away her women to see
the sight--at least, they said afterwards, in excuse, that she had
done so, and it was very like her to do it--she had turned with her
face to the window, whence one could just see the tops of the distant
mountains--the Beautiful Mountains, as they were called--where she was
born. So gazing, she had quietly died.

When the little Prince was carried back to his mother's room, there was
no mother to kiss him. And, though he did not know it, there would be
for him no mother's kiss any more.

As for his Godmother--the little old woman in grey who called herself
so--whether she melted into air, like her gown when they touched it,
or whether she flew out of the chapel window, or slipped through the
doorway among the bewildered crowd, nobody knew--nobody ever thought
about her.

Only the nurse, the ordinary homely one, coming out of the Prince's
nursery in the middle of the night in search of a cordial to quiet
his continual moans, saw, sitting in the doorway, something which she
would have thought a mere shadow, had she not seen shining out of it
two eyes, grey and soft and sweet. She put her hand before her own,
screaming loudly. When she took them away, the old woman was gone.




                              CHAPTER II.


Everybody was very kind to the poor little Prince. I think people
generally are kind to motherless children, whether princes or peasants.
He had a magnificent nursery, and a regular suite of attendants, and
was treated with the greatest respect and state. Nobody was allowed to
talk to him in silly baby language, or dandle him, or above all to kiss
him, though, perhaps, some people did it surreptitiously, for he was
such a sweet baby that it was difficult to help it.

It could not be said that the Prince missed his mother; children of
his age cannot do that; but somehow after she died everything seemed
to go wrong with him. From a beautiful baby he became sickly and pale,
seeming to have almost ceased growing, especially in his legs, which
had been so fat and strong. But after the day of his christening they
withered and shrank; he no longer kicked them out either in passion or
play, and when, as he got to be nearly a year old, his nurse tried to
make him stand upon them, he only tumbled down.

This happened so many times that at last people began to talk about it.
A prince, and not able to stand on his own legs! What a dreadful thing!
what a misfortune for the country!

Rather a misfortune to him also, poor little boy! but nobody seemed to
think of that. And when, after a while, his health revived, and the
old bright look came back to his sweet little face, and his body grew
larger and stronger, though still his legs remained the same, people
continued to speak of him in whispers, and with grave shakes of the
head. Everybody knew, though nobody said it, that something, impossible
to guess what, was not quite right with the poor little Prince.

Of course, nobody hinted this to the King his father: it does not do to
tell great people anything unpleasant. And besides, his Majesty took
very little notice of his son, or of his other affairs, beyond the
necessary duties of his kingdom. People had said he would not miss the
Queen at all, she having been so long an invalid: but he did. After
her death he never was quite the same. He established himself in her
empty rooms, the only rooms in the palace whence one could see the
Beautiful Mountains, and was often observed looking at them as if he
thought she had flown away thither, and that his longing could bring
her back again. And by a curious coincidence, which nobody dared to
inquire into, he desired that the Prince might be called, not by any
of the four-and-twenty grand names given him by his godfathers and
godmothers, but by the identical name mentioned by the little old woman
in grey,--Dolor, after his mother Dolorez.

Once a week, according to established state custom, the Prince, dressed
in his very best, was brought to the King his father for half-an-hour,
but his Majesty was generally too ill and too melancholy to pay much
heed to the child.

Only once, when he and the Crown Prince, who was exceedingly attentive
to his royal brother, were sitting together, with Prince Dolor playing
in a corner of the room, dragging himself about with his arms rather
than his legs, and sometimes trying feebly to crawl from one chair to
another, it seemed to strike the father that all was not right with his
son.

"How old is his Royal Highness?" said he suddenly to the nurse.

"Two years, three months, and five days, please your Majesty."

[Illustration: _"How old is his Royal Highness?" said he suddenly to
the nurse._]

"It does not please me," said the King with a sigh. "He ought to be far
more forward than he is now, ought he not, brother? You, who have so
many children, must know. Is there not something wrong about him?"

"Oh, no," said the Crown Prince, exchanging meaning looks with the
nurse, who did not understand at all, but stood frightened and
trembling with the tears in her eyes. "Nothing to make your Majesty at
all uneasy. No doubt his Royal Highness will outgrow it in time."

"Outgrow--what?"

"A slight delicacy--ahem!--in the spine; something inherited, perhaps,
from his dear mother."

"Ah, she was always delicate; but she was the sweetest woman that ever
lived. Come here, my little son."

And as the Prince turned round upon his father a small, sweet, grave
face--so like his mother's--his Majesty the King smiled and held out
his arms. But when the boy came to him, not running like a boy, but
wriggling awkwardly along the floor, the royal countenance clouded
over.

"I ought to have been told of this. It is terrible--terrible! And for a
prince, too! Send for all the doctors in my kingdom immediately."

They came, and each gave a different opinion, and ordered a different
mode of treatment. The only thing they agreed in was what had been
pretty well known before: that the prince must have been hurt when he
was an infant--let fall, perhaps, so as to injure his spine and lower
limbs. Did nobody remember?

No, nobody. Indignantly, all the nurses denied that any such accident
had happened, was possible to have happened, until the faithful country
nurse recollected that it really had happened, on the day of the
christening. For which unluckily good memory all the others scolded her
so severely that she had no peace of her life, and soon after, by the
influence of the young lady nurse who had carried the baby that fatal
day, and who was a sort of connection of the Crown Prince, being his
wife's second cousin once removed, the poor woman was pensioned off,
and sent to the Beautiful Mountains, from whence she came, with orders
to remain there for the rest of her days.

But of all this the King knew nothing, for, indeed, after the first
shock of finding out that his son could not walk, and seemed never
likely to walk, he interfered very little concerning him. The whole
thing was too painful, and his Majesty had never liked painful things.
Sometimes he inquired after Prince Dolor, and they told him his Royal
Highness was going on as well as could be expected, which really was
the case. For after worrying the poor child and perplexing themselves
with one remedy after another, the Crown Prince, not wishing to offend
any of the differing doctors, had proposed leaving him to nature; and
nature, the safest doctor of all, had come to his help, and done her
best. He could not walk, it is true; his limbs were mere useless
additions to his body; but the body itself was strong and sound. And
his face was the same as ever--just his mother's face, one of the
sweetest in the world!

Even the King, indifferent as he was, sometimes looked at the little
fellow with sad tenderness, noticing how cleverly he learned to crawl,
and swing himself about by his arms, so that in his own awkward way he
was as active in motion as most children of his age.

"Poor little man! he does his best, and he is not unhappy; not half
so unhappy as I, brother," addressing the Crown Prince, who was more
constant than ever in his attendance upon the sick monarch. "If
anything should befall me, I have appointed you as Regent. In case of
my death, you will take care of my poor little boy?"

"Certainly, certainly; but do not let us imagine any such misfortune. I
assure your Majesty--everybody will assure you--that it is not in the
least likely."

He knew, however, and everybody knew, that it was likely, and soon
after it actually did happen. The King died, as suddenly and quietly
as the Queen had done--indeed, in her very room and bed; and Prince
Dolor was left without either father or mother--as sad a thing as could
happen, even to a Prince.

He was more than that now, though. He was a king. In Nomansland, as in
other countries, the people were struck with grief one day and revived
the next. "The king is dead--long live the king!" was the cry that rang
through the nation, and almost before his late Majesty had been laid
beside the queen in their splendid mausoleum, crowds came thronging
from all parts of the royal palace, eager to see the new monarch.

They did see him--the Prince Regent took care they should--sitting
on the floor of the council-chamber, sucking his thumb! And when
one of the gentlemen-in-waiting lifted him up and carried him--fancy,
carrying a king!--to the chair of state, and put the crown on his head,
he shook it off again, it was so heavy and uncomfortable. Sliding down
to the foot of the throne, he began playing with the golden lions that
supported it, stroking their paws and putting his tiny fingers into
their eyes, and laughing--laughing as if he had at last found something
to amuse him.

"There's a fine king for you!" said the first lord-in-waiting, a friend
of the Prince Regent's (the Crown Prince that used to be, who, in the
deepest mourning, stood silently beside the throne of his young nephew.
He was a handsome man, very grand and clever looking). "What a king!
who can never stand to receive his subjects, never walk in processions,
who, to the last day of his life, will have to be carried about like a
baby. Very unfortunate!"

"Exceedingly unfortunate," repeated the second lord. "It is always bad
for a nation when its king is a child; but such a child--a permanent
cripple, if not worse."

"Let us hope not worse," said the first lord in a very hopeless tone,
and looking towards the Regent, who stood erect and pretended to
hear nothing. "I have heard that these sort of children with very
large heads and great broad foreheads and staring eyes, are----well,
well, let us hope for the best and be prepared for the worst. In the
meantime----"

"I swear," said the Crown Prince, coming forward and kissing the hilt
of his sword--"I swear to perform my duties as regent, to take all
care of his Royal Highness--his Majesty, I mean," with a grand bow to
the little child, who laughed innocently back again. "And I will do
my humble best to govern the country. Still, if the country has the
slightest objection----" But the Crown Prince being generalissimo, and
having the whole army at his beck and call, so that he could have begun
a civil war in no time; the country had, of course, not the slightest
objection.

So the king and queen slept together in peace, and Prince Dolor reigned
over the land--that is, his uncle did; and everybody said what a
fortunate thing it was for the poor little Prince to have such a clever
uncle to take care of him. All things went on as usual; indeed, after
the Regent had brought his wife and her seven sons, and established
them in the palace, rather better than usual. For they gave such
splendid entertainments and made the capital so lively, that trade
revived, and the country was said to be more flourishing than it had
been for a century.

Whenever the Regent and his sons appeared, they were received with
shouts--"Long live the Crown Prince!" "Long live the Royal family!"
And, in truth, they were very fine children, the whole seven of them,
and made a great show when they rode out together on seven beautiful
horses, one height above another, down to the youngest, on his tiny
black pony, no bigger than a large dog.

[Illustration: "_And, in truth, they were very fine children, the whole
seven of them._"]

[Illustration: "_They made a great show when they rode out together on
seven beautiful horses._"]

As for the other child, his Royal Highness Prince Dolor--for somehow
people soon ceased to call him his Majesty, which seemed such a
ridiculous title for a poor little fellow, a helpless cripple, with
only head and trunk, and no legs to speak of--he was seen very seldom
by anybody.

Sometimes, people daring enough to peer over the high wall of the
palace garden, noticed there, carried in a footman's arms, or drawn in
a chair, or left to play on the grass, often with nobody to mind him, a
pretty little boy, with a bright intelligent face, and large melancholy
eyes--no, not exactly melancholy, for they were his mother's, and she
was by no means sad-minded, but thoughtful and dreamy. They rather
perplexed people, those childish eyes; they were so exceedingly
innocent and yet so penetrating. If anybody did a wrong thing, told
a lie for instance, they would turn round with such a grave silent
surprise--the child never talked much--that every naughty person in the
palace was rather afraid of Prince Dolor.

He could not help it, and perhaps he did not even know it, being no
better a child than many other children, but there was something about
him which made bad people sorry, and grumbling people ashamed of
themselves, and ill-natured people gentle and kind. I suppose, because
they were touched to see a poor little fellow who did not in the least
know what had befallen him, or what lay before him, living his baby
life as happy as the day was long. Thus, whether or not he was good
himself, the sight of him and his affliction made other people good,
and, above all, made everybody love him. So much so, that his uncle the
Regent began to feel a little uncomfortable.

Now, I have nothing to say against uncles in general. They are usually
very excellent people, and very convenient to little boys and girls.

Even the "cruel uncle" of "The Babes in the Wood" I believe to be quite
an exceptional character. And this "cruel uncle" of whom I am telling
was, I hope, an exception too.

He did not mean to be cruel. If anybody had called him so, he would
have resented it extremely: he would have said that what he did was
done entirely for the good of the country. But he was a man who
had been always accustomed to consider himself first and foremost,
believing that whatever he wanted was sure to be right, and, therefore,
he ought to have it. So he tried to get it, and got it too, as people
like him very often do. Whether they enjoy it when they have it, is
another question.

Therefore, he went one day to the council-chamber, determined on making
a speech and informing the ministers and the country at large that
the young King was in failing health, and that it would be advisable
to send him for a time to the Beautiful Mountains. Whether he really
meant to do this; or whether it occurred to him afterwards that there
would be an easier way of attaining his great desire, the crown of
Nomansland, is a point which I cannot decide.

But soon after, when he had obtained an order in council to send the
King away--which was done in great state, with a guard of honour
composed of two whole regiments of soldiers--the nation learnt, without
much surprise, that the poor little Prince--nobody ever called him king
now--had gone on a much longer journey than to the Beautiful Mountains.

He had fallen ill on the road and died within a few hours; at least, so
declared the physician in attendance, and the nurse who had been sent
to take care of him. They brought his coffin back in great state, and
buried it in the mausoleum with his parents.

So Prince Dolor was seen no more. The country went into deep mourning
for him, and then forgot him, and his uncle reigned in his stead. That
illustrious personage accepted his crown with great decorum, and wore
it with great dignity, to the last. But whether he enjoyed it or not,
there is no evidence to show.




                              CHAPTER III.


And what of the little lame prince, whom everybody seemed so easily to
have forgotten?

Not everybody. There were a few kind souls, mothers of families, who
had heard his sad story, and some servants about the palace, who had
been familiar with his sweet ways--these many a time sighed and said,
"Poor Prince Dolor!" Or, looking at the Beautiful Mountains, which
were visible all over Nomansland, though few people ever visited them,
"Well, perhaps his Royal Highness is better where he is than even
there."

They did not know--indeed, hardly anybody did know--that beyond the
mountains, between them and the sea, lay a tract of country, barren,
level, bare, except for short stunted grass, and here and there a
patch of tiny flowers. Not a bush--not a tree--not a resting-place for
bird or beast was in that dreary plain. In summer, the sunshine fell
upon it hour after hour with a blinding glare; in winter, the winds
and rains swept over it unhindered, and the snow came down, steadily,
noiselessly, covering it from end to end in one great white sheet,
which lay for days and weeks unmarked by a single footprint.

[Illustration: "_One large round tower which rose up in the center of
the plain._"]

Not a pleasant place to live in--and nobody did live there, apparently.
The only sign that human creatures had ever been near the spot, was
one large round tower which rose up in the centre of the plain, and
might be seen all over it--if there had been anybody to see, which
there never was. Rose, right up out of the ground, as if it had grown
of itself, like a mushroom. But it was not at all mushroom-like; on the
contrary, it was very solidly built. In form, it resembled the Irish
round towers, which have puzzled people for so long, nobody being
able to find out when, or by whom, or for what purpose they were made;
seemingly for no use at all, like this tower. It was circular, of very
firm brickwork, with neither doors nor windows, until near the top,
when you could perceive some slits in the wall, through which one might
possibly creep in or look out. Its height was nearly a hundred feet
high, and it had a battlemented parapet, showing sharp against the sky.

As the plain was quite desolate--almost like a desert, only
without sand, and led to nowhere except the still more desolate
sea-coast--nobody ever crossed it. Whatever mystery there was about the
tower, it and the sky and the plain kept their secret to themselves.

It was a very great secret indeed--a state secret--which none but so
clever a man as the present king of Nomansland would ever have thought
of. How he carried it out, undiscovered, I cannot tell. People said,
long afterwards, that it was by means of a gang of condemned criminals,
who were set to work, and executed immediately after they had done, so
that nobody knew anything, or in the least suspected the real fact.

And what was the fact? Why, that this tower, which seemed a mere mass
of masonry, utterly forsaken and uninhabited, was not so at all. Within
twenty feet of the top, some ingenious architect had planned a perfect
little house, divided into four rooms--as by drawing a cross within a
circle you will see might easily be done. By making skylights, and a
few slits in the walls for windows, and raising a peaked roof which was
hidden by the parapet, here was a dwelling complete; eighty feet from
the ground, and as inaccessible as a rook's nest on the top of a tree.

A charming place to live in! if you once got up there, and never wanted
to come down again.

Inside--though nobody could have looked inside except a bird, and
hardly even a bird flew past that lonely tower--inside it was furnished
with all the comfort and elegance imaginable; with lots of books and
toys, and everything that the heart of a child could desire. For its
only inhabitant, except a nurse of course, was a poor little solitary
child.

One winter night, when all the plain was white with moonlight, there
was seen crossing it a great tall black horse, ridden by a man also
big and equally black, carrying before him on the saddle a woman and
a child. The woman--she had a sad, fierce look, and no wonder, for
she was a criminal under sentence of death, but her sentence had been
changed to almost as severe a punishment. She was to inhabit the lonely
tower with the child, and was allowed to live as long as the child
lived--no longer. This, in order that she might take the utmost care
of him; for those who put him there were equally afraid of his dying
and of his living. And yet he was only a little gentle boy, with a
sweet sleepy smile--he had been very tired with his long journey--and
clinging arms, which held tight to the man's neck, for he was rather
frightened, and the face, black as it was, looked kindly at him. And
he was very helpless, with his poor small shrivelled legs, which could
neither stand nor run away--for the little forlorn boy was Prince Dolor.

[Illustration: "_He was rather frightened, and the face, black as it
was, looked kindly at him._"]

He had not been dead at all--or buried either. His grand funeral had
been a mere pretence: a wax figure having been put in his place, while
he himself was spirited away under charge of these two, the condemned
woman and the black man. The latter was deaf and dumb, so could neither
tell nor repeat anything.

When they reached the foot of the tower, there was light enough to see
a huge chain dangling from the parapet, but dangling only half way.
The deaf-mute took from his saddle-wallet a sort of ladder, arranged
in pieces like a puzzle, fitted it together and lifted it up to meet
the chain. Then he mounted to the top of the tower, and slung from it a
sort of chair, in which the woman and the child placed themselves and
were drawn up, never to come down again as long as they lived. Leaving
them there, the man descended the ladder, took it to pieces again and
packed it in his pack, mounted the horse, and disappeared across the
plain.

Every month they used to watch for him, appearing like a speck in the
distance. He fastened his horse to the foot of the tower and climbed
it, as before, laden with provisions and many other things. He always
saw the Prince, so as to make sure that the child was alive and well,
and then went away until the following month.

While his first childhood lasted, Prince Dolor was happy enough. He
had every luxury that even a prince could need, and the one thing
wanting--love, never having known, he did not miss. His nurse was very
kind to him, though she was a wicked woman. But either she had not been
quite so wicked as people said, or she grew better through being shut
up continually with a little innocent child, who was dependent upon her
for every comfort and pleasure of his life.

It was not an unhappy life. There was nobody to tease or ill-use him,
and he was never ill. He played about from room to room--there were
four rooms--parlour, kitchen, his nurse's bed-room, and his own; learnt
to crawl like a fly, and to jump like a frog, and to run about on
all-fours almost as fast as a puppy. In fact, he was very much like a
puppy or a kitten, as thoughtless and as merry--scarcely ever cross,
though sometimes a little weary. As he grew older, he occasionally
liked to be quiet for awhile, and then he would sit at the slits of
windows, which were, however, much bigger than they looked from the
bottom of the tower,--and watch the sky above and the ground below,
with the storms sweeping over and the sunshine coming and going, and
the shadows of the clouds running races across the blank plain.

By-and-by he began to learn lessons--not that his nurse had been
ordered to teach him, but she did it partly to amuse herself. She was
not a stupid woman, and Prince Dolor was by no means a stupid boy; so
they got on very well, and his continual entreaty "What can I do? what
can you find me to do?" was stopped; at least for an hour or two in the
day.

It was a dull life, but he had never known any other; anyhow, he
remembered no other; and he did not pity himself at all. Not for a long
time, till he grew to be quite a big little boy, and could read easily.
Then he suddenly took to books, which the deaf-mute brought him from
time to time--books which, not being acquainted with the literature of
Nomansland, I cannot describe, but no doubt they were very interesting;
and they informed him of everything in the outside world, and filled
him with an intense longing to see it.

From this time a change came over the boy. He began to look sad and
thin, and to shut himself up for hours without speaking. For his nurse
hardly spoke, and whatever questions he asked beyond their ordinary
daily life she never answered. She had, indeed, been forbidden, on
pain of death, to tell him anything about himself, who he was, or what
he might have been. He knew he was Prince Dolor, because she always
addressed him as "my prince," and "your royal highness," but what a
prince was he had not the least idea. He had no idea of any thing in
the world, except what he found in his books.

He sat one day surrounded by them, having built them up round him
like a little castle wall. He had been reading them half the day, but
feeling all the while that to read about things which you never can
see is like hearing about a beautiful dinner while you are starving.
For almost the first time in his life he grew melancholy: his hands
fell on his lap; he sat gazing out of the window-slit upon the view
outside--the view he had looked at every day of his life, and might
look at for endless days more.

Not a very cheerful view--just the plain and the sky--but he liked
it. He used to think, if he could only fly out of that window, up to
the sky or down to the plain, how nice it would be! Perhaps when he
died--his nurse had told him once in anger that he would never leave
the tower till he died--he might be able to do this. Not that he
understood much what dying meant, but it must be a change, and any
change seemed to him a blessing.

"And I wish I had somebody to tell me all about it; about that and many
other things; somebody that would be fond of me, like my poor white
kitten."

Here the tears came into his eyes, for the boy's one friend, the
one interest of his life, had been a little white kitten, which the
deaf-mute, kindly smiling, once took out of his pocket and gave
him--the only living creature Prince Dolor had ever seen. For four
weeks it was his constant plaything and companion, till one moonlight
night it took a fancy for wandering, climbed on to the parapet of the
tower, dropped over and disappeared. It was not killed, he hoped, for
cats have nine lives; indeed, he almost fancied he saw it pick itself
up and scamper away, but he never caught sight of it more.

"Yes, I wish I had something better than a kitten--a person, a real
live person, who would be fond of me and kind to me. Oh, I want
somebody--dreadfully, dreadfully!"

As he spoke, there sounded behind him a slight tap-tap-tap, as of a
stick or a cane, and twisting himself round, he saw--what do you think
he saw?

Nothing either frightening or ugly, but still exceedingly curious. A
little woman, no bigger than he might himself have been, had his legs
grown like those of other children, but she was not a child--she was
an old woman. Her hair was grey, and her dress was grey, and there was
a grey shadow over her whereever she moved. But she had the sweetest
smile, the prettiest hands, and when she spoke it was in the softest
voice imaginable.

"My dear little boy,"--and dropping her cane, the only bright and rich
thing about her, she laid those two tiny hands on his shoulders--"my
own little boy, I could not come to you until you had said you wanted
me, but now you do want me, here I am."

[Illustration: "_She laid those two tiny hands on his shoulders--'My
own little boy, I could not come to you until you had said you wanted
me.'_"]

"And you are very welcome, madam," replied the Prince, trying to speak
politely, as princes always did in books; "and I am exceedingly obliged
to you. May I ask who you are? Perhaps my mother?" For he knew that
little boys usually had a mother, and had occasionally wondered what
had become of his own.

"No," said the visitor, with a tender, half-sad smile, putting back the
hair from his forehead, and looking right into his eyes--"No, I am not
your mother, though she was a dear friend of mine; and you are as like
her as ever you can be."

"Will you tell her to come and see me then?"

"She cannot; but I dare say she knows all about you. And she loves
you very much--and so do I; and I want to help you all I can, my poor
little boy."

"Why do you call me poor?" asked Prince Dolor in surprise.

The little old woman glanced down on his legs and feet, which he did
not know were different from those of other children, and then at
his sweet, bright face, which, though he knew not that either, was
exceedingly different from many children's faces, which are often so
fretful, cross, sullen. Looking at him, instead of sighing, she smiled.
"I beg your pardon, my prince," said she.

"Yes, I am a prince, and my name is Dolor; will you tell me yours,
madam?"

The little old woman laughed like a chime of silver bells.

"I have not got a name--or rather, I have so many names that I don't
know which to choose. However, it was I who gave you yours, and you
will belong to me all your days. I am your godmother."

"Hurrah!" cried the little prince; "I am glad I belong to you, for I
like you very much. Will you come and play with me?"

So they sat down together, and played. By-and-by they began to talk.

"Are you very dull here?" asked the little old woman.

"Not particularly, thank you, godmother. I have plenty to eat and
drink, and my lessons to do, and my books to read--lots of books."

"And you want nothing?"

"Nothing. Yes--perhaps--If you please, godmother, could you bring me
just one more thing?"

"What sort of thing?"

"A little boy to play with."

The old woman looked very sad. "Just the thing, alas, which I cannot
give you. My child, I cannot alter your lot in any way, but I can help
you to bear it."

"Thank you. But why do you talk of bearing it? I have nothing to bear."

"My poor little man!" said the old woman in the very tenderest tone of
her tender voice. "Kiss me!"

"What is kissing?" asked the wondering child.

His godmother took him in her arms and embraced him many times.
By-and-by he kissed her back again--at first awkwardly and shyly, then
with all the strength of his warm little heart.

"You are better to cuddle than even my white kitten, I think. Promise
me that you will never go away."

"I must; but I will leave a present behind me--something as good as
myself to amuse you--something that will take you wherever you want to
go, and show you all that you wish to see."

"What is it?"

"A travelling-cloak."

The Prince's countenance fell. "I don't want a cloak, for I never go
out. Sometimes nurse hoists me on to the roof, and carries me round by
the parapet; but that is all. I can't walk, you know, as she does."

"The more reason why you should ride; and besides, this
travelling-cloak----"

"Hush!--she's coming."

There sounded outside the room door a heavy step and a grumpy voice,
and a rattle of plates and dishes.

"It's my nurse, and she is bringing my dinner; but I don't want dinner
at all--I only want you. Will her coming drive you away, godmother?"

"Perhaps; but only for a little. Never mind; all the bolts and bars
in the world couldn't keep me out. I'd fly in at the window, or down
through the chimney. Only wish for me, and I come."

"Thank you," said Prince Dolor, but almost in a whisper, for he
was very uneasy at what might happen next. His nurse and his
godmother--what would they say to one another? how would they look
at one another?--two such different faces: one, harsh-lined, sullen,
cross, and sad; the other, sweet and bright and calm as a summer
evening before the dark begins.

When the door was flung open, Prince Dolor shut his eyes, trembling all
over: opening them again, he saw he need fear nothing; his lovely old
godmother had melted away just like the rainbow out of the sky, as he
had watched it many a time. Nobody but his nurse was in the room.

"What a muddle your Royal Highness is sitting in," said she sharply.
"Such a heap of untidy books; and what's this rubbish?" kicking a
little bundle that lay beside them.

"Oh, nothing, nothing--give it me!" cried the prince, and darting after
it, he hid it under his pinafore, and then pushed it quickly into his
pocket. Rubbish as it was, it was left in the place where she had sat,
and might be something belonging to her--his dear, kind godmother, whom
already he loved with all his lonely, tender, passionate heart.

It was, though he did not know this, his wonderful travelling-cloak.




                              CHAPTER IV.


And what of the travelling-cloak? What sort of cloak was it, and what
good did it do the Prince?

Stay, and I'll tell you all about it.

Outside it was the commonest-looking bundle imaginable--shabby and
small; and the instant Prince Dolor touched it, it grew smaller still,
dwindling down till he could put it in his trousers pocket, like a
handkerchief rolled up into a ball. He did this at once, for fear his
nurse should see it, and kept it there all day--all night, too. Till
after his next morning's lessons he had no opportunity of examining his
treasure.

When he did, it seemed no treasure at all; but a mere piece of
cloth--circular in form, dark green in colour, that is, if it had any
colour at all, being so worn and shabby, though not dirty. It had a
split cut to the centre, forming a round hole for the neck--and that
was all its shape; the shape, in fact, of those cloaks which in South
America are called _ponchos_--very simple, but most graceful and
convenient.

Prince Dolor had never seen anything like it. In spite of his
disappointment he examined it curiously; spread it out on the floor,
then arranged it on his shoulders. It felt very warm and comfortable;
but it was so exceedingly shabby--the only shabby thing that the Prince
had ever seen in his life.

[Illustration: "_Prince Dolor had never seen anything like it. In spite
of his disappointment he examined it curiously._"]

"And what use will it be to me?" said he sadly. "I have no need of
outdoor clothes, as I never go out. Why was this given me, I wonder?
and what in the world am I to do with it? She must be a rather funny
person, this dear godmother of mine."

Nevertheless, because she was his godmother, and had given him the
cloak, he folded it carefully and put it away, poor and shabby as it
was, hiding it in a safe corner of his toy-cupboard, which his nurse
never meddled with. He did not want her to find it, or to laugh at it,
or at his godmother--as he felt sure she would, if she knew all.

There it lay, and by-and-by he forgot all about it; nay, I am sorry
to say, that, being but a child, and not seeing her again, he almost
forgot his sweet old godmother, or thought of her only as he did of the
angels or fairies that he read of in his books, and of her visit as if
it had been a mere dream of the night.

There were times, certainly, when he recalled her; of early mornings
like that morning when she appeared beside him, and late evenings, when
the grey twilight reminded him of the colour of her hair and her pretty
soft garments; above all, when, waking in the middle of the night,
with the stars peering in at his window, or the moonlight shining
across his little bed, he would not have been surprised to see her
standing beside it, looking at him with those beautiful tender eyes,
which seemed to have a pleasantness and comfort in them different from
anything he had ever known.

But she never came, and gradually she slipped out of his memory--only
a boy's memory, after all; until something happened which made him
remember her, and want her as he had never wanted anything before.

Prince Dolor fell ill. He caught--his nurse could not tell how--a
complaint common to the people of Nomansland, called the doldrums,
as unpleasant as measles or any other of our complaints; and it made
him restless, cross, and disagreeable. Even when a little better, he
was too weak to enjoy anything, but lay all day long on his sofa,
fidgetting his nurse extremely--while, in her intense terror lest he
might die, she fidgetted him still more. At last, seeing he really was
getting well, she left him to himself--which he was most glad of, in
spite of his dulness and dreariness. There he lay, alone, quite alone.

[Illustration: "_Even when a little better, he was too weak to enjoy
anything, but lay all day long on his sofa, fidgetting his nurse
extremely._"]

Now and then an irritable fit came over him, in which he longed to get
up and do something, or go somewhere--would have liked to imitate his
white kitten--jump down from the tower and run away, taking the chance
of whatever might happen.

Only one thing, alas! was likely to happen; for the kitten, he
remembered, had four active legs, while he----

"I wonder what my godmother meant when she looked at my legs and sighed
so bitterly? I wonder why I can't walk straight and steady like my
nurse--only I wouldn't like to have her great noisy, clumping shoes.
Still, it would be very nice to move about quickly--perhaps to fly,
like a bird, like that string of birds I saw the other day skimming
across the sky--one after the other."

These were the passage-birds--the only living creatures that ever
crossed the lonely plain; and he had been much interested in them,
wondering whence they came and whither they were going.

"How nice it must be to be a bird. If legs are no good, why cannot one
have wings? People have wings when they die--perhaps: I wish I was
dead, that I do. I am so tired, so tired; and nobody cares for me.
Nobody ever did care for me, except perhaps my godmother. Godmother,
dear, have you quite forsaken me?"

He stretched himself wearily, gathered himself up, and dropped his
head upon his hands; as he did so, he felt somebody kiss him at the
back of his neck, and turning, found that he was resting, not on the
sofa-pillows, but on a warm shoulder--that of the little old woman
clothed in grey.

How glad he was to see her! How he looked into her kind eyes, and felt
her hands, to see if she were all real and alive! then put both his
arms round her neck, and kissed her as if he would never have done
kissing!

"Stop, stop!" cried she, pretending to be smothered, "I see you have
not forgotten my teachings. Kissing is a good thing--in moderation.
Only, just let me have breath to speak one word."

"A dozen!" he said.

"Well, then, tell me all that has happened to you since I saw you--or
rather, since you saw me, which is a quite different thing."

"Nothing has happened--nothing ever does happen to me," answered the
Prince dolefully.

"And are you very dull, my boy?"

"So dull, that I was just thinking whether I could not jump down to the
bottom of the tower like my white kitten."

"Don't do that, being not a white kitten."

"I wish I were!--I wish I were anything but what I am!"

"And you can't make yourself any different, nor can I do it either. You
must be content to stay just what you are."

The little old woman said this--very firmly, but gently, too--with her
arms round his neck, and her lips on his forehead. It was the first
time the boy had ever heard any one talk like this, and he looked up in
surprise--but not in pain, for her sweet manner softened the hardness
of her words.

"Now, my prince--for you are a prince, and must behave as such--let us
see what we can do; how much I can do for you, or show you how to do
for yourself. Where is your travelling-cloak?"

Prince Dolor blushed extremely. "I--I put it away in the cupboard; I
suppose it is there still."

"You have never used it; you dislike it?"

He hesitated, not wishing to be impolite. "Don't you think it's--just a
little old and shabby, for a prince?"

The old woman laughed--long and loud, though very sweetly.

"Prince, indeed! Why, if all the princes in the world craved for it,
they couldn't get it, unless I gave it them. Old and shabby! It's the
most valuable thing imaginable! Very few ever have it; but I thought I
would give it to you, because--because you are different from other
people."

"Am I?" said the Prince, and looked first with curiosity, then with a
sort of anxiety, into his godmother's face, which was sad and grave,
with slow tears beginning to steal down.

She touched his poor little legs. "These are not like those of other
little boys."

"Indeed!--my nurse never told me that."

"Very likely not. But it is time you were told; and I tell you, because
I love you."

"Tell me what, dear godmother?"

"That you will never be able to walk, or run, or jump, or play--that
your life will be quite different to most people's lives: but it may be
a very happy life for all that. Do not be afraid."

"I am not afraid," said the boy; but he turned very pale, and his lips
began to quiver, though he did not actually cry--he was too old for
that, and, perhaps, too proud.

Though not wholly comprehending, he began dimly to guess what his
godmother meant. He had never seen any real live boys, but he had seen
pictures of them; running and jumping; which he had admired and tried
hard to imitate, but always failed. Now he began to understand why he
failed, and that he always should fail--that, in fact, he was not like
other little boys; and it was of no use his wishing to do as they did,
and play as they played, even if he had had them to play with. His was
a separate life, in which he must find out new work and new pleasures
for himself.

The sense of _the inevitable_, as grown-up people call it--that we
cannot have things as we want them to be, but as they are, and that we
must learn to bear them and make the best of them--this lesson, which
everybody has to learn soon or late--came, alas! sadly soon, to the
poor boy. He fought against it for a while, and then, quite overcome,
turned and sobbed bitterly in his godmother's arms.

She comforted him--I do not know how, except that love always comforts;
and then she whispered to him, in her sweet, strong, cheerful
voice--"Never mind!"

"No, I don't think I do mind--that is, I _won't_ mind," replied he,
catching the courage of her tone and speaking like a man, though he was
still such a mere boy.

"That is right, my prince!--that is being like a prince. Now we know
exactly where we are; let us put our shoulders to the wheel and----"

"We are in Hopeless Tower" (this was its name, if it had a name), "and
there is no wheel to put our shoulders to," said the child sadly.

"You little matter-of-fact goose! Well for you that you have a
godmother called----"

"What?" he eagerly asked.

"Stuff-and-nonsense."

"Stuff-and-nonsense! What a funny name!"

"Some people give it me, but they are not my most intimate friends.
These call me--never mind what," added the old woman, with a soft
twinkle in her eyes. "So as you know me, and know me well, you may give
me any name you please; it doesn't matter. But I am your godmother,
child. I have few godchildren; those I have love me dearly, and find me
the greatest blessing in all the world."

"I can well believe it," cried the little lame Prince, and forgot
his troubles in looking at her--as her figure dilated, her eyes grew
lustrous as stars, her very raiment brightened, and the whole room
seemed filled with her beautiful and beneficent presence like light.

He could have looked at her for ever--half in love, half in awe; but
she suddenly dwindled down into the little old woman all in grey, and
with a malicious twinkle in her eyes, asked for the travelling-cloak.

"Bring it out of the rubbish cupboard, and shake the dust off
it, quick!" said she to Prince Dolor, who hung his head, rather
ashamed. "Spread it out on the floor, and wait till the split closes
and the edges turn up like a rim all round. Then go and open the
sky-light--mind, I say _open the skylight_--set yourself down in the
middle of it, like a frog on a water-lily leaf; say 'Abracadabra, dum
dum dum,' and--see what will happen!"

The prince burst into a fit of laughing. It all seemed so exceedingly
silly; he wondered that a wise old woman like his godmother should talk
such nonsense.

"Stuff-and-nonsense, you mean," said she, answering, to his great
alarm, his unspoken thoughts. "Did I not tell you some people called me
by that name? Never mind; it doesn't harm me."

And she laughed--her merry laugh--as child-like as if she were the
prince's age instead of her own, whatever that might be. She certainly
was a most extraordinary old woman.

"Believe me or not, it doesn't matter," said she. "Here is the cloak:
when you want to go travelling on it, say _Abracadabra, dum dum dum_;
when you want to come back again, say _Abracadabra, tum tum ti_. That's
all; good-bye."

A puff of pleasant air passing by him, and making him feel for the
moment quite strong and well, was all the Prince was conscious of. His
most extraordinary godmother was gone.

"Really now, how rosy your Royal Highness's cheeks have grown! You seem
to have got well already," said the nurse, entering the room.

"I think I have," replied the Prince very gently--he felt kindly and
gently even to his grim nurse. "And now let me have my dinner, and go
you to your sewing as usual."

The instant she was gone, however, taking with her the plates
and dishes, which for the first time since his illness he had
satisfactorily cleared, Prince Dolor sprang down from his sofa, and
with one or two of his frog-like jumps, not graceful but convenient, he
reached the cupboard where he kept his toys, and looked everywhere for
his travelling-cloak.

Alas! it was not there.

While he was ill of the doldrums, his nurse, thinking it a good
opportunity for putting things to rights, had made a grand clearance
of all his "rubbish," as she considered it: his beloved headless
horses, broken carts, sheep without feet, and birds without wings--all
the treasures of his baby days, which he could not bear to part with.
Though he seldom played with them now, he liked just to feel they were
there.

They were all gone! and with them the travelling-cloak. He sat down on
the floor, looking at the empty shelves, so beautifully clean and tidy,
then burst out sobbing as if his heart would break.

But quietly--always quietly. He never let his nurse hear him cry. She
only laughed at him, as he felt she would laugh now.

"And it is all my own fault," he cried. "I ought to have taken better
care of my godmother's gift. O, godmother, forgive me! I'll never be so
careless again. I don't know what the cloak is exactly, but I am sure
it is something precious. Help me to find it again. Oh, don't let it be
stolen from me--don't, please!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed a silvery voice. "Why, that travelling-cloak is
the one thing in the world which nobody can steal. It is of no use to
anybody except the owner. Open your eyes, my prince, and see what you
shall see."

His dear old godmother, he thought, had turned eagerly round. But no;
he only beheld, lying in a corner of the room, all dust and cobwebs,
his precious travelling-cloak.

Prince Dolor darted towards it, tumbling several times on the way,--as
he often did tumble, poor boy! and pick himself up again, never
complaining. Snatching it to his breast, he hugged and kissed it,
cobwebs and all, as if it had been something alive. Then he began
unrolling it, wondering each minute what would happen. But what did
happen was so curious that I must leave it for another chapter.




                               CHAPTER V.


If any reader, big or little, should wonder whether there is a meaning
in this story, deeper than that of an ordinary fairy tale, I will own
that there is. But I have hidden it so carefully that the smaller
people, and many larger folk, will never find it out, and meantime the
book may be read straight on, like "Cinderella," or "Blue-Beard," or
"Hop-o'-my Thumb," for what interest it has, or what amusement it may
bring.

Having said this, I return to Prince Dolor, that little lame boy whom
many may think so exceedingly to be pitied. But if you had seen him
as he sat patiently untying his wonderful cloak, which was done up in
a very tight and perplexing parcel, using skilfully his deft little
hands, and knitting his brows with firm determination, while his eyes
glistened with pleasure, and energy, and eager anticipation--if you had
beheld him thus, you might have changed your opinion.

When we see people suffering or unfortunate, we feel very sorry for
them; but when we see them bravely bearing their sufferings, and making
the best of their misfortunes, it is quite a different feeling. We
respect, we admire them. One can respect and admire even a little child.

When Prince Dolor had patiently untied all the knots, a remarkable
thing happened. The cloak began to undo itself. Slowly unfolding, it
laid itself down on the carpet, as flat as if it had been ironed; the
split joined with a little sharp crick-crack, and the rim turned up all
round till it was breast-high; for meantime the cloak had grown and
grown, and become quite large enough for one person to sit in it, as
comfortable as if in a boat.

The Prince watched it rather anxiously; it was such an extraordinary,
not to say a frightening thing. However, he was no coward, but a
thorough boy, who, if he had been like other boys, would doubtless have
grown up daring and adventurous--a soldier, a sailor, or the like. As
it was, he could only show his courage morally, not physically, by
being afraid of nothing, and by doing boldly all that it was in his
narrow powers to do. And I am not sure but that in this way he showed
more real valour than if he had had six pairs of proper legs.

He said to himself, "What a goose I am! As if my dear godmother would
ever have given me anything to hurt me. Here goes!"

So, with one of his active leaps, he sprang right into the middle of
the cloak, where he squatted down, wrapping his arms tight round his
knees, for they shook a little and his heart beat fast. But there he
sat, steady and silent, waiting for what might happen next.

Nothing did happen, and he began to think nothing would, and to feel
rather disappointed, when he recollected the words he had been told to
repeat--"Abracadabra, dum, dum, dum!"

He repeated them, laughing all the while, they seemed such nonsense.
And then--and then----

Now, I don't expect anybody to believe what I am going to relate,
though a good many wise people have believed a good many sillier
things. And as seeing's believing, and I never saw it, I cannot be
expected implicitly to believe it myself, except in a sort of a way;
and yet there is truth in it--for some people.

The cloak rose, slowly and steadily, at first only a few inches, then
gradually higher and higher, till it nearly touched the skylight.
Prince Dolor's head actually bumped against the glass, or would have
done so, had he not crouched down, crying, "Oh, please don't hurt me!"
in a most melancholy voice.

Then he suddenly remembered his godmother's express command--"Open the
skylight!"

Regaining his courage at once, without a moment's delay, he lifted
up his head and began searching for the bolt, the cloak meanwhile
remaining perfectly still, balanced in air. But the minute the window
was opened, out it sailed--right out into the clear fresh air, with
nothing between it and the cloudless blue.

Prince Dolor had never felt any such delicious sensation before! I
can understand it. Cannot you? Did you never think, in watching the
rooks going home singly or in pairs, oaring their way across the calm
evening sky, till they vanish like black dots in the misty grey, how
pleasant it must feel to be up there, quite out of the noise and din of
the world, able to hear and see everything down below, yet troubled by
nothing and teased by no one--all alone, but perfectly content.

Something like this was the happiness of the little lame Prince when he
got out of Hopeless Tower, and found himself for the first time in the
pure open air, with the sky above him and the earth below.

True, there was nothing but earth and sky; no houses, no trees, no
rivers, mountains, seas--not a beast on the ground, or a bird in the
air. But to him even the level plain looked beautiful; and then there
was the glorious arch of the sky, with a little young moon sitting in
the west like a baby queen. And the evening breeze was so sweet and
fresh, it kissed him like his godmother's kisses; and by-and-by a few
stars came out, first two or three, and then quantities--quantities! so
that, when he began to count them, he was utterly bewildered.

[Illustration: "_By-and-by a few stars came out, first two or three,
and then quantities!_"]

By this time, however, the cool breeze had become cold, the mist
gathered, and as he had, as he said, no outdoor clothes, poor Prince
Dolor was not very comfortable. The dews fell damp on his curls--he
began to shiver.

"Perhaps I had better go home," thought he.

But how?--For in his excitement the other words which his godmother
had told him to use had slipped his memory. They were only a little
different from the first, but in that slight difference all the
importance lay. As he repeated his "Abracadabra," trying ever so many
other syllables after it, the cloak only went faster and faster,
skimming on through the dusky empty air.

The poor little Prince began to feel frightened. What if his wonderful
travelling-cloak should keep on thus travelling, perhaps to the world's
end, carrying with it a poor, tired, hungry boy, who, after all, was
beginning to think there was something very pleasant in supper and bed?

"Dear godmother," he cried pitifully, "do help me! Tell me just this
once and I'll never forget again."

Instantly the words came rushing into his head--"Abracadabra, tum, tum,
ti!" Was that it? Ah, yes!--for the cloak began to turn slowly. He
repeated the charm again, more distinctly and firmly, when it gave a
gentle dip, like a nod of satisfaction, and immediately started back,
as fast as ever, in the direction of the tower.

He reached the skylight, which he found exactly as he had left it,
and slipped in, cloak and all, as easily as he had got out. He had
scarcely reached the floor, and was still sitting in the middle of his
travelling-cloak--like a frog on a water-lily leaf, as his godmother
had expressed it--when he heard his nurse's voice outside.

"Bless us! what has become of your Royal Highness all this time? To
sit stupidly here at the window till it is quite dark, and leave the
skylight open too. Prince! what can you be thinking of? You are the
silliest boy I ever knew."

"Am I?" said he absently, and never heeding her crossness; or his only
anxiety was lest she might find out anything.

She would have been a very clever person to have done so. The instant
Prince Dolor got off it, the cloak folded itself up into the tiniest
possible parcel, tied all its own knots, and rolled itself of its own
accord into the farthest and darkest corner of the room. If the nurse
had seen it, which she didn't, she would have taken it for a mere
bundle of rubbish not worth noticing.

Shutting the skylight with an angry bang, she brought in the supper and
lit the candles, with her usual unhappy expression of countenance. But
Prince Dolor hardly saw it; he only saw, hid in the corner where nobody
else would see it, his wonderful travelling-cloak. And though his
supper was not particularly nice, he ate it heartily, scarcely hearing
a word of his nurse's grumbling, which to-night seemed to have taken
the place of her sullen silence.

[Illustration: "_She brought in the supper and lit the candles,
with her usual unhappy expression ... he only saw his wonderful
travelling-cloak._" _Page 58._]

"Poor woman!" he thought, when he paused a minute to listen and look at
her, with those quiet, happy eyes, so like his mother's. "Poor woman!
_she_ hasn't got a travelling-cloak!"

And when he was left alone at last, and crept into his little
bed, where he lay awake a good while, watching what he called his
"sky-garden," all planted with stars, like flowers, his chief thought
was, "I must be up very early to-morrow morning and get my lessons
done, and then I'll go travelling all over the world on my beautiful
cloak."

So, next day, he opened his eyes with the sun, and went with a good
heart to his lessons. They had hitherto been the chief amusement of
his dull life; now, I am afraid, he found them also a little dull. But
he tried to be good--I don't say Prince Dolor always was good, but he
generally tried to be--and when his mind went wandering after the dark
dusty corner where lay his precious treasure, he resolutely called it
back again.

"For," he said, "how ashamed my godmother would be of me if I grew up a
stupid boy."

But the instant lessons were done, and he was alone in the empty room,
he crept across the floor, undid the shabby little bundle, his fingers
trembling with eagerness, climbed on the chair, and thence to the
table, so as to unbar the skylight--he forgot nothing now--said his
magic charm, and was away out of the window, as children say, "in a few
minutes less than no time!"

Nobody missed him. He was accustomed to sit so quietly always, that
his nurse, though only in the next room, perceived no difference. And
besides, she might have gone in and out a dozen times, and it would
have been just the same; she never could have found out his absence.

For what do you think the clever godmother did? She took a quantity
of moonshine, or some equally convenient material, and made an image,
which she set on the window-sill reading, or by the table drawing,
where it looked so like Prince Dolor, that any common observer would
never have guessed the deception; and even the boy would have been
puzzled to know which was the image and which was himself.

And all this while the happy little fellow was away, floating in the
air on his magic cloak, and seeing all sorts of wonderful things--or
they seemed wonderful to him, who had hitherto seen nothing at all.

First, there were the flowers that grew on the plain, which, whenever
the cloak came near enough, he strained his eyes to look at; they were
very tiny, but very beautiful--white saxifrage, and yellow lotus,
and ground-thistles, purple and bright, with many others the names
of which I do not know. No more did Prince Dolor, though he tried to
find them out by recalling any pictures he had seen of them. But he
was too far off; and though it was pleasant enough to admire them as
brilliant patches of colour, still he would have liked to examine them
all. He was, as a little girl I know once said of a playfellow, "a very
_examining_ boy."

"I wonder," he thought, "whether I could see better through a pair of
glasses like those my nurse reads with, and takes such care of. How I
would take care of them too! if only I had a pair!"

Immediately he felt something queer and hard fixing itself on to the
bridge of his nose. It was a pair of the prettiest gold spectacles ever
seen; and looking downwards, he found that, though ever so high above
the ground, he could see every minute blade of grass, every tiny bud
and flower--nay, even the insects that walked over them.

"Thank you, thank you!" he cried in a gush of gratitude--to anybody or
everybody, but especially to his dear godmother, whom he felt sure had
given him this new present. He amused himself with it for ever so long,
with his chin pressed on the rim of the cloak, gazing down upon the
grass, every square foot of which was a mine of wonders.

Then, just to rest his eyes, he turned them up to the sky--the blue,
bright, empty sky, which he had looked at so often and seen nothing.

Now, surely there was something. A long, black, wavy line, moving on
in the distance, not by chance, as the clouds move apparently, but
deliberately, as if it were alive. He might have seen it before--he
almost thought he had; but then he could not tell what it was. Looking
at it through his spectacles, he discovered that it really was alive;
being a long string of birds, flying one after the other, their wings
moving steadily and their heads pointed in one direction, as steadily
as if each were a little ship, guided invisibly by an unerring helm.

"They must be the passage-birds flying seawards!" cried the boy, who
had read a little about them, and had a great talent for putting two
and two together and finding out all he could. "Oh, how I should like
to see them quite close, and to know where they come from, and whither
they are going! How I wish I knew everything in all the world!"

A silly speech for even an "examining" little boy to make; because, as
we grow older, the more we know, the more we find out there is to know.
And Prince Dolor blushed when he had said it, and hoped nobody had
heard him.

Apparently somebody had, however; for the cloak gave a sudden bound
forward, and presently he found himself high up in air, in the very
middle of that band of ærial travellers, who had no magic cloak to
travel on--nothing except their wings. Yet there they were, making
their fearless way through the sky.

Prince Dolor looked at them, as one after the other they glided past
him; and they looked at him--those pretty swallows, with their changing
necks and bright eyes--as if wondering to meet in mid-air such an
extraordinary sort of a bird.

[Illustration: "_They looked at him ... as if wondering to meet in
mid-air such an extraordinary sort of bird._" _Page 62._]

"Oh, I wish I were going with you, you lovely creatures!" cried the
boy. "I'm getting so tired of this dull plain, and the dreary and
lonely tower. I do so want to see the world! Pretty swallows, dear
swallows! tell me what it looks like--the beautiful, wonderful world!"

But the swallows flew past him--steadily, slowly, pursuing their course
as if inside each little head had been a mariner's compass, to guide
them safe over land and sea, direct to the place where they desired to
go.

The boy looked after them with envy. For a long time he followed with
his eyes the faint wavy black line as it floated away, sometimes
changing its curves a little, but never deviating from its settled
course, till it vanished entirely out of sight.

Then he settled himself down in the centre of the cloak, feeling quite
sad and lonely.

"I think I'll go home," said he, and repeated his "Abracadabra, tum,
tum, ti!" with a rather heavy heart. The more he had, the more he
wanted; and it is not always one can have everything one wants--at
least, at the exact minute one craves for it; not even though one is a
prince, and has a powerful and beneficent godmother.

He did not like to vex her by calling for her, and telling her how
unhappy he was, in spite of all her goodness; so he just kept his
trouble to himself, went back to his lonely tower, and spent three days
in silent melancholy without even attempting another journey on his
travelling-cloak.




                              CHAPTER VI.


The fourth day it happened that the deaf-mute paid his accustomed
visit, after which Prince Dolor's spirits rose. They always did, when
he got the new books, which, just to relieve his conscience, the King
of Nomansland regularly sent to his nephew; with many new toys also,
though the latter were disregarded now.

"Toys indeed! when I'm a big boy," said the Prince with disdain,
and would scarcely condescend to mount a rocking-horse, which had
come, somehow or other--I can't be expected to explain things very
exactly--packed on the back of the other, the great black horse, which
stood and fed contentedly at the bottom of the tower.

Prince Dolor leaned over and looked at it, and thought how grand it
must be to get upon its back--this grand live steed--and ride away,
like the pictures of knights.

"Suppose I was a knight," he said to himself; "then I should be obliged
to ride out and see the world."

But he kept all these thoughts to himself, and just sat still,
devouring his new books till he had come to the end of them all. It
was a repast not unlike the Barmecide's feast which you read of in the
"Arabian Nights," which consisted of very elegant but empty dishes, or
that supper of Sancho Panza in "Don Quixote," where, the minute the
smoking dishes came on the table, the physician waved his hand and they
were all taken away.

Thus, almost all the ordinary delights of boy-life had been taken away
from, or rather never given to, this poor little Prince.

"I wonder," he would sometimes think--"I wonder what it feels like to
be on the back of a horse, galloping away, or holding the reins in
a carriage, and tearing across the country, or jumping a ditch, or
running a race, such as I read of or see in pictures. What a lot of
things there are that I should like to do! But first, I should like to
go and see the world. I'll try."

Apparently it was his godmother's plan always to let him try, and try
hard, before he gained anything. This day the knots that tied up his
travelling-cloak were more than usually troublesome, and he was a
full half hour before he got out into the open air, and found himself
floating merrily over the top of the tower.

Hitherto, in all his journeys he had never let himself go out of sight
of home, for the dreary building, after all, was home--he remembered
no other; but now he felt sick of the very look of his tower, with its
round smooth walls and level battlements.

"Off we go!" cried he, when the cloak stirred itself with a slight slow
motion, as if waiting his orders. "Anywhere--anywhere, so that I am
away from here, and out into the world."

As he spoke, the cloak, as if seized suddenly with a new idea, bounded
forward and went skimming through the air, faster than the very fastest
railway train.

"Gee-up, gee-up!" cried Prince Dolor in great excitement. "This is as
good as riding a race."

And he patted the cloak as if it had been a horse--that is, in the way
he supposed horses ought to be patted; and tossed his head back to meet
the fresh breeze, and pulled his coat-collar up and his hat down, as he
felt the wind grow keener and colder, colder than anything he had ever
known.

"What does it matter though?" said he. "I'm a boy, and boys ought not
to mind anything."

Still, for all his good-will, by-and-by he began to shiver exceedingly;
also, he had come away without his dinner, and he grew frightfully
hungry. And to add to everything, the sunshiny day changed into rain,
and being high up, in the very midst of the clouds, he got soaked
through and through in a very few minutes.

"Shall I turn back?" meditated he. "Suppose I say 'Abracadabra?'"

Here he stopped, for already the cloak gave an obedient lurch, as if it
were expecting to be sent home immediately.

"No--I can't--I can't go back! I must go forward and see the world. But
oh! if I had but the shabbiest old rug to shelter me from the rain, or
the driest morsel of bread and cheese, just to keep me from starving!
Still, I don't much mind; I'm a prince, and ought to be able to stand
anything. Hold on, cloak, we'll make the best of it."

It was a most curious circumstance, but no sooner had he said this than
he felt stealing over his knees something warm and soft; in fact, a
most beautiful bearskin, which folded itself round him quite naturally,
and cuddled him up as closely as if he had been the cub of the kind
old mother-bear that once owned it. Then feeling in his pocket, which
suddenly stuck out in a marvellous way, he found, not exactly bread and
cheese, nor even sandwiches, but a packet of the most delicious food
he had ever tasted. It was not meat, nor pudding, but a combination of
both, and it served him excellently for both. He ate his dinner with
the greatest gusto imaginable, till he grew so thirsty he did not know
what to do.

"Couldn't I have just one drop of water, if it didn't trouble you too
much, kindest of godmothers."

For he really thought this want was beyond her power to supply.
All the water which supplied Hopeless Tower was pumped up with
difficulty, from a deep artesian well--there were such things known
in Nomansland--which had been made at the foot of it. But around, for
miles upon miles, the desolate plain was perfectly dry. And above it,
high in air, how could he expect to find a well, or to get even a drop
of water?

He forgot one thing--the rain. While he spoke, it came on in another
wild burst, as if the clouds had poured themselves out in a passion of
crying, wetting him certainly, but leaving behind, in a large glass
vessel which he had never noticed before, enough water to quench the
thirst of two or three boys at least. And it was so fresh, so pure--as
water from the clouds always is, when it does not catch the soot from
city chimneys and other defilements--that he drank it, every drop, with
the greatest delight and content.

Also, as soon as it was empty, the rain filled it again, so that he
was able to wash his face and hands and refresh himself exceedingly.
Then the sun came out and dried him in no time. After that he curled
himself up under the bearskin rug, and though he determined to be the
most wide-awake boy imaginable, being so exceedingly snug and warm and
comfortable, Prince Dolor condescended to shut his eyes, just for one
minute. The next minute he was sound asleep.

When he awoke, he found himself floating over a country quite unlike
anything he had ever seen before.

Yet it was nothing but what most of you children see every day and
never notice it--a pretty country landscape, like England, Scotland,
France, or any other land you choose to name. It had no particular
features--nothing in it grand or lovely--was simply pretty, nothing
more; yet to Prince Dolor, who had never gone beyond his lonely tower
and level plain, it appeared the most charming sight imaginable.

First, there was a river. It came tumbling down the hillside, frothing
and foaming, playing at hide-and-seek among rocks, then bursting out in
noisy fun like a child, to bury itself in deep still pools. Afterwards
it went steadily on for a while, like a good grown-up person, till it
came to another big rock, where it misbehaved itself extremely. It
turned into a cataract and went tumbling over and over, after a fashion
that made the Prince--who had never seen water before, except in his
bath or his drinking-cup--clap his hands with delight.

"It is so active, so alive! I like things active and alive!" cried he,
and watched it shimmering and dancing, whirling and leaping, till,
after a few windings and vagaries, it settled into a respectable
stream. After that it went along, deep and quiet, but flowing steadily
on, till it reached a large lake, into which it slipped, and so ended
its course.

[Illustration: "_After a few windings and vagaries, it settled into a
respectable stream._"]

All this the boy saw, either with his own naked eye, or through his
gold spectacles. He saw also as in a picture, beautiful but silent,
many other things, which struck him with wonder, especially a grove of
trees.

Only think, to have lived to his age (which he himself did not know,
as he did not know his own birthday) and never to have seen trees! As
he floated over these oaks, they seemed to him--trunk, branches, and
leaves--the most curious sight imaginable.

"If I could only get nearer, so as to touch them," said he, and
immediately the obedient cloak ducked down; Prince Dolor made a snatch
at the topmost twig of the tallest tree, and caught a bunch of leaves
in his hand.

Just a bunch of green leaves--such as we see in myriads; watching them
bud, grow, fall, and then kicking them along on the ground as if they
were worth nothing. Yet, how wonderful they are--every one of them
a little different. I don't suppose you could ever find two leaves
exactly alike, in form, colour, and size--no more than you could find
two faces alike, or two characters exactly the same. The plan of this
world is infinite similarity and yet infinite variety.

Prince Dolor examined his leaves with the greatest curiosity--and also
a little caterpillar that he found walking over one of them. He coaxed
it to take an additional walk over his finger, which it did with the
greatest dignity and decorum, as if it, Mr. Caterpillar, were the most
important individual in existence. It amused him for a long time; and
when a sudden gust of wind blew it overboard, leaves and all, he felt
quite disconsolate.

"Still, there must be many live creatures in the world besides
caterpillars. I should like to see a few of them."

The cloak gave a little dip down, as if to say "All right, my Prince,"
and bore him across the oak forest to a long fertile valley--called in
Scotland a strath, and in England a weald--but what they call it in
the tongue of Nomansland I do not know. It was made up of cornfields,
pasturefields, lanes, hedges, brooks, and ponds. Also, in it were what
the Prince had desired to see, a quantity of living creatures, wild
and tame. Cows and horses, lambs and sheep, fed in the meadows; pigs
and fowls walked about the farmyards; and, in lonelier places, hares
scudded, rabbits burrowed, and pheasants and partridges, with many
other smaller birds, inhabited the fields and woods.

[Illustration: "_It was made up of cornfields, pasturefields, lanes,
hedges, brooks, and ponds._"]

[Illustration: "_In it were what the Prince had desired to see, a
quantity of living creatures._"]

Through his wonderful spectacles the Prince could see everything;
but, as I said, it was a silent picture; he was too high up to catch
anything except a faint murmur, which only aroused his anxiety to hear
more.

"I have as good as two pairs of eyes," he thought. "I wonder if my
godmother would give me a second pair of ears."

Scarcely had he spoken, than he found lying on his lap the most curious
little parcel, all done up in silvery paper. And it contained--what do
you think? Actually, a pair of silver ears, which, when he tried them
on, fitted so exactly over his own, that he hardly felt them, except
for the difference they made in his hearing.

There is something which we listen to daily and never notice. I mean
the sounds of the visible world, animate and inanimate. Winds blowing,
waters flowing, trees stirring, insects whirring (dear me! I am quite
unconsciously writing rhyme), with the various cries of birds and
beasts--lowing cattle, bleating sheep, grunting pigs, and cackling
hens--all the infinite discords that somehow or other make a beautiful
harmony.

We hear this, and are so accustomed to it that we think nothing of it;
but Prince Dolor, who had lived all his days in the dead silence of
Hopeless Tower, heard it for the first time. And oh! if you had seen
his face.

He listened, listened, as if he could never have done listening. And
he looked and looked, as if he could not gaze enough. Above all, the
motion of the animals delighted him: cows walking, horses galloping,
little lambs and calves running races across the meadows, were such
a treat for him to watch--he that was always so quiet. But, these
creatures having four legs, and he only two, the difference did not
strike him painfully.

Still, by-and-by, after the fashion of children--and, I fear, of many
big people too--he began to want something more than he had, something
that would be quite fresh and new.

"Godmother," he said, having now begun to believe that, whether he saw
her or not, he could always speak to her with full confidence that she
would hear him--"Godmother, all these creatures I like exceedingly--but
I should like better to see a creature like myself. Couldn't you show
me just one little boy?"

There was a sigh behind him--it might have been only the wind--and the
cloak remained so long balanced motionless in air, that he was half
afraid his godmother had forgotten him, or was offended with him for
asking too much. Suddenly, a shrill whistle startled him, even through
his silver ears, and looking downwards, he saw start up from behind a
bush on a common, something--

Neither a sheep, nor a horse, nor a cow--nothing upon four legs. This
creature had only two; but they were long, straight, and strong. And
it had a lithe active body, and a curly head of black hair set upon
its shoulders. It was a boy, a shepherdboy, about the Prince's own
age--but, oh! so different.

Not that he was an ugly boy--though his face was almost as red as his
hands, and his shaggy hair matted like the backs of his own sheep. He
was rather a nice-looking lad; and seemed so bright, and healthy, and
good-tempered--"jolly" would be the word, only I am not sure if they
have such an one in the elegant language of Nomansland--that the little
Prince watched him with great admiration.

"Might he come and play with me? I would drop down to the ground to
him, or fetch him up to me here. Oh, how nice it would be if I only had
a little boy to play with me!"

But the cloak, usually so obedient to his wishes, disobeyed him now.
There were evidently some things which his godmother either could
not or would not give. The cloak hung stationary, high in air, never
attempting to descend. The shepherd lad evidently took it for a large
bird and, shading his eyes, looked up at it, making the Prince's heart
beat fast.

[Illustration: "_The shepherd lad evidently took it for a large bird._"]

However, nothing ensued. The boy turned round, with a long, loud
whistle--seemingly his usual and only way of expressing his feelings.
He could not make the thing out exactly--it was a rather mysterious
affair, but it did not trouble him much--_he_ was not an "examining"
boy.

Then, stretching himself, for he had been evidently half asleep, he
began flopping his shoulders with his arms, to wake and warm himself;
while his dog, a rough collie, who had been guarding the sheep
meanwhile, began to jump upon him, barking with delight.

"Down Snap, down! Stop that, or I'll thrash you," the Prince heard him
say; though with such a rough hard voice and queer pronunciation that
it was difficult to make the words out. "Hollo! Let's warm ourselves by
a race."

They started off together, boy and dog--barking and shouting, till it
was doubtful which made the most noise or ran the fastest. A regular
steeple-chase it was: first across the level common, greatly disturbing
the quiet sheep; and then tearing away across country, scrambling
through hedges, and leaping ditches, and tumbling up and down over
ploughed fields. They did not seem to have anything to run for--but as
if they did it, both of them, for the mere pleasure of motion.

And what a pleasure that seemed! To the dog of course, but scarcely
less so to the boy. How he skimmed along over the ground--his cheeks
glowing, and his hair flying, and his legs--oh, what a pair of legs he
had!

Prince Dolor watched him with great intentness, and in a state of
excitement almost equal to that of the runner himself--for a while.
Then the sweet pale face grew a trifle paler, the lips began to quiver
and the eyes to fill.

"How nice it must be to run like that!" he said softly, thinking that
never--no, never in this world--would he be able to do the same.

Now he understood what his godmother had meant when she gave him his
travelling-cloak, and why he had heard that sigh--he was sure it was
hers--when he had asked to see "just one little boy."

"I think I had rather not look at him again," said the poor little
Prince, drawing himself back into the centre of his cloak, and resuming
his favourite posture, sitting like a Turk, with his arms wrapped round
his feeble, useless legs.

"You're no good to me," he said, patting them mournfully. "You never
will be any good to me. I wonder why I had you at all; I wonder why I
was born at all, since I was not to grow up like other little boys.
_Why_ not?"

A question, so strange, so sad, yet so often occurring in some form
or other, in this world--as you will find, my children, when you are
older--that even if he had put it to his mother she could only have
answered it, as we have to answer many as difficult things, by simply
saying, "I don't know." There is much that we do not know, and cannot
understand--we big folks, no more than you little ones. We have to
accept it all just as you have to accept anything which your parents
may tell you, even though you don't as yet see the reason of it. You
may some time if you do exactly as they tell you, and are content to
wait.

Prince Dolor sat a good while thus, or it appeared to him a good while,
so many thoughts came and went through his poor young mind--thoughts of
great bitterness, which, little though he was, seemed to make him grow
years older in a few minutes.

Then he fancied the cloak began to rock gently to and fro, with a
soothing kind of motion, as if he were in somebody's arms: somebody who
did not speak, but loved him and comforted him without need of words;
not by deceiving him with false encouragement or hope, but by making
him see the plain hard truth, in all its hardness, and thus letting him
quietly face it, till it grew softened down, and did not seem nearly so
dreadful after all.

Through the dreary silence and blankness, for he had placed himself so
that he could see nothing but the sky, and had taken off his silver
ears, as well as his gold spectacles--what was the use of either when
he had no legs to walk or run?--up from below there rose a delicious
sound.

You have heard it hundreds of times, my children, and so have I. When I
was a child I thought there was nothing so sweet; and I think so still.
It was just the song of a skylark, mounting higher and higher from the
ground, till it came so close that Prince Dolor could distinguish its
quivering wings and tiny body, almost too tiny to contain such a gush
of music.

"O, you beautiful, beautiful bird!" cried he; "I should dearly like to
take you in and cuddle you. That is, if I could--if I dared."

But he hesitated. The little brown creature with its loud heavenly
voice almost made him afraid. Nevertheless, it also made him happy;
and he watched and listened--so absorbed that he forgot all regret and
pain, forgot everything in the world except the little lark.

It soared and soared, and he was just wondering if it would soar out
of sight, and what in the world he should do when it was gone, when it
suddenly closed its wings, as larks do, when they mean to drop to the
ground. But, instead of dropping to the ground, it dropped right into
the little boy's breast.

What felicity! If it would only stay! A tiny soft thing to fondle and
kiss, to sing to him all day long, and be his playfellow and companion,
tame and tender, while to the rest of the world it was a wild bird of
the air. What a pride, what a delight! To have something that nobody
else had--something all his own. As the travelling-cloak travelled on,
he little heeded where, and the lark still stayed, nestled down in his
bosom, hopped from his hand to his shoulder, and kissed him with its
dainty beak, as if it loved him, Prince Dolor forgot all his grief, and
was entirely happy.

But when he got in sight of Hopeless Tower, a painful thought struck
him.

"My pretty bird, what am I to do with you? If I take you into my room
and shut you up there, you, a wild skylark of the air, what will become
of you? I am used to this, but you are not. You will be so miserable,
and suppose my nurse should find you--she who can't bear the sound of
singing? Besides, I remember her once telling me that the nicest thing
she ever ate in her life was lark pie!"

The little boy shivered all over at the thought. And, though the merry
lark immediately broke into the loudest carol, as if saying derisively
that he defied anybody to eat _him_--still Prince Dolor was very
uneasy. In another minute he had made up his mind.

"No, my bird, nothing so dreadful shall happen to you if I can help it;
I would rather do without you altogether. Yes, I'll try. Fly away, my
darling, my beautiful! Good-bye, my merry, merry bird."

Opening his two caressing hands, in which, as if for protection, he
had folded it, he let the lark go. It lingered a minute, perching on
the rim of the cloak, and looking at him with eyes of almost human
tenderness; then away it flew, far up into the blue sky. It was only a
bird.

But, some time after, when Prince Dolor had eaten his supper--somewhat
drearily, except for the thought that he could not possibly sup
off lark pie now--and gone quietly to bed, the old familiar little
bed, where he was accustomed to sleep, or lie awake contentedly
thinking--suddenly he heard outside the window a little faint
carol--faint but cheerful--cheerful, even though it was the middle of
the night.

The dear little lark! it had not flown away after all. And it was
truly the most extraordinary bird, for, unlike ordinary larks, it kept
hovering about the tower in the silence and darkness of the night,
outside the window or over the roof. Whenever he listened for a moment,
he heard it singing still.

He went to sleep as happy as a king.




                              CHAPTER VII.


"Happy as a king." How far kings are happy I cannot say, no more than
could Prince Dolor, though he had once been a king himself. But he
remembered nothing about it, and there was nobody to tell him, except
his nurse, who had been forbidden upon pain of death to let him know
anything about his dead parents, or the king his uncle, or, indeed, any
part of his own history.

Sometimes he speculated about himself, whether he had had a father and
mother as other little boys had, what they had been like, and why he
had never seen them. But, knowing nothing about them, he did not miss
them--only once or twice, reading pretty stories about little children
and their mothers, who helped them when they were in difficulty, and
comforted them when they were sick, he, feeling ill and dull and
lonely, wondered what had become of his mother, and why she never came
to see him.

Then, in his history lessons, of course, he read about kings and
princes, and the governments of different countries, and the events
that happened there. And though he but faintly took in all this, still
he did take it in, a little, and worried his young brain about it, and
perplexed his nurse with questions, to which she returned sharp and
mysterious answers, which only set him thinking the more.

He had plenty of time for thinking. After his last journey in the
travelling-cloak, the journey which had given him so much pain, his
desire to see the world had somehow faded away. He contented himself
with reading his books, and looking out of the tower windows, and
listening to his beloved little lark, which had come home with him that
day, and never left him again.

True, it kept out of the way; and though his nurse sometimes dimly
heard it, and said, "What is that horrid noise outside?" she never got
the faintest chance of making it into a lark pie. Prince Dolor had his
pet all to himself, and though he seldom saw it, he knew it was near
him, and he caught continually, at odd hours of the day, and even in
the night, fragments of its delicious song.

All during the winter--so far as there ever was any difference between
summer and winter in Hopeless Tower--the little bird cheered and amused
him. He scarcely needed anything more--not even his travelling-cloak,
which lay bundled up unnoticed in a corner, tied up in its innumerable
knots. Nor did his godmother come near him. It seemed as if she had
given these treasures and left him alone--to use them, or lose them,
apply them, or misapply them, according to his own choice. That is all
we can do with children, when they grow into big children, old enough
to distinguish between right and wrong, and too old to be forced to do
either.

Prince Dolor was now quite a big boy. Not tall--alas! he never could be
that, with his poor little shrunken legs; which were of no use, only an
encumbrance. But he was stout and strong, with great sturdy shoulders,
and muscular arms, upon which he could swing himself about almost like
a monkey. As if in compensation for his useless lower limbs, nature had
given to these extra strength and activity. His face, too, was very
handsome; thinner, firmer, more manly; but still the sweet face of his
childhood--his mother's own face.

How his mother would have liked to look at him! Perhaps she did--who
knows!

The boy was not a stupid boy either. He could learn almost anything
he chose--and he did choose, which was more than half the battle. He
never gave up his lessons till he had learnt them all--never thought it
a punishment that he had to work at them, and that they cost him a deal
of trouble sometimes.

"But," thought he, "men work, and it must be so grand to be a man;--a
prince too; and I fancy princes work harder than anybody--except kings.
The princes I read about generally turn into kings. I wonder"--the
boy was always wondering--"Nurse"--and one day he startled her with a
sudden question--"tell me--shall I ever be a king?"

The woman stood, perplexed beyond expression. So long a time had passed
by since her crime--if it was a crime--and her sentence, that she now
seldom thought of either. Even her punishment--to be shut up for life
in Hopeless Tower--she had gradually got used to. Used also to the
little lame prince, her charge--whom at first she had hated, though she
carefully did everything to keep him alive, since upon him her own life
hung. But latterly she had ceased to hate him, and, in a sort of way,
almost loved him--at least, enough to be sorry for him--an innocent
child, imprisoned here till he grew into an old man--and became a dull,
worn-out creature like herself. Sometimes, watching him, she felt more
sorry for him than even for herself; and then, seeing she looked a less
miserable and ugly woman, he did not shrink from her as usual.

He did not now. "Nurse--dear nurse," said he, "I don't mean to vex you,
but tell me--what is a king? shall I ever be one?"

When she began to think less of herself and more of the child, the
woman's courage increased. The idea came to her--what harm would it be,
even if he did know his own history? Perhaps he ought to know it--for
there had been various ups and downs, usurpations, revolutions, and
restorations in Nomansland, as in most other countries. Something might
happen--who could tell? Changes might occur. Possibly a crown would
even yet be set upon those pretty, fair curls--which she began to think
prettier than ever when she saw the imaginary coronet upon them.

She sat down, considering whether her oath, never to "say a word" to
Prince Dolor about himself, would be broken, if she were to take a
pencil and write what was to be told. A mere quibble--a mean, miserable
quibble. But then she was a miserable woman, more to be pitied than
scorned.

After long doubt, and with great trepidation, she put her finger to her
lips, and taking the Prince's slate--with the sponge tied to it, ready
to rub out the writing in a minute--she wrote--

"You are a king."

[Illustration: "_After long doubt ... she put her finger to her lips,
and taking the Prince's slate ... wrote--'You are a king.'_"]

Prince Dolor started. His face grew pale, and then flushed all over;
his eyes glistened; he held himself erect. Lame as he was, anybody
could see he was born to be a king.

"Hush!" said his nurse, as he was beginning to speak. And then,
terribly frightened all the while--people who have done wrong always
are frightened--she wrote down in a few hurried sentences his history.
How his parents had died--his uncle had usurped his throne, and sent
him to end his days in this lonely tower.

"I, too," added she, bursting into tears. "Unless, indeed, you could
get out into the world, and fight for your rights like a man. And fight
for me also, my prince, that I may not die in this desolate place."

"Poor old nurse!" said the boy compassionately. For somehow, boy as he
was, when he heard he was born to be a king, he felt like a man--like a
king--who could afford to be tender because he was strong.

He scarcely slept that night, and even though he heard his little lark
singing in the sunrise, he barely listened to it. Things more serious
and important had taken possession of his mind.

"Suppose," thought he, "I were to do as she says, and go out into the
world, no matter how it hurts me--the world of people, active people,
as active as that boy I saw. They might only laugh at me--poor helpless
creature that I am; but still I might show them I could do something.
At any rate, I might go and see if there was anything for me to do.
Godmother, help me!"

It was so long since he had asked her help, that he was hardly
surprised when he got no answer--only the little lark outside the
window sang louder and louder, and the sun rose, flooding the room with
light.

Prince Dolor sprang out of bed, and began dressing himself which was
hard work, for he was not used to it--he had always been accustomed to
depend upon his nurse for everything.

"But I must now learn to be independent," thought he. "Fancy a king
being dressed like a baby!"

So he did the best he could--awkwardly but cheerily--and then he leaped
to the corner where lay his travelling-cloak, untied it as before,
and watched it unrolling itself--which it did rapidly, with a hearty
good-will, as if quite tired of idleness. So was Prince Dolor--or felt
as if he was. He jumped into the middle of it, said his charm, and was
out through the skylight immediately.

"Good-bye, pretty lark!" he shouted, as he passed it on the wing, still
warbling its carol to the newly-risen sun. "You have been my pleasure,
my delight; now I must go and work. Sing to old nurse till I come back
again. Perhaps she'll hear you--perhaps she won't--but it will do her
good all the same. Good-bye!"

But, as the cloak hung irresolute in air, he suddenly remembered that
he had not determined where to go--indeed, he did not know, and there
was nobody to tell him.

"Godmother," he cried, in much perplexity, "you know what I want--at
least, I hope you do, for I hardly do myself--take me where I ought to
go; show me whatever I ought so see--never mind what I like to see,"
as a sudden idea came into his mind that he might see many painful and
disagreeable things. But this journey was not for pleasure--as before.
He was not a baby now, to do nothing but play--big boys do not always
play. Nor men neither--they work. Thus much Prince Dolor knew--though
very little more. And as the cloak started off, travelling faster
than he had ever known it to do--through sky-land and cloud-land,
over freezing mountain-tops, and desolate stretches of forest, and
smiling cultivated plains, and great lakes that seemed to him almost as
shoreless as the sea--he was often rather frightened. But he crouched
down, silent and quiet; what was the use of making a fuss? and,
wrapping himself up in his bear-skin, waited for what was to happen.

After some time he heard a murmur in the distance, increasing more
and more till it grew like the hum of a gigantic hive of bees. And,
stretching his chin over the rim of his cloak, Prince Dolor saw--far,
far below him, yet with his gold spectacles and silver ears on, he
could distinctly hear and see--What?

Most of us have sometime or other visited a great metropolis--have
wandered through its network of streets--lost ourselves in its crowds
of people--looked up at its tall rows of houses, its grand public
buildings, churches and squares. Also, perhaps, we have peeped into its
miserable little back alleys, where dirty children play in gutters all
day and half the night--or where men reel tipsy and women fight--where
even young boys go about picking pockets, with nobody to tell them it
is wrong, except the policeman; and he simply takes them off to prison.
And all this wretchedness is close behind the grandeur--like the two
sides of the leaf of a book.

An awful sight is a large city, seen anyhow, from anywhere. But,
suppose you were to see it from the upper air; where, with your eyes
and ears open, you could take in everything at once? What would it look
like? How would you feel about it? I hardly know myself. Do you?

Prince Dolor had need to be a king--that is, a boy with a kingly
nature--to be able to stand such a sight without being utterly
overcome. But he was very much bewildered--as bewildered as a blind
person who is suddenly made to see.

He gazed down on the city below him, and then put his hand over his
eyes.

"I can't bear to look at it, it is so beautiful--so dreadful. And I
don't understand it--not one bit. There is nobody to tell me about it.
I wish I had somebody to speak to."

"Do you? Then pray speak to me. I was always considered good at
conversation."

The voice that squeaked out this reply was an excellent imitation of
the human one, though it came only from a bird. No lark this time,
however, but a great black and white creature that flew into the cloak,
and began walking round and round on the edge of it with a dignified
stride, one foot before the other, like any unfeathered biped you could
name.

"I haven't the honour of your acquaintance, sir," said the boy politely.

[Illustration: "_One half the people seemed so happy and busy._" _Page
90._]

[Illustration: "_The other half were so wretched and miserable._" _Page
90._]

"Ma'am, if you please. I am a mother bird, and my name is Mag, and
I shall be happy to tell you everything you want to know. For I know
a great deal; and I enjoy talking. My family is of great antiquity;
we have built in this palace for hundreds--that is to say, dozens of
years. I am intimately acquainted with the King, the Queen, and the
little princes and princesses--also the maids of honour, and all the
inhabitants of the city. I talk a good deal, but I always talk sense,
and I dare say I should be exceedingly useful to a poor little ignorant
boy like you."

"I am a prince," said the other gently.

"All right. And I am a magpie. You will find me a most respectable
bird."

"I have no doubt of it," was the polite answer--though he thought in
his own mind that Mag must have a very good opinion of herself. But she
was a lady and a stranger, so, of course, he was civil to her.

She settled herself at his elbow, and began to chatter away, pointing
out with one skinny claw while she balanced herself on the other,
every object of interest,--evidently believing, as no doubt all its
inhabitants did, that there was no capital in the world like the great
metropolis of Nomansland.

I have not seen it, and therefore cannot describe it, so we will just
take it upon trust, and suppose it to be, like every other fine city,
the finest city that ever was built. "Mag" said so--and of course she
knew. Nevertheless, there were a few things in it which surprised
Prince Dolor--and, as he had said, he could not understand them at all.
One half the people seemed so happy and busy--hurrying up and down
the full streets, or driving lazily along the parks in their grand
carriages, while the other half were so wretched and miserable.

"Can't the world be made a little more level? I would try to do it if
I were the king."

"But you're not the king: only a little goose of a boy," returned the
magpie loftily. "And I'm here not to explain things, only to show them.
Shall I show you the royal palace?"

It was a very magnificent palace. It had terraces and gardens,
battlements and towers. It extended over acres of ground, and had in
it rooms enough to accommodate half the city. Its windows looked in
all directions, but none of them had any particular view--except a
small one, high up towards the roof, which looked on to the Beautiful
Mountains. But since the Queen died there, it had been closed, boarded
up, indeed, the magpie said. It was so little and inconvenient, that
nobody cared to live in it. Besides, the lower apartments, which had no
view, were magnificent--worthy of being inhabited by his Majesty the
King.

[Illustration: "_It had terraces and gardens, battlements and towers
... and had in it rooms enough to accommodate half the city._"]

[Illustration: "_Its windows looked in all directions ... except a
small one, high up towards the roof, which looked on to the Beautiful
Mountains._"]

"I should like to see the King," said Prince Dolor.

But what followed was so important that I must take another chapter to
tell it in.




                             CHAPTER VIII.


What, I wonder, would be most people's idea of a king?

What was Prince Dolor's?

Perhaps a very splendid personage, with a crown on his head, and a
sceptre in his hand, sitting on a throne, and judging the people.
Always doing right, and never wrong--"The king can do no wrong" was
a law laid down in olden times. Never cross, or tired, or sick, or
suffering; perfectly handsome and well-dressed, calm and good-tempered,
ready to see and hear everybody, and discourteous to nobody; all things
always going well with him, and nothing unpleasant ever happening.

This, probably, was what Prince Dolor expected to see. And what did he
see? But I must tell you how he saw it.

"Ah," said the magpie, "no levée to-day. The King is ill, though his
Majesty does not wish it to be generally known--it would be so very
inconvenient. He can't see you, but perhaps you might like to go and
take a look at him, in a way I often do? It is so very amusing."

Amusing, indeed!

The Prince was just now too much excited to talk much. Was he not going
to see the King his uncle, who had succeeded his father, and dethroned
himself; had stepped into all the pleasant things that he, Prince
Dolor, ought to have had, and shut him up in a desolate tower? What
was he like, this great, bad, clever man? Had he got all the things he
wanted, which another ought to have had? And did he enjoy them?

"Nobody knows," answered the magpie, just as if she had been sitting
inside the Prince's heart, instead of on the top of his shoulder. "He
is a king, and that's enough. For the rest nobody knows."

As she spoke Mag flew down on to the palace roof, where the cloak
had rested, settling down between the great stacks of chimneys as
comfortably as if on the ground. She pecked at the tiles with her
beak--truly she was a wonderful bird--and immediately a little hole
opened, a sort of door, through which could be seen distinctly the
chamber below.

[Illustration: "_She pecked at the tiles with her beak ... a little
hole opened ... 'Now look in, Prince. Make haste, for I must soon shut
it up again.'_" _Page 92._]

"Now look in, my prince. Make haste, for I must soon shut it up again."

But the boy hesitated. "Isn't it rude?--won't they think us--intruding?"

"O dear no! there's a hole like this in every palace; dozens of holes,
indeed. Everybody knows it, but nobody speaks of it. Intrusion! Why,
though the Royal family are supposed to live shut up behind stone
walls ever so thick, all the world knows that they live in a glass
house where everybody can see them, and throw a stone at them. Now, pop
down on your knees, and take a peep at his Majesty."

His Majesty!

The Prince gazed eagerly down, into a large room, the largest room he
had ever beheld, with furniture and hangings grander than anything he
could have ever imagined. A stray sunbeam, coming through a crevice
of the darkened windows, struck across the carpet, and it was the
loveliest carpet ever woven--just like a bed of flowers to walk over;
only nobody walked over it; the room being perfectly empty and silent.

"Where is the King?" asked the puzzled boy.

"There," said Mag, pointing with one wrinkled claw to a magnificent
bed, large enough to contain six people. In the centre of it, just
visible under the silken counterpane--quite straight and still--with
its head on the lace pillow--lay a small figure, something like
waxwork, fast asleep--very fast asleep! There were a quantity of
sparkling rings on the tiny yellow hands, that were curled a little,
helplessly, like a baby's, outside the coverlet; the eyes were shut,
the nose looked sharp and thin, and the long grey beard hid the mouth,
and lay over the breast. A sight not ugly, nor frightening, only solemn
and quiet. And so very silent--two little flies buzzing about the
curtains of the bed, being the only audible sound.

"Is that the King?" whispered Prince Dolor.

"Yes," replied the bird.

He had been angry--furiously angry; ever since he knew how his uncle
had taken the crown, and sent him, a poor little helpless child, to be
shut up for life, just as if he had been dead. Many times the boy had
felt as if, king as he was, he should like to strike him, this great,
strong, wicked man.

Why, you might as well have struck a baby! How helpless he lay! with
his eyes shut, and his idle hands folded: they had no more work to do,
bad or good.

"What is the matter with him?" asked the Prince again.

"He is dead," said the Magpie with a croak.

No, there was not the least use in being angry with him now. On the
contrary, the Prince felt almost sorry for him, except that he looked
so peaceful, with all his cares at rest. And this was being dead? So,
even kings died?

"Well, well, he hadn't an easy life, folk say, for all his grandeur.
Perhaps he is glad it is over. Good-bye, your Majesty."

With another cheerful tap of her beak, Mistress Mag shut down the
little door in the tiles, and Prince Dolor's first and last sight of
his uncle was ended.

He sat in the centre of his travelling-cloak silent and thoughtful.

"What shall we do now?" said the Magpie. "There's nothing much
more to be done with his Majesty, except a fine funeral, which I
shall certainly go and see. All the world will. He interested the
world exceedingly when he was alive, and he ought to do it now he's
dead--just once more. And since he can't hear me, I may as well say
that, on the whole, his Majesty is much better dead than alive--if
we can only get somebody in his place. There'll be such a row in the
city presently. Suppose we float up again, and see it all. At a safe
distance, though. It will be such fun."

"What will be fun?"

"A revolution."

Whether anybody except a magpie would have called it "fun," I don't
know, but it certainly was a remarkable scene.

As soon as the Cathedral bell began to toll, and the minute guns to
fire, announcing to the kingdom that it was without a king, the people
gathered in crowds, stopping at street corners to talk together. The
murmur now and then rose into a shout, and the shout into a roar. When
Prince Dolor, quietly floating in upper air, caught the sound of their
different and opposite cries, it seemed to him as if the whole city had
gone mad together.

"Long live the King!" "The King is dead--down with the King!" "Down
with the crown, and the King too!" "Hurrah for the Republic!" "Hurrah
for no Government at all."

Such were the shouts which travelled up to the travelling-cloak. And
then began--oh, what a scene!

When you children are grown men and women--or before--you will hear and
read in books about what are called revolutions--earnestly I trust that
neither I nor you may ever see one. But they have happened, and may
happen again, in other countries beside Nomansland, when wicked kings
have helped to make their people wicked too, or out of an unrighteous
nation have sprung rulers equally bad; or, without either of these
causes, when a restless country has fancied any change better than no
change at all.

For me, I don't like changes, unless pretty sure that they are for
good. And how good can come out of absolute evil--the horrible evil
that went on this night under Prince Dolor's very eyes--soldiers
shooting people down by hundreds in the streets, scaffolds erected, and
heads dropping off--houses burnt, and women and children murdered--this
is more than I can understand.

But all these things you will find in history, my children, and must
by-and-by judge for yourselves the right and wrong of them, as far as
anybody ever can judge.

Prince Dolor saw it all. Things happened so fast after one another that
they quite confused his faculties.

"Oh, let me go home," he cried at last, stopping his ears and shutting
his eyes; "only let me go home!" for even his lonely tower seemed home,
and its dreariness and silence absolute paradise after all this.

"Good-bye, then," said the magpie, flapping her wings. She had been
chatting incessantly all day and all night, for it was actually thus
long that Prince Dolor had been hovering over the city, neither eating
nor sleeping, with all these terrible things happening under his very
eyes. "You've had enough, I suppose, of seeing the world?"

"Oh, I have--I have!" cried the Prince with a shudder.

"That is, till next time. All right, your Royal Highness. You don't
know me, but I know you. We may meet again sometime."

She looked at him with her clear piercing eyes, sharp enough to see
through everything, and it seemed as if they changed from bird's eyes
to human eyes, the very eyes of his godmother, whom he had not seen for
ever so long. But the minute afterwards she became only a bird, and
with a screech and a chatter spread her wings and flew away.

Prince Dolor fell into a kind of swoon, of utter misery, bewilderment,
and exhaustion, and when he awoke he found himself in his own
room--alone and quiet--with the dawn just breaking, and the long rim of
yellow light in the horizon glimmering through the window panes.




                              CHAPTER IX.


When Prince Dolor sat up in bed, trying to remember where he was,
whither he had been, and what he had seen the day before, he perceived
that his room was empty.

Generally, his nurse rather worried him by breaking his slumbers,
coming in and "setting things to rights," as she called it. Now, the
dust lay thick upon chairs and tables; there was no harsh voice heard
to scold him for not getting up immediately--which, I am sorry to say,
this boy did not always do. For he so enjoyed lying still, and thinking
lazily, about everything or nothing, that, if he had not tried hard
against it, he would certainly have become like those celebrated

                  "Two little men
            Who lay in their bed till the clock struck ten."

It was striking ten now, and still no nurse was to be seen. He was
rather relieved at first, for he felt so tired; and besides when he
stretched out his arm, he found to his dismay that he had gone to bed
in his clothes.

Very uncomfortable he felt, of course; and just a little frightened.
Especially when he began to call and call again, but nobody answered.
Often he used to think how nice it would be to get rid of his nurse and
live in this tower all by himself--like a sort of monarch, able to do
everything he liked, and leave undone all that he did not want to do;
but now that this seemed really to have happened, he did not like it at
all.

"Nurse--dear nurse--please come back!" he called out. "Come back, and I
will be the best boy in all the land."

And when she did not come back, and nothing but silence answered his
lamentable call, he very nearly began to cry.

"This won't do," he said at last, dashing the tears from his eyes.
"It's just like a baby, and I'm a big boy--shall be a man some day.
What has happened, I wonder? I'll go and see."

He sprang out of bed--not to his feet, alas! but to his poor little
weak knees, and crawled on them from room to room. All the four
chambers were deserted--not forlorn or untidy, for everything seemed
to have been done for his comfort--the breakfast and dinner-things
were laid, the food spread in order. He might live "like a prince,"
as the proverb is, for several days. But the place was entirely
forsaken--there was evidently not a creature but himself in the
solitary tower.

A great fear came upon the poor boy. Lonely as his life had been,
he had never known what it was to be absolutely alone. A kind of
despair seized him--no violent anger or terror, but a sort of patient
desolation.

"What in the world am I to do?" thought he, and sat down in the middle
of the floor, half inclined to believe that it would be better to give
up entirely, lay himself down and die.

This feeling, however, did not last long, for he was young and strong,
and I said before, by nature a very courageous boy. There came into his
head, somehow or other, a proverb that his nurse had taught him--the
people of Nomansland were very fond of proverbs:--


                   "For every evil under the sun
                    There is a remedy, or there's none;
                    If there is one, try to find it--
                    If there isn't, never mind it."


"I wonder--is there a remedy now, and could I find it?" cried the
Prince, jumping up and looking out of the window.

No help there. He only saw the broad bleak sunshiny plain--that is, at
first. But, by-and-by, in the circle of mud that surrounded the base
of the tower he perceived distinctly the marks of a horse's feet, and
just in the spot where the deaf-mute was accustomed to tie up his great
black charger, while he himself ascended, there lay the remains of a
bundle of hay and a feed of corn.

"Yes, that's it. He has come and gone, taking nurse away with him. Poor
nurse! how glad she would be to go!"

That was Prince Dolor's first thought. His second--wasn't it
natural?--was a passionate indignation at her cruelty--at the cruelty
of all the world towards him--a poor little helpless boy. Then he
determined--forsaken as he was--to try and hold on to the last, and not
to die as long as he could possibly help it.

Anyhow, it would be easier to die here than out in the world, among the
terrible doings which he had just beheld. From the midst of which, it
suddenly struck him, the deaf-mute had come--contrived somehow to make
the nurse understand that the king was dead, and she need have no fear
in going back to the capital, where there was a grand revolution, and
everything turned upside down. So, of course she had gone.

"I hope she'll enjoy it, miserable woman--if they don't cut off her
head too."

And then a kind of remorse smote him for feeling so bitterly towards
her, after all the years she had taken care of him--grudgingly,
perhaps, and coldly; still, she had taken care of him, and that even
to the last: for, as I have said, all his four rooms were as tidy as
possible, and his meals laid out, that he might have no more trouble
than could be helped.

"Possibly she did not mean to be cruel. I won't judge her," said he.
And afterwards he was very glad that he had so determined.

For the second time he tried to dress himself, and then to do
everything he could for himself--even to sweeping up the hearth and
putting on more coals. "It's a funny thing for a prince to have to do,"
said he laughing. "But my godmother once said princes need never mind
doing anything."

And then he thought a little of his godmother. Not of summoning her,
or asking her to help him--she had evidently left him to help himself,
and he was determined to try his best to do it, being a very proud and
independent boy--but he remembered her, tenderly and regretfully, as
if even she had been a little hard upon him--poor, forlorn boy that he
was! But he seemed to have seen and learned so much within the last few
days, that he scarcely felt like a boy, but a man--until he went to bed
at night.

When I was a child, I used often to think how nice it would be to live
in a little house all by my own self--a house built high up in a tree,
or far away in a forest, or half way up a hillside,--so deliciously
alone and independent. Not a lesson to learn--but no! I always liked
learning my lessons. Anyhow, to choose the lessons I liked best, to
have as many books to read and dolls to play with as ever I wanted:
above all, to be free and at rest, with nobody to teaze, or trouble, or
scold me, would be charming. For I was a lonely little thing, who liked
quietness--as many children do; which other children, and sometimes
grown-up people even, cannot always understand. And so I can understand
Prince Dolor.

After his first despair, he was not merely comfortable, but actually
happy in his solitude, doing everything for himself, and enjoying
everything by himself--until bedtime.

Then, he did not like it at all. No more, I suppose, than other
children would have liked my imaginary house in a tree, when they had
had sufficient of their own company.

But the prince had to bear it--and he did bear it--like a prince: for
fully five days. All that time he got up in the morning and went to
bed at night, without having spoken to a creature, or, indeed, heard
a single sound. For even his little lark was silent: and as for his
travelling-cloak, either he never thought about it, or else it had been
spirited away--for he made no use of it, nor attempted to do so.

A very strange existence it was, those five lonely days. He never
entirely forgot it. It threw him back upon himself, and into
himself--in a way that all of us have to learn when we grow up, and are
the better for it--but it is somewhat hard learning.

On the sixth day, Prince Dolor had a strange composure in his look, but
he was very grave, and thin, and white. He had nearly come to the end
of his provisions--and what was to happen next? Get out of the tower he
could not; the ladder the deaf-mute used was always carried away again;
and if it had not been, how could the poor boy have used it? And even
if he slung or flung himself down, and by miraculous chance came alive
to the foot of the tower how could he run away?

Fate had been very hard to him, or so it seemed.

He made up his mind to die. Not that he wished to die; on the contrary,
there was a great deal that he wished to live to do; but if he must
die, he must. Dying did not seem so very dreadful; not even to lie
quiet like his uncle, whom he had entirely forgiven now, and neither be
miserable nor naughty any more, and escape all those horrible things
that he had seen going on outside the palace, in that awful place which
was called "the world."

"It's a great deal nicer here," said the poor little Prince, and
collected all his pretty things round him: his favourite pictures,
which he thought he should like to have near him when he died; his
books and toys--no, he had ceased to care for toys now; he only liked
them because he had done so as a child. And there he sat very calm and
patient, like a king in his castle, waiting for the end.

"Still, I wish I had done something first--something worth doing, that
somebody might remember me by," thought he. "Suppose I had grown a man,
and had had work to do, and people to care for, and was so useful and
busy that they liked me, and perhaps even forgot I was lame. Then, it
would have been nice to live, I think."

A tear came into the little fellow's eyes, and he listened intently
through the dead silence for some hopeful sound.

Was there one--was it his little lark, whom he had almost forgotten?
No, nothing half so sweet. But it really was something--something which
came nearer and nearer, so that there was no mistaking it. It was the
sound of a trumpet, one of the great silver trumpets so admired in
Nomansland. Not pleasant music, but very bold, grand, and inspiring.

As he listened to it the boy seemed to recall many things which had
slipped his memory for years, and to nerve himself for whatever might
be going to happen.

What had happened was this.

The poor condemned woman had not been such a wicked woman after all.
Perhaps her courage was not wholly disinterested, but she had done a
very heroic thing. As soon as she heard of the death and burial of
the King, and of the changes that were taking place in the country, a
daring idea came into her head--to set upon the throne of Nomansland
its rightful heir. Thereupon she persuaded the deaf-mute to take her
away with him, and they galloped like the wind from city to city,
spreading everywhere the news that Prince Dolor's death and burial
had been an invention concocted by his wicked uncle--that he was alive
and well, and the noblest young Prince that ever was born.

It was a bold stroke, but it succeeded. The country, weary, perhaps,
of the late King's harsh rule, and yet glad to save itself from the
horrors of the last few days, and the still further horrors of no rule
at all, and having no particular interest in the other young princes,
jumped at the idea of this Prince, who was the son of their late good
King and the beloved Queen Dolorez.

"Hurrah for Prince Dolor! Let Prince Dolor be our sovereign!" rang
from end to end of the kingdom. Everybody tried to remember what a
dear baby he once was--how like his mother, who had been so sweet and
kind, and his father, the finest looking king that ever reigned. Nobody
remembered his lameness--or, if they did, they passed it over as a
matter of no consequence. They were determined to have him to reign
over them, boy as he was--perhaps just because he was a boy, since in
that case the great nobles thought they should be able to do as they
liked with the country.

Accordingly, with a fickleness not confined to the people of
Nomansland, no sooner was the late King laid in his grave than they
pronounced him to have been a usurper; turned all his family out of
the palace, and left it empty for the reception of the new sovereign,
whom they went to fetch with great rejoicing; a select body of lords,
gentlemen, and soldiers, travelling night and day in solemn procession
through the country, until they reached Hopeless Tower.

There they found the Prince, sitting calmly on the floor--deadly pale
indeed, for he expected a quite different end from this, and was
resolved if he had to die, to die courageously, like a prince and a
king.

But when they hailed him as prince and king, and explained to him how
matters stood, and went down on their knees before him, offering the
crown (on a velvet cushion, with four golden tassels, each nearly as
big as his head)--small though he was and lame, which lameness the
courtiers pretended not to notice--there came such a glow into his
face, such a dignity into his demeanour, that he became beautiful,
king-like.

"Yes," he said, "if you desire it, I will be your king. And I will do
my best to make my people happy."

Then there arose, from inside and outside the tower, such a shout as
never yet was heard across the lonely plain.

Prince Dolor shrank a little from the deafening sound. "How shall I be
able to rule all this great people? You forget, my lords, that I am
only a little boy still."

"Not so very little," was the respectful answer. "We have searched
in the records, and found that your Royal Highness--your Majesty, I
mean--is precisely fifteen years old."

"Am I?" said Prince Dolor; and his first thought was a thoroughly
childish pleasure that he should now have a birthday, with a whole
nation to keep it. Then he remembered that his childish days were
done. He was a monarch now. Even his nurse, to whom, the moment he saw
her, he had held out his hand, kissed it reverently, and called him
ceremoniously "his Majesty the King."

"A king must be always a king, I suppose," said he half sadly, when,
the ceremonies over, he had been left to himself for just ten minutes,
to put off his boy's clothes, and be re-attired in magnificent robes,
before he was conveyed away from his tower to the Royal Palace.

He could take nothing with him; indeed, he soon saw that, however
politely they spoke, they would not allow him to take anything. If
he was to be their king, he must give up his old life for ever. So he
looked with tender farewell on his old books, old toys, the furniture
he knew so well, and the familiar plain in all its levelness, ugly yet
pleasant, simply because it was familiar.

"It will be a new life in a new world," said he to himself; "but I'll
remember the old things still. And, oh! if before I go, I could but
once see my dear old godmother."

While he spoke, he had laid himself down on the bed for a minute or
two, rather tired with his grandeur, and confused by the noise of
the trumpets which kept playing incessantly down below. He gazed,
half sadly, up to the skylight, whence there came pouring a stream of
sun-rays, with innumerable motes floating there, like a bridge thrown
between heaven and earth. Sliding down it, as if she had been made of
air, came the little old woman in grey.

[Illustration: "_There came pouring a stream of sun-rays ... like a
bridge ... Sliding down it, as if she had been made of air, came the
little old woman in grey._"]

So beautiful looked she--old as she was--that Prince Dolor was at first
quite startled by the apparition. Then he held out his arms in eager
delight.

"O, godmother, you have not forsaken me!"

"Not at all, my son. You may not have seen me, but I have seen you,
many a time."

"How?"

"O, never mind. I can turn into anything I please, you know. And I
have been a bear-skin rug, and a crystal goblet--and sometimes I have
changed from inanimate to animate nature, put on feathers, and made
myself very comfortable as a bird."

"Ha!" laughed the Prince, a new light breaking in upon him, as he
caught the infection of her tone, lively and mischievous. "Ha, ha! a
lark, for instance?"

"Or a magpie," answered she, with a capital imitation of Mistress
Mag's croaky voice. "Do you suppose I am always sentimental and never
funny?--If anything makes you happy, gay or grave, don't you think it
is more than likely to come through your old godmother?"

"I believe that," said the boy tenderly, holding out his arms. They
clasped one another in a close embrace.

Suddenly Prince Dolor looked very anxious. "You will not leave me now
that I am a king? Otherwise, I had rather not be a king at all. Promise
never to forsake me?"

The little old woman laughed gaily. "Forsake you? that is impossible.
But it is just possible you may forsake me. Not probable though. Your
mother never did, and she was a queen. The sweetest queen in all the
world was the lady Dolorez."

"Tell me about her," said the boy eagerly. "As I get older I think I
can understand more. Do tell me."

"Not now. You couldn't hear me for the trumpets and the shouting. But
when you are come to the palace, ask for a long-closed upper room,
which looks out upon the Beautiful Mountains; open it and take it for
your own. Whenever you go there, you will always find me, and we will
talk together about all sorts of things."

"And about my mother?"

The little old woman nodded--and kept nodding and smiling to herself
many times, as the boy repeated over and over again the sweet words he
had never known or understood--"my mother--my mother."

"Now I must go," said she, as the trumpets blared louder and louder,
and the shouts of the people showed that they would not endure any
delay. "Good-bye, Good-bye! Open the window and out I fly."

Prince Dolor repeated gaily the musical rhyme--but all the while tried
to hold his godmother fast.

Vain, vain!--for the moment that a knocking was heard at his door, the
sun went behind a cloud, the bright stream of dancing motes vanished,
and the little old woman with them--he knew not where.

So Prince Dolor quitted his tower--which he had entered so mournfully
and ignominiously, as a little helpless baby carried in the deaf-mute's
arms--quitted it as the great King of Nomansland.

[Illustration: "_So Prince Dolor quitted his tower ... quitted it as
the great King of Nomansland._" _Page 111._]

The only thing he took away with him was something so insignificant,
that none of the lords, gentlemen, and soldiers who escorted him with
such triumphant splendour, could possibly notice it--a tiny bundle,
which he had found lying on the floor just where the bridge of sunbeams
had rested. At once he had pounced upon it, and thrust it secretly into
his bosom, where it dwindled into such small proportions, that it might
have been taken for a mere chest-comforter--a bit of flannel--or an old
pocket-handkerchief!

It was his travelling-cloak.




                               CHAPTER X.


Did Prince Dolor become a great king? Was he, though little more than
a boy, "the father of his people," as all kings ought to be? Did his
reign last long--long and happy?--and what were the principal events of
it, as chronicled in the history of Nomansland?

Why, if I were to answer all these questions, I should have to write
another book. And I'm tired, children, tired--as grown-up people
sometimes are; though not always with play. (Besides, I have a small
person belonging to me, who, though she likes extremely to listen to
the word-of-mouth story of this book, grumbles much at the writing of
it, and has run about the house clapping her hands with joy when mamma
told her that it was nearly finished. But that is neither here nor
there.)

I have related, as well as I could, the history of Prince Dolor, but
with the history of Nomansland I am as yet unacquainted. If anybody
knows it, perhaps he or she will kindly write it all down in another
book. But mine is done.

However, of this I am sure, that Prince Dolor made an excellent king.
Nobody ever does anything less well, not even the commonest duty of
common daily life, for having such a godmother as the little old woman
clothed in grey, whose name is--well, I leave you to guess. Nor, I
think, is anybody less good, less capable of both work and enjoyment
in after life, for having been a little unhappy in his youth, as the
Prince had been.

I cannot take upon myself to say that he was always happy now--who
is?--or that he had no cares; just show me the person who is quite free
from them! But, whenever people worried and bothered him--as they did
sometimes, with state etiquette, state squabbles, and the like, setting
up themselves and pulling down their neighbours--he would take refuge
in that upper room which looked out on the Beautiful Mountains and,
laying his head on his godmother's shoulder, become calmed and at rest.

Also, she helped him out of any difficulty which now and then
occurred--for there never was such a wise old woman. When the people of
Nomansland raised the alarm--as sometimes they did--for what people can
exist without a little fault-finding?--and began to cry out, "Unhappy
is the nation whose king is a child," she would say to him gently,
"You are a child. Accept the fact. Be humble--be teachable. Lean upon
the wisdom of others till you have gained your own."

He did so. He learned how to take advice before attempting to give it,
to obey before he could righteously command. He assembled round him all
the good and wise of his kingdom--laid all its affairs before them, and
was guided by their opinions until he had maturely formed his own.

This he did, sooner than anybody would have imagined, who did not
know of his godmother and his travelling-cloak--two secret blessings,
which, though many guessed at, nobody quite understood. Nor did they
understand why he loved so the little upper room, except that it had
been his mother's room, from the window of which, as people remembered
now, she had used to sit for hours watching the Beautiful Mountains.

Out of that window he used to fly--not very often; as he grew
older, the labours of state prevented the frequent use of his
travelling-cloak; still he did use it sometimes. Only now it was
less for his own pleasure and amusement than to see something, or
investigate something, for the good of the country. But he prized his
godmother's gift as dearly as ever. It was a comfort to him in all his
vexations; an enhancement of all his joys. It made him almost forget
his lameness--which was never cured.

However, the cruel things which had been once foreboded of him did not
happen. His misfortune was not such a heavy one after all. It proved
to be much less inconvenience, even to himself, than had been feared.
A council of eminent surgeons and mechanicians invented for him a
wonderful pair of crutches, with the help of which, though he never
walked easily or gracefully, he did manage to walk, so as to be quite
independent. And such was the love his people bore him that they never
heard the sound of his crutch on the marble palace-floors without a
leap of the heart, for they knew that good was coming to them whenever
he approached them.

Thus, though he never walked in processions, never reviewed his troops
mounted on a magnificent charger, nor did any of the things which make
a show monarch so much appreciated, he was able for all the duties and
a great many of the pleasures of his rank. When he held his levées,
not standing, but seated on a throne, ingeniously contrived to hide
his infirmity, the people thronged to greet him; when he drove out
through the city streets, shouts followed him wherever he went--every
countenance brightened as he passed, and his own, perhaps, was the
brightest of all.

[Illustration: "_When he drove out through the city streets, shouts
followed him wherever he went._" _Page 116._]

First, because, accepting his affliction as inevitable, he took it
patiently; second, because, being a brave man, he bore it bravely;
trying to forget himself, and live out of himself, and in and for other
people. Therefore other people grew to love him so well, that I think
hundreds of his subjects might have been found who were almost ready to
die for their poor lame King.

He never gave them a queen. When they implored him to choose one, he
replied that his country was his bride, and he desired no other. But,
perhaps, the real reason was that he shrank from any change; and that
no wife in all the world would have been found so perfect, so lovable,
so tender to him in all his weaknesses, as his beautiful old godmother.

His four-and-twenty other godfathers and godmothers, or as many of
them as were still alive, crowded round him as soon as he ascended the
throne. He was very civil to them all, but adopted none of the names
they had given him, keeping to the one by which he had been always
known, though it had now almost lost its meaning; for King Dolor was
one of the happiest and cheerfullest men alive.

He did a good many things, however, unlike most men and most kings,
which a little astonished his subjects. First, he pardoned the
condemned woman who had been his nurse, and ordained that from
henceforward there should be no such thing as the punishment of death
in Nomansland. All capital criminals were to be sent to perpetual
imprisonment in Hopeless Tower, and the plain round about it, where
they could do no harm to anybody, and might in time do a little good,
as the woman had done.

Another surprise he shortly afterwards gave the nation. He recalled his
uncle's family, who had fled away in terror to another country, and
restored them to all their honours in their own. By-and-by he chose
the eldest son of his eldest cousin (who had been dead a year), and
had him educated in the royal palace, as the heir to the throne. This
little prince was a quiet, unobtrusive boy, so that everybody wondered
at the King's choosing him, when there were so many more; but as he
grew into a fine young fellow, good and brave, they agreed that the
King judged more wisely than they.

"Not a lame prince neither," his Majesty observed one day, watching
him affectionately; for he was the best runner, the highest leaper,
the keenest and most active sportsman in the country. "One cannot make
oneself, but one can sometimes help a little in the making of somebody
else. It is well."

This was said, not to any of his great lords and ladies, but to a good
old woman--his first homely nurse--whom he had sought for far and
wide, and at last found, in her cottage among the Beautiful Mountains.
He sent for her to visit him once a year, and treated her with great
honour until she died. He was equally kind, though somewhat less
tender, to his other nurse, who, after receiving her pardon, returned
to her native town and grew into a great lady, and I hope a good one.
But as she was so grand a personage now, any little faults she had did
not show.

[Illustration: "_But as she was so grand a personage now, any little
faults she had did not show._" _Page 118.

Thus King Dolor's reign passed, year after year, long and prosperous.
Whether he was happy--"as happy as a king"--is a question no human
being can decide. But I think he was, because he had the power of
making everybody about him happy, and did it too; also because he was
his godmother's godson, and could shut himself up with her whenever he
liked, in that quiet little room, in view of the Beautiful Mountains,
which nobody else ever saw or cared to see. They were too far off,
and the city lay so low. But there they were, all the time. No change
ever came to them; and I think, at any day throughout his long reign,
the King would sooner have lost his crown than have lost sight of the
Beautiful Mountains.

In course of time, when the little prince, his cousin, was grown into
a tall young man, capable of all the duties of a man, his Majesty did
one of the most extraordinary acts ever known in a sovereign beloved by
his people and prosperous in his reign. He announced that he wished to
invest his heir with the royal purple--at any rate, for a time--while
he himself went away on a distant journey, whither he had long desired
to go.

Everybody marvelled, but nobody opposed him. Who could oppose the
good King, who was not a young king now? And, besides, the nation had
a great admiration for the young Regent--and, possibly, a lurking
pleasure in change.

So there was fixed a day, when all the people whom it would hold,
assembled in the great square of the capital, to see the young Prince
installed solemnly in his new duties, and undertaking his new vows.
He was a very fine young fellow; tall and straight as a poplar tree,
with a frank handsome face--a great deal handsomer than the King, some
people said, but others thought differently. However, as his Majesty
sat on his throne, with his grey hair falling from underneath his
crown, and a few wrinkles showing in spite of his smile, there was
something about his countenance which made his people, even while they
shouted, regard him with a tenderness mixed with awe.

[Illustration: "_All the people ... assembled to see the young Prince
installed solemnly in his new duties and undertaking his new vows._"
_Page 119._]

He lifted up his thin, slender hand, and there came a silence over the
vast crowd immediately. Then he spoke, in his own accustomed way, using
no grand words, but saying what he had to say in the simplest fashion,
though with a clearness that struck their ears like the first song of a
bird in the dusk of the morning.

"My people, I am tired: I want to rest. I have had a long reign, and
done much work--at least, as much as I was able to do. Many might have
done it better than I--but none with a better will. Now I leave it to
others. I am tired, very tired. Let me go home."

There rose a murmur--of content or discontent none could well tell;
then it died down again, and the assembly listened silently once more.

"I am not anxious about you--my people--my children," continued the
king. "You are prosperous and at peace. I leave you in good hands. The
Prince Regent will be a fitter king for you than I."

"No, no, no!" rose the universal shout--and those who had sometimes
found fault with him shouted louder than anybody. But he seemed as if
he heard them not.

"Yes, yes," said he, as soon as the tumult had a little subsided; and
his voice sounded firm and clear; and some very old people, who boasted
of having seen him as a child, declared that his face took a sudden
change, and grew as young and sweet as that of the little Prince Dolor.
"Yes, I must go. It is time for me to go. Remember me sometimes, my
people, for I have loved you well. And I am going a long way, and I do
not think I shall come back any more."

He drew a little bundle out of his breast pocket--a bundle that nobody
had ever seen before. It was small and shabby-looking, and tied up
with many knots, which untied themselves in an instant. With a joyful
countenance, he muttered over it a few half-intelligible words. Then,
so suddenly that even those nearest to his Majesty could not tell
how it came about, the King was away--away--floating right up in the
air--upon something, they knew not what, except that it appeared to be
as safe and pleasant as the wings of a bird.

And after him sprang a bird--a dear little lark, rising from whence
no one could say, since larks do not usually build their nests in the
pavement of city squares. But there it was, a real lark, singing far
over their heads, louder and clearer, and more joyful, as it vanished
further into the blue sky.

Shading their eyes, and straining their ears, the astonished people
stood, until the whole vision disappeared like a speck in the
clouds--the rosy clouds that overhung the Beautiful Mountains.

Then they guessed that they should see their beloved king no more.
Well-beloved as he was, he had always been somewhat of a mystery to
them, and such he remained. But they went home, and, accepting their
new monarch, obeyed him faithfully for his cousin's sake.

King Dolor was never again beheld or heard of in his own country. But
the good he had done there lasted for years and years; he was long
missed and deeply mourned--at least, so far as anybody could mourn one
who was gone on such a happy journey.

Whither he went, or who went with him, it is impossible to say. But I
myself believe that his godmother took him, on his travelling-cloak, to
the Beautiful Mountains. What he did there, or where he is now, who can
tell? I cannot. But one thing I am quite sure of, that, wherever he is,
he is perfectly happy.

And so, when I think of him, am I.


                               THE END.




[Illustration: STORY OF THE AUTHOR'S LIFE]


The author of this little book, Dinah Maria Mulock Craik, was a woman
as modest, sweet, and wholesome as the story itself. She lived in
England, but her writings endeared her to people all over the world.
Some American ladies who went to call upon her in her home, Wildwood
Cottage, in Hampstead, near London, describe her as wearing a black
silk gown with a plain linen collar, her brown hair drawn smoothly back
from an open brow, and her face, gracious and winning to an unusual
degree, bearing the look of one who had tasted of sorrow. This was when
she was already a well-known writer, having won her place in literature
by hard and faithful work; but probably she did not dream, even then,
that she would come to be recognized as, next to Dickens, the most
widely-read novelist of her time.

She was born April 20, 1826, at Stoke-upon-Trent, one of the chief
manufacturing towns of Staffordshire, England. Staffordshire is the
central county of England, and has many curious and interesting
features. It forms the sloping base of a long chain of hills, where in
countless ages the sea, sometimes covering the land and again driven
away from it by the upheaval of a great body of earth and stone, has
worn down the grit and limestone rock into clay. Did you know that all
clay was mud made by the washing away of rocks? Just think how many
hundreds of years it took to make the little ball of clay you model
with!

Well, the people who lived in this country found out, eighteen hundred
years ago, that they could mould their clay into pots and basins, even
if they could not make things grow in it; so they dug up the clay,
shaped it with their hands, and baked it in the sun, making jars,
bowls, and other useful things which they sold to farmers in exchange
for food.

About that time there came marching over the thickly wooded land,
companies of Roman soldiers, who took all the clay bowls they wanted
for their own use, and showed the potters how to make better ones.
They also compelled them to make floors, roofs, and wall ornaments of
clay baked in very hot ovens, called kilns. Much of this old Roman
pottery was, of course, broken and lost, but still, if you should ever
go there, you would find pieces of it in the banks of the little rivers
and brooks near the clay pits, pieces more than a thousand years old.

Because it is so full of clay--dark blue clay, and red and yellow
ochres, used for coloring and painting, as well as red and black
chalk--the country seems to have been made for potteries. Besides this,
there used always to be plenty of wood to keep the kilns hot, for a
great forest covered nearly all the land. This was a continuation
of the Forest of Arden, about which you will read some day, as well
as about Sherwood Forest, which sheltered Robin Hood and his merry
men.--Have you heard about them yet?--Later, when better fuel was
needed, two great coal fields were discovered underlying the county,
one of them twenty miles long by two broad. Here, then, where all was
so perfectly prepared for his work, it was natural that the greatest
potter of modern times, and one of the greatest of all times, should be
born--Josiah Wedgwood, who lived for many years in the very town where
Mrs. Craik was born. He not only loved to make dishes and jars of all
kinds as perfect as possible, but while shut in with a long illness he
studied the chemistry and the arithmetic needed in his trade. In years
of hard labor and close study he so mastered his trade that he made it
both a science and an art. He, more than any other, turned the county
into one of the busiest places in the world, where thousands of men
work from morning till night to supply the whole world with every sort
of thing that can be made out of clay. Perhaps on the bottom of your
plates at home you may find printed the words "Staffordshire, England."

Before Wedgwood's time--in 1653, to be accurate--Stoke-upon-Trent was
a small group of thatched houses and two pot-works, gathered around
the ancient parish church. In 1762, thirty-two years after Wedgwood's
birth, it had a population of 8,000, of whom 7,000 were employed, in
one way or another, in the pottery trade. The whole country-side is
now black with smoke from the many factories. At one time, when the
potters used salt to glaze their ware--that is, to put a bright polish
on it--they used to open up their huge ovens every Saturday morning,
between the hours of eight and twelve, and cast in salt. It would then
melt, and run over the surface of the clay jugs and things inside, and
leave a smooth, shining surface. If you let some salt and water, very
strong of salt, boil over an old crock of your mother's, when the fire
is making the stove red-hot, you will see how it works. Indeed, it was
through an accidental boiling-over of this sort that salt-glaze was
discovered. On Saturdays, when the salt was cast into the kilns, it
made great clouds of smoke and vapor, filling streets and houses, and
spreading far out into the country, so heavy that travelers to town
lost their way, and persons in the street ran against each other.

Here lived, and preached, and argued, and laid down the law, a
brilliant, enthusiastic Irishman, named Thomas Mulock, the father of
the woman who wrote this book. He was a minister, but one who did
not agree with any of the other ministers around him. He had a warm,
eager nature, and a temper to match, and as the second of twenty-two
children must have exercised from his early childhood all that power
of domineering which made Lord Byron nickname him "Muley Mulock." By
this name he was known over half of Europe, but for all that he was
much loved and admired, and moved in the same circle as Byron, Scott,
Southey, and Wordsworth. From him, Mrs. Craik undoubtedly inherited her
gifts as a writer.

Her mother was a daughter of Mr. Mellard, a tanner and a member of the
Reverend Thomas Mulock's congregation. She was one of three sisters
who used to talk with the young minister over the wall that separated
their gardens. There is a legend that he went all in white to the
wedding, his shoes being of white satin; but this is very likely only a
picturesque bit of gossip, kept alive by the fact that Mr. Mulock was
quite romantic enough and independent enough to have done such a thing
if it had happened to strike his fancy. His wife was a frail little
woman, and the troubles which soon beset her husband on account of his
strong, new opinions, were hard for her to bear, as was also the way
in which he, like a hot-blooded Irishman, sure that he was right and
all the rest of the world wrong, marched straight into the thick of
any theological fight that might be going on. Dinah, at last, although
merely an inexperienced girl, persuaded her mother to go with her to
London, to seek a little peace and quiet, leaving the father to fight
out his battles alone in the country place he found--or made--so full
of strife.

This was a tremendous responsibility for a young girl with no means to
speak of and only an ordinarily good education, such as was given to
young ladies in the girls' schools of those days. At school she seems
to have been a great favorite, and is described as being always the
center of a bevy of girls, who hung round her lovingly, and for whom
she prophesied the most wonderful things. She was always sure they had
great abilities, but seemed to be quite unconscious that she herself
was the most gifted of them all, and would be remembered when they were
forgotten.

Even after she came to London, she made friends among other girls, and
in spite of her unceasing and exacting work, seems always to have had
time to enjoy them and make them enjoy her. She was only twenty years
old when, in 1846, she went to London, and undertook the main support
of her mother and the two young brothers who soon joined them. She did
everything her pen could find to do, writing stories for fashion books
and other periodicals, and had the satisfaction, finally, of knowing
that she had succeeded in caring for her aged mother to the end of her
life.

Of the two brothers, the elder, Thomas, Jr., true son of his father,
took part in some act of rebellion while studying at the
Royal Academy. His father sided with the principals of the school
and approved of the son's being expelled, his own heart aching, most
probably, while he did what he thought was his duty. The son's heart,
in turn, was sore at what he must have thought unloving conduct on the
father's part. At any rate, he decided soon after to go to Australia,
and, as he was about to board the ship, fell off the quay and was
killed.

This was a heavy blow to the brave young sister, now left with only the
younger brother. He was a musician and a photographer of no mean rank
at a time when few persons thought of photography as an art. Though he
never proved a support to her, always leaning on her motherly care and
getting himself into many scrapes from which she had to pull him out he
was nevertheless the joy of his sister's life.

In London Miss Mulock made friends whose assistance, later, was worth
a great deal to her. She had published, in 1849, her first novel,
_The Ogilvies_, which brought her recognition, and made men and women
of real power in the world of letters seek her out. When they knew
her personally, her simple cordiality, friendliness, and, above all,
her thorough goodness of heart, made them her warm friends. When she
found herself able to take a cottage--the "Wildwood Cottage" already
spoken of--she quickly gathered around her some of the brightest and
best people in the great city. From that time on, her books came out
steadily and in great numbers. In all, she wrote forty-six works,
including many novels, some essays, and two or three volumes of poetry.

The greatest of her novels is _John Halifax, Gentleman_, considered
by many the best story of English middle-class life ever written. This
novel was translated into French, German, Italian, Greek, and Russian,
and is still one of the most frequently called for books in the public
libraries. Her poems, _Douglas, Douglas, Tender and True_, and _Philip
My King_, are known wherever English is spoken.

There is an interesting story connected with the latter poem. Philip
Bourke Marston, the boy to whom it refers, was the son of one of Miss
Mulock's London friends, Westland Marston, a famous dramatic poet and
critic. When his little son was born, August 13, 1850, he asked Miss
Mulock to be Philip's godmother, and traces of her deep affection for
the gifted child are to be found among her writings. _A Hero_ was
written for him, and it is to him, evidently, that the lovely little
poem, _A Child's Smile_, refers. The boy lost his sight when only three
years old. The cause is said to have been too much belladonna, given to
prevent scarlet fever. For many years enough sight remained to enable
him, in his own words, to see "the three boughs waving in the wind,
the pageant of sunset in the west, and the glimmer of a fire upon the
hearth." Shut in thus to the inner world of thought and feeling, Philip
indulged in an imaginative series of wonderful adventures, and in long
daydreams excited by music. Perhaps his blindness, coupled with his
vivid imagination, is the reason why the beautiful poems he wrote when
he grew older show such a wonderfully vivid power of portraying nature.
When he saw a tree-bough waving in the wind, he saw it only dimly with
his outward eyes, but as he sat dreaming over it afterward, it became
more real to him than any bough was likely to become to an everyday,
hearty boy who saw so many trees, with so many branches, that he hardly
noticed them at all. It must have been a great comfort to him to have
such a godmother as Miss Mulock--a real fairy godmother, who could
weave magic spells of the most interesting stories, and heal the aches
of his poor heart by sweet little poems.

It was at Wildwood Cottage that Miss Mulock formed that close
acquaintance with George Lillie Craik that finally led to her marriage
with him. Mr. Craik met with a serious railroad accident near her
house, which she promptly gave up to him, she staying with a friend
near by; in the long days of convalescence they learned to know each
other thoroughly. The marriage was singularly happy. Mr. Craik was a
man of letters as well as a publisher, and they had every taste in
common. Their life together was beautiful and full of a deep peace.

Although they had no children of their own, they had an adopted
daughter, Dorothy, and she it is for whom _The Adventures of a Brownie_
was written. It is probably because of Mrs. Craik's devotion and love
for her that the little book is so free from self-consciousness, so
evidently written wholeheartedly "as told to my child."

Mrs. Craik's death, which took place in 1887, was, like her life, full
of self-sacrificing affection and obedience to duty. She had not been
ill, beyond a few attacks of heart-trouble that no one considered
serious. By some blessed chance, on the morning of her last day on
earth, her husband took an especially loving farewell of her--so much
so that Dorothy laughed at him, and Mrs. Craik, smiling happily,
reminded her that, although they had been so long married, they were
lovers still. It was within a few weeks of Dorothy's marriage when the
sudden heart failure came, and Mrs. Craik's one wish was that she might
be permitted to live four weeks longer, so that her death might not
overshadow her daughter's wedding. She resigned even this unselfish
wish when she saw that it was not God's will.

The beauty of her character, it may be supposed, quite as much as any
peculiar merit in her writings, led Queen Victoria, who always tried
to reward uprightness of life as well as unusual skill in any art, to
bestow upon Mrs. Craik the only mark of recognition in her power. This
was a small pension, and although she often was criticised for keeping
a sum of money she did not need, while many less fortunate writers
did need it, she retained it as her right, to use as her conscience
dictated. She set it aside for struggling authors who would accept help
from the queen's bounty that they would refuse from her private funds.

Other writers may be more brilliant and more profound than Mrs. Craik,
but her tales of simple goodness bring, not only a sense of rest and
relief to the reader, but also a new desire to put goodness into his
own daily life. In all her stories Mrs. Craik makes goodness as lovely
as it really is. There are sad things in them, but the sadness is
always made sweet at last by courage and patience and kindliness.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE LAME PRINCE AND HIS TRAVELLING CLOAK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


