The Project Gutenberg eBook of Prayers of the Early Church
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Prayers of the Early Church

Editor: J. Manning Potts

Release date: February 12, 2015 [eBook #48247]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRAYERS OF THE EARLY CHURCH ***

                                PRAYERS
                                 of the
                              EARLY CHURCH


                               Edited by
                            J. MANNING POTTS

[Illustration: logo]

                             THE UPPER ROOM

             The World’s Most Widely Used Devotional Guide
                           1908 Grand Avenue
                         Nashville 5, Tennessee

                            Copyright, 1953
                                   by
                             The Upper Room
                          Nashville, Tennessee

                            UR-74-50-1053-10
                Printed in the United States of America




                                Preface


Demand for books of prayers has caused this book to be compiled. The
experience of The Upper Room in publishing Ralph S. Cushman’s _A Pocket
Book of Prayer_ with its sale of over a million copies and the reaction
from the publication of other prayer books have prompted the editor to
collect and arrange these prayers. There are prayers of our Lord, the
apostles, the martyrs, and the saints covering the period of the Early
Church from its beginning through the fifth century. There are some
prayers from each of the first five centuries. The treasure house from
which to choose is almost unlimited. It is a vast and fruitful field and
anyone is amply rewarded who delves into it.

The prayers have been selected primarily for their spiritual and
devotional content. Many have been laid aside with regret that they
could not be included in this book, but its compass in size is set and
only so many can be used.

The prayers are arranged chronologically. Some other method of
arrangement might have been chosen but this seemed good in order to
represent each century. There are questions about the date and
authorship of the prayers. They are the same questions that arise in
reference to the Books of the Bible.

This book of prayers is published with the hope and prayer that it may
have wide use. It has been prepared for individual and family devotions.
It can be used with prayer groups in prayer meetings, for cells, and, of
course, for the development of one’s own personal spiritual life. The
material is perfect for use in the devotional services of young people’s
groups, women’s groups, and men’s clubs. The prayers are excellent for
insertion in church bulletins. Other ways will be found of making these
great prayers usable.

The prayers have been collected from many old books of prayers and
devotional materials. The editor is deeply indebted to all those who
have ploughed the field before. They have labored and we have entered
into their labors. It has been a joy to search out the material, to
arrange the prayers, to put them in order, and to index them under so
many subjects.

        J. Manning Potts
        Editor, _THE UPPER ROOM_
        Nashville, Tennessee




                                Contents


                               Chapter I
  FIRST CENTURY PRAYERS                                                 7
  1. New Testament Prayers                                              8
      Simeon, Mary, Jesus, Stephen, Paul, Peter.
  2. Other First Century Prayers                                       15
      Clement of Rome, Clementine Liturgy, Syrian Clementine
      Liturgy.

                                Chapter II
  SECOND CENTURY PRAYERS                                               21
      Polycarp, Ignatius, Liturgy of St. James, Barnabas, Clement of
      Alexandria, Irenaeus.

                               Chapter III
  THIRD CENTURY PRAYERS                                                31
      Old Gallican Sacramentary, Liturgy of St. Mark, Eastern Church
      Liturgy, Eastern Church Vespers.

                                Chapter IV
  FOURTH CENTURY PRAYERS                                               41
      Coptic Liturgy of St. Cyril, Ambrose, Nerses of Clajes,
      Gallican Sacramentary, Armenian Liturgy, Basil, Chrysostom,
      Augustine, Apostolic Constitutions.

                                Chapter V
  FIFTH CENTURY PRAYERS                                                77
      Liturgy of the Nestorians, Ancient Collect, Leonine
      Sacramentary, Gelasian Sacramentary, Liturgy of the Blessed
      Apostles.




                               Chapter I
                         FIRST CENTURY PRAYERS




                        1. New Testament Prayers


                          The Prayer of Simeon

Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared
before the face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
glory of thy people Israel.
                                                             —Luke 2:29.


                             The Magnificat

And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath
rejoiced in God my Saviour. For he hath regarded the low estate of his
handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed. For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is
his name. And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to
generation. He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the
proud in the imagination of their hearts. He hath put down the mighty
from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. He hath filled the
hungry with good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away. He hath
holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy.
                                                          —Luke 1:46-54.


                   Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane

O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless
not as I will, but as thou wilt. O my Father, if this cup may not pass
away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.
                                                       —Matt. 26:39, 42.


                      Jesus’ High Priestly Prayer

These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said,
Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee: as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life
eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
whom thou hast sent. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished
the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me
with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the
world was. I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me
out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they
have kept thy word. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou
hast given me are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which
thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that
I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.
                                                           —John 17:1-8.


                       Jesus Prays From the Cross

Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.
                                                            —Luke 23:34.

Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit.
                                                            —Luke 23:46.


                           Prayer of Stephen

And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus,
receive my spirit.

And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.
                                                          —Acts 7:59-60.


                  That Christ May Dwell in Your Hearts

Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and
love unto all the saints, cease not to give thanks for you, making
mention of you in my prayers; that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him: the eyes of your understanding being
enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what is
the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according
to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places.

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, that he would
grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able
to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God.

Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, unto him be
glory forever and ever. Amen.
                             —Epistle to the Ephesians 1:15-20; 3:14-21.


                       For Friends and Relatives

O God, the Father of glory, the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
every family in heaven and earth is named, thou who hast set the
solitary in families, grant to all members of this family and to all the
members of our different families, that, according to the riches of thy
glory, we may be strengthened with might by thy Spirit in the inner man;
that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith; that we, being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of
Christ, which passeth knowledge, that we may be filled with all the
fulness of God; through the eternal Christ our Saviour. Amen.
                                    —_Adapted_: Ephesians 1:17; 3:15-19.


                     For a Knowledge of God’s Will

O Almighty God, we are confident of this very thing, that he which hath
begun a good work in us, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ:
we pray that our love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in
all judgment; that we may approve things that are excellent; that we may
be sincere and without offense, till the day of Christ, being filled
with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the
glory and praise of God. Amen.
                                         —_Adapted_: Philippians 1:6-11.


                   Persecuted for Righteousness’ Sake

O Lord, our heavenly Father, grant to thy children who are persecuted
for righteousness’ sake that our conversation may be as becometh the
Gospel of Christ; that we may stand fast in one spirit, with one mind
striving together for the faith of the Gospel; that in nothing terrified
by our adversaries we may be steadfast in behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake, who liveth forever and
ever. Amen.
                                        —_Adapted_: Philippians 1:27-29.


                         For Spiritual Desires

Our Father, we most humbly beseech Thee to give unto this house, and
unto each member of it in particular, to stand fast in the Lord. May we
be of the same mind in the Lord. May we rejoice in the Lord alway. Grant
that whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, if there be any praise, may we think on these things,
may we know both how to be abased, and how to abound. May we do all
things through Christ which strengtheneth us, knowing that God shall
supply all our need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.
Amen.
                                              —_Adapted_: Philippians 4.


                       Patience and Longsuffering

For this cause we also, ... do not cease to pray for you, and to desire
that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding; that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work and increasing in the
knowledge of God; strengthened with all might according to his glorious
power, unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness; giving
thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the saints in light: who hath delivered us from the power
of darkness, and hath translated us unto the kingdom of his dear Son: in
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
     —_Adapted_: Epistles to the Colossians 1:9-14 and Philippians 4:20.


                       Begotten to a Lively Hope

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according
to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in
heaven for us. Keep us by the power of God through faith unto salvation;
that the trial of our faith, being much more precious than of gold that
perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and
honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Amen.
                                          —_Adapted_: First Peter 1:3-7.




                     2. Other First Century Prayers


                        For All Kings and Rulers

Grant unto all Kings and Rulers, O Lord, health, peace, concord, and
stability, that they may administer the government which Thou hast given
them without failure. For Thou, O heavenly Master, King of the Ages,
givest to the sons of men glory and honour, and power over all things
that are upon the earth. Do Thou, Lord, direct their counsel according
to that which is good and well pleasing in Thy sight, that administering
in peace and gentleness, with godliness, the power which Thou hast given
them, they may obtain Thy favour. O Thou Who alone art able to do these
things, and things far more exceeding good than these, for us, we praise
Thee, through the High Priest and Guardian of our souls, Jesus Christ;
through Whom be the glory and the majesty, unto Thee, both now and for
all generations, and forever and ever. Amen.
                                                       —Clement of Rome.


                            A Morning Prayer

O God, Who art the unsearchable abyss of peace, the ineffable sea of
love, the fountain of blessings, and the bestower of affection, Who
sendest peace to those that receive it; open to us this day the sea of
Thy love, and water us with the plenteous streams from the riches of Thy
grace. Make us children of quietness, and heirs of peace. Enkindle in us
the fire of Thy love; sow in us Thy fear; strengthen our weakness by Thy
power; bind us closely to Thee and to each other in one firm bond of
unity; for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen.
                                             —Syrian Clementine Liturgy.


                        For Rulers and Governors

To our rulers and governors on the earth—to them Thou, Lord, gavest the
power of the kingdom by Thy glorious and ineffable might, to the end
that we may know the glory and honour given to them by Thee and be
subject to them, in nought resisting Thy will; to them, Lord, give
health, peace, concord, stability, that they may exercise the authority
given to them without offence. For Thou, O heavenly Lord and King
eternal, givest to the sons of men glory and honour and power over the
things that are on the earth; do Thou, Lord, direct their counsel
according to that which is good and well-pleasing in Thy sight, that,
devoutly in peace and meekness exercising the power given them by Thee,
they may find Thee propitious. O Thou, who only hast power to do these
things and more abundant good with us, we praise Thee through the High
Priest and Guardian of our souls Jesus Christ, through whom be glory and
majesty to Thee both now and from generation to generation and
forevermore. Amen.
                                                       —Clement of Rome.


                             For Blessings

May God, who seeth all things, and who is the Ruler of all spirits and
the Lord of all flesh—who chose our Lord Jesus Christ and us through Him
to be a peculiar people—grant to every soul that calleth upon His
glorious and holy Name, faith, peace, patience, long-suffering,
self-control, purity, and sobriety, to the well-pleasing of His Name,
through our High Priest and Protector, Jesus Christ, by whom be to Him
glory, and majesty, and power, and honour, both now and forevermore.
Amen.
                                                       —Clement of Rome.


                            For Forgiveness

Thou didst make to appear the enduring fabric of the world by the works
of Thy hand; Thou, Lord, didst create the earth on which we dwell,—Thou,
who art faithful in all generations, just in judgments, wonderful in
strength and majesty, with wisdom creating and with understanding fixing
the things which were made, who art good among them that are being saved
and faithful among them whose trust is in Thee; O merciful and
Compassionate One, forgive us our iniquities and offences and
transgressions and trespasses. Reckon not every sin of Thy servants and
handmaids, but Thou wilt purify us with the purification of Thy truth;
and direct our steps that we may walk in holiness of heart and do what
is good and well-pleasing in Thy sight and in the sight of our rulers.
Yea, Lord, make Thy face to shine upon us for good in peace, that we may
be shielded by Thy mighty hand and delivered from every sin by Thine
uplifted arm, and deliver us from those who hate us wrongfully. Give
concord and peace to us and all who dwell upon the earth, even as Thou
gavest to our fathers, when they called upon Thee in faith and truth,
submissive as we are to Thine almighty and all-excellent Name. Amen.
                                                       —Clement of Rome.


             Prayer Before Partaking of the Holy Sacrament

O God, who art great, great in name and counsel, powerful in Thy works,
the God and Father of Thy Holy Son Jesus, our Saviour, look upon us, Thy
flock, which Thou hast chosen through Him to the glory of Thy Name;
sanctify us in body and soul, and grant that we, being purified from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, may partake of the mystic blessings now
going before Thee, and judge none of us unworthy of them, but be Thou
our Supporter, our Helper, and Defender, through Thy Christ, with whom
glory, honour, laud, praise, thanksgiving, be to Thee and the Holy Ghost
forever. Amen.
                                                —The Clementine Liturgy.


                              A Pure Heart

O God Almighty, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Thine only begotten
Son, give me a body unstained, a pure heart, a watchful mind, and an
upright understanding, and the presence of Thy Holy Spirit, that I may
obtain and ever hold fast to an unshaken faith in Thy Truth, through
Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our Lord; through whom be glory to Thee in the
Holy Ghost, forever and ever. Amen.
                                                —The Clementine Liturgy.


                          For Joy and Gladness

Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who hast nourished me from my youth up, who
givest food to all flesh. Fill our hearts with joy and gladness, that
we, always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work in Christ Jesus our Lord, through whom to Thee be glory,
honour, might, majesty, and dominion, forever and ever. Amen.
                                                —The Clementine Liturgy.




                               Chapter II
                         SECOND CENTURY PRAYERS


                              Intercession

May God the Father, and the Eternal High Priest Jesus Christ, build us
up in faith and truth and love, and grant to us our portion among the
saints with all those who believe on our Lord Jesus Christ. We pray for
all saints, for kings and rulers, for the enemies of the Cross of
Christ, and for ourselves we pray that our fruit may abound and we may
be made perfect in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.
                                                              —Polycarp.


                 A Dying Prayer of Polycarp, the Martyr

O Father of Thy well-beloved and blessed Son Jesus Christ, through whom
we have known Thee; O God of the angels and powers and of every living
creature, and of all sorts of just men which live in Thy presence, I
thank Thee that Thou hast graciously vouchsafed this day and this hour
to allot me a portion among the number of martyrs, among the people of
Christ unto the resurrection of the everlasting life, both of body and
soul, in the incorruption of the Holy Ghost; among whom I shall be
received in Thy sight this day, as a fruitful and acceptable sacrifice,
as Thou hast heretofore prepared, often revealed and now fulfilled, most
faithful God who canst not lie. Wherefore for all things I praise Thee,
I bless Thee, I glorify Thee, through the everlasting High Priest, Jesus
Christ, Thy well-beloved Son, to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be
all glory, world without end. Amen.
                                             —The Martyrdom of Polycarp.


                A Prayer for the Privilege of Martyrdom

Ask for me this only in your prayers, that strength may be given me of
the Lord that I may not be called but proved to be a Christian. Then
shall I be seen to be faithful when the world no longer sees me. For
nothing that appeareth is eternal. For the things which are perceived
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. I write to
the Churches and charge you all that willingly I die for Christ, if you
prevent me not. I ask of you that your love for me be not untimely;
allow me to be devoured of wild beasts, through whom I may attain unto
God. I am the grain of God ground between the teeth of wild beasts, that
I may be found to be the pure bread of Christ. Then indeed shall I be
the true disciple of Christ when the world shall no longer behold my
body. Beseech Christ on my behalf that through these means I may be
found a perfect sacrifice. Not as Peter and Paul do I command you. They
were apostles, I am the least of them; they were free, but I am a slave
even unto this day, but, if you wish, I shall be the freedman of Jesus
Christ, and in Him I shall rise again and be free. Amen.
                                                              —Ignatius.


                           For Soul Cleansing

O God, who hast taught us Thy divine and saving oracles, enlighten the
souls of us sinners for the comprehension of the things which have been
before spoken, so that we may not only be seen to be hearers of
spiritual things, but also doers of good deeds, striving after guileless
faith, blameless life, and pure conversation.

Release, pardon, and forgive, O God, all our voluntary and involuntary
sins, such as we have committed in action and in word, knowingly and
ignorantly, by night and by day, in mind and thought, forgive us all in
goodness and love.

Sanctify, O Lord, our souls, bodies and spirits; examine our minds and
search our consciences; take from us all evil imaginations, all impurity
of thought, all inclinations to lust, all depravity of conception, all
envy, pride and hypocrisy, all falsehood, deceit and irregular living,
all covetousness, vain glory and sloth; all malice, anger and wrath, all
remembrance of injuries, all blasphemy and every motion of flesh and
spirit that is contrary to the purity of Thy Will. Amen.
                                                  —Liturgy of St. James.


                         To Witness for Christ

Grant, O merciful God, that as Thy holy Apostle St. James, leaving his
father and all that he had, without delay, was obedient to the call of
Thy son Jesus Christ, and followed Him, and at last cheerfully laid down
his life for His gospel’s sake, so I, forsaking all worldly and carnal
affections, may be evermore ready to follow Thy holy commandments, and,
whenever Thy providence shall make it my duty, may readily and
cheerfully embrace death, though armed with his utmost terror, rather
than forsake or deny Thee. Let me rejoice in every happy occasion of
testifying the sincerity of my love, by suffering for Thy truth, and let
the firm belief of those glorious eternal rewards which Thou hast
prepared for them who lay down their lives for Thy sake, support me
under all the cruelties of the most merciless persecutors. Grant this, O
blessed Lord, who didst die for me, and didst rise again, and now
sittest at the right hand of the Father, to intercede for me, and all
Thy faithful disciples. Amen.
                                                  —Liturgy of St. James.


                            For a Pure Heart

O God, the Father of our Saviour Jesus Christ, whose name is great,
whose nature is blissful, whose goodness is inexhaustible, God and Ruler
of all things, who art blessed forever; before whom stand thousands and
thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand, the hosts of holy angels
and archangels; sanctify, O Lord, our souls and bodies and spirits,
search our consciences, and cast out of us every evil thought, every
base desire, all envy and pride, all wrath and anger, and all that is
contrary to Thy holy will. And grant us, O Lord, Lover of men, with a
pure heart and contrite soul, to call upon Thee, our holy God and Father
who art in heaven. Amen.
                                                  —Liturgy of St. James.


                          Sanctify Us, O Lord

God and Father of our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ, the
glorious Lord, the blessed essence, the bounteous goodness, the God and
Sovereign of all, who art blessed to all eternity, who sittest upon the
cherubim, and art glorified by the seraphim, before whom stand thousand
thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand hosts of angels and
archangels: Thou hast accepted the gifts, offerings, and fruits brought
unto Thee as an odour of a sweet spiritual smell, and hast been pleased
to sanctify them, and make them perfect, O good One, by the grace of Thy
Christ, and by the presence of Thy all-holy Spirit.

Sanctify also, O Lord, our souls, and bodies, and spirits, and touch our
understandings, and search our consciences, and cast out from us every
evil imagination, every impure feeling, every base desire, every
unbecoming thought, all envy, and vanity, and hypocrisy, all lying, all
deceit, every worldly affection, all covetousness, all vainglory, all
indifference, all vice, all passion, all anger, all malice, all
blasphemy, every motion of the flesh and spirit that is not in
accordance with Thy holy will: and count us worthy, O loving Lord, with
boldness, without condemnation, in a pure heart, with a contrite spirit,
with unshamed face, with sanctified lips, to dare to call upon Thee, the
holy God, Father in heaven. Amen.
                                                  —Liturgy of St. James.


                            For Stewardship

O Lord God Almighty, who hast built Thy Church upon the foundation of
the Apostles, under Christ the head corner-stone, and to this end didst
endue Thy holy apostle St. Barnabas with the singular gift of the Holy
Ghost; leave me not destitute, I humbly beseech Thee, of Thy manifold
gifts and talents, nor yet of grace to make a right use of them always
without any sordid self-ends, to Thy honour and glory; that, making a
due improvement of all those gifts Thou graciously entrustest me with, I
may be able to give a good account of my stewardship when the great
Judge shall appear, the Lord Jesus Christ, who reigneth with Thee and
the Eternal Spirit, one God, blessed forever. Amen.
                                                              —Barnabas.


                              Stewardship

O Lord God Almighty, who didst endue Thy holy apostle Barnabas with
singular gifts of the Holy Ghost; leave us not, we beseech Thee,
destitute of Thy manifold gifts, nor yet of grace to use them always to
Thy honour and glory; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                              —Barnabas.


                         Prayer to the Teacher

Be gracious, O Instructor, to us Thy children, Father, Charioteer of
Israel, Son and Father, both in One, O Lord. Grant to us who obey Thy
precepts, that we may perfect the likeness of the image, and with all
our power know Him who is the good God and not a harsh judge. And do
Thou Thyself cause that all of us who have our conversation in Thy
peace, who have been translated into Thy commonwealth, having sailed
tranquilly over the billows of sin, may be wafted in calm by Thy Holy
Spirit, by the ineffable wisdom, by night and day to the perfect day;
and giving thanks may praise, and praising thank the Alone Father and
Son, Son and Father, the Son, Instructor and Teacher, with the Holy
Spirit, all in One, in whom is all, for whom all is One, for whom is
eternity, whose members we all are, whose glory the aeons are; for the
All-good, All-lovely, All-wise, All-just One. To whom be glory both now
and forever. Amen.
                                                 —Clement of Alexandria.


                          For Growth in Grace

Give perfection to beginners, O Father; give intelligence to the little
ones; give aid to those who are running their course. Give sorrow to the
negligent; give fervour of spirit to the lukewarm. Give to the perfect a
good consummation; for the sake of Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.
                                   —Irenaeus, Old Gallican Sacramentary.




                              Chapter III
                         THIRD CENTURY PRAYERS


                             For Blessings

We most earnestly beseech Thee, O Thou Lover of mankind, to bless all
Thy people, the flocks of Thy fold. Send down into our hearts the peace
of heaven, and grant us also the peace of this life. Give life to the
souls of all of us, and let no deadly sin prevail against us, or any of
Thy people. Deliver all who are in trouble, for Thou art our God, who
settest the captives free; who givest hope to the hopeless, and help to
the helpless; who liftest up the fallen; and who art the Haven of the
shipwrecked. Give Thy pity, pardon, and refreshment to every Christian
soul, whether in affliction or error. Preserve us, in our pilgrimage
through this life from hurt and danger, and grant that we may end our
lives as Christians, well-pleasing to Thee and free from sin, and that
we may have our portion and lot with all Thy saints. Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                               For Light

O God of Light, Father of Life, Giver of Wisdom, Benefactor of our
souls, who givest to the fainthearted who put their trust in Thee those
things into which the angels desire to look; O Sovereign Lord, who hast
brought us up from the depths of darkness to light, who hast given us
life from death, who hast graciously bestowed upon us freedom from
slavery, and who hast scattered the darkness of sin within us, do Thou
now also enlighten the eyes of our understanding, and sanctify us wholly
in soul, body, and spirit. Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                    For the Peace of Christ’s Flock

O Sovereign and Almighty Lord, bless all Thy people and all Thy flock.
Give peace, Thy help, Thy love unto us, Thy servants the sheep of Thy
fold, that we may be united in the bond of peace and love, one body and
one spirit, in one hope of our calling, in Thy Divine and boundless
love; for the sake of Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the sheep.
Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                       Before the Holy Communion

O God of light, Father of life, Author of grace, Creator of worlds,
Founder of knowledge, Giver of wisdom, Treasure of holiness, Teacher of
pure prayers, Benefactor of our souls, who givest to the faint-hearted
who put their trust in Thee those things into which the angels desire to
look: O Sovereign Lord, who hast brought us up from the depths of
darkness to light, who hast given us life from death, who hast
graciously bestowed upon us freedom from slavery, who hast scattered the
darkness of sin within us, through the presence of Thine only-begotten
Son, do Thou now also, through the visitation of Thy all-holy Spirit,
enlighten the eyes of our understanding, that we may partake without
fear of condemnation of this heavenly and immortal food, and sanctify us
wholly in soul, body, and spirit, that with Thy holy disciples and
apostles we may say this prayer to Thee: Our Father who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it
is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; And forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil; For thine is the kingdom, and
the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                          For Divine Strength

O mightiest King, co-eternal with the Father, who by Thy might hast
vanquished hell and trodden death under foot, who hast bound the strong
man, and by Thy miraculous power and the enlightening radiance of Thy
unspeakable Godhead hast raised Adam from the tomb, send forth Thy
invisible right hand, which is full of blessing, and bless us all.

Pity us, O Lord, and strengthen us by Thy divine power.

Take away from us the sinful and wicked influence of carnal desire.

Let the light shine into our souls, and dispell the surrounding darkness
of sin.

Unite us to the all-blessed assembly that is well-pleasing unto Thee;
for through Thee and with Thee, all praise, honour, power, adoration,
and thanksgiving are due unto the Father and the Holy Spirit, now,
henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                             For Blessings

O Sovereign and Almighty Lord, bless all Thy people, and all Thy flock.
Give Thy peace, Thy help, Thy love unto us Thy servants, the sheep of
Thy fold, that we may be united in the bond of peace and love, one body
and one spirit, in one hope of our calling, in Thy divine and boundless
love. Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                            A Morning Prayer

We give Thee thanks—yea, more than thanks O Lord our God, for all Thy
goodness at all times, and in all places, because Thou hast shielded,
rescued, helped, and guided us all the days of our lives, and brought us
unto this hour. We pray and beseech Thee, merciful God, to grant in Thy
goodness that we may spend this day, and all the time of our lives,
without sin, in fullness of joy, holiness, and reverence of Thee. But
drive away from us, O Lord, all envy, all fear, and all temptations.
Bestow upon us what is good and meet. Whatever sin we commit in thought,
word, or deed, do Thou in Thy goodness and mercy be pleased to pardon.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; through the
grace, mercy, and love of Thine only begotten Son. Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                   Thanksgiving and Prayer for Pardon

We render unto Thee our thanksgiving, O Lord our God, Father of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ, by all means, at all times, in all places. For
that Thou hast sheltered, assisted, supported, and led us on through the
time past of our life, and brought us to this hour. And we pray and
beseech Thee, O God and loving Lord, grant us to pass this day, this
year, and all the time of our life without sin, with all joy, health,
and salvation. But all envy, all fear, all temptation, all the working
of Satan, do Thou drive away, O God, from us, and from Thy holy Church.
Supply us with things good and profitable. Whereinsoever we have sinned
against Thee, in word, or deed, or thought, be Thou pleased in Thy love
and goodness to forgive, and forsake us not, O God, who hope in Thee,
neither lead us into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one and
from his works; by the grace and compassion of Thine only begotten Son,
Jesus Christ. Amen.
                                                   —Liturgy of St. Mark.


                       For Friends and Relations

Have mercy, O Lord, upon all those whom Thou hast associated with us in
the bonds of friendship and kindredship, and grant that they, with us,
may be so perfectly conformed to Thy Holy Will, that being cleansed from
all sin, we may be found worthy, by the inspiration of Thy love, to be
partakers together of the blessedness of Thy heavenly kingdom; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                             —Old Gallican Sacramentary.


                          For Christian Graces

Grant Thy servants, O God, to be set on fire with Thy Spirit,
strengthened by Thy power, illuminated by Thy splendour, filled with Thy
grace, and to go forward by Thine aid. Give them, O Lord, a right faith,
perfect love, true humility. Grant, O Lord, that there may be in us
simple affection, brave patience, persevering obedience, perpetual
peace, a pure mind, a right and honest heart, a good will, a holy
conscience, spiritual strength, a life unspotted and unblamable; and
after having manfully finished our course, may we be enabled happily to
enter into Thy kingdom; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                             —Old Gallican Sacramentary.


                             A Table Grace

Abba, Father, fulfill the office of Thy Name towards Thy servants; do
Thou govern, protect, preserve, sanctify, guide, and console us. Let us
be so enkindled with love for Thee, that we may not be despised by Thee,
O most merciful Lord, most tender Father; for Jesus Christ’s sake. Amen.
                                             —Old Gallican Sacramentary.


                             Morning Prayer

We give thee hearty thanks for the rest of the past night, and for the
gift of a new day, with its opportunities of pleasing thee. Grant that
we may so pass its hours in the perfect freedom of thy service, that at
eventide we may again give thanks unto thee; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
                                                    —The Eastern Church.


                             A Table Grace

In the evening and morning and noonday we praise Thee, we thank Thee,
and pray Thee, Master of all, to direct our prayers as incense before
Thee. Let not our hearts turn away to words or thoughts of wickedness,
but keep us from all things that might hurt us; for to Thee, O Lord, our
eyes look up, and our hope is in Thee: confound us not, O our God; for
the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                —Eastern Church Vespers.


                             For Ministers

O God, great in power, unsearchable in understanding, wondrous in
counsels towards the children of men, do Thou fill with the gift of Thy
Holy Spirit those whom Thou dost will to undertake the degree of the
priesthood that they may be worthy to stand before Thy holy altar
unblamably, to announce the Gospel of Thy kingdom, to administer the
Word of Thy Truth, to offer gifts and spiritual sacrifices unto Thee,
and to renew Thy people in the laver of regeneration; that at the second
coming of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ, Thine only begotten
Son, they may go forth to meet Him, and by the multitude of Thy mercies
receive their reward; for Thy venerable and majestic Name is blessed and
glorified. Amen.
                                                —Eastern Church Liturgy.


                            For Illumination

Shine into our hearts, O loving Master, by the pure light of the
knowledge of Thyself, and open the eyes of our mind to the contemplation
of Thy teaching, and put into us the fear of Thy blessed commandments;
that trampling down all that is worldly, we may follow a spiritual life,
thinking and doing all things according to Thy good pleasure. For Thou
art our sanctification, and our illumination, and to Thee we render
glory, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of
ages. Amen.
                                                —Eastern Church Liturgy.




                               Chapter IV
                         FOURTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                              For Charity

O God of love, Who hast given a new commandment through Thine only
begotten Son, that we should love one another, even as Thou didst love
us, the unworthy and the wandering, and gavest Thy beloved Son for our
life and salvation; we pray Thee, Lord, give to us, Thy servants, in all
time of our life on the earth, a mind forgetful of past ill-will, a pure
conscience and sincere thoughts, and a heart to love our brethren; for
the sake of Jesus Christ, Thy Son, our Lord and only Saviour. Amen.
                                           —Coptic Liturgy of St. Cyril.


                             For Protection

Be gracious to our prayers, O merciful God, and guard Thy people with
loving protection; that they who confess Thine only begotten Son as God,
born in our bodily flesh, may never be corrupted by the deceits of the
devil; through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                               —Ambrose.


                               For Pardon

O Lord, who hast mercy upon all, take away from me my sins, and
mercifully kindle in me the fire of Thy Holy Spirit. Take away from me
the heart of stone, and give me a heart of flesh, a heart to love and
adore Thee, a heart to delight in Thee, to follow and to enjoy Thee, for
Christ’s sake. Amen.
                                                               —Ambrose.


                     For Trust and Fuller Knowledge

Merciful Lord, the Comforter and Teacher of Thy faithful people,
increase in Thy Church the desires which Thou hast given, and confirm
the hearts of those who hope in Thee by enabling them to understand the
depth of Thy promises, that all Thine adopted sons may even now behold,
with the eyes of faith, and patiently wait for, the light which as yet
Thou dost not openly manifest; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                               —Ambrose.


                             For Salvation

O God, Who didst look on man when he had fallen down into death, and
resolve to redeem him by the advent of Thine only begotten Son; grant,
we beseech Thee, that they who confess His glorious Incarnation may also
be admitted to the fellowship of Him their Redeemer; through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                               —Ambrose.


                          For Freedom From Sin

O Lord, my Saviour, in whose power it is to remit sins, I beseech Thee
say unto me, “Loose thee from thy chains, come out of the bonds of thy
sins”; and when Thou sayest it, loose those cords of my errors wherewith
I am entangled and bound; for, though I am the most wicked of all men,
and to be abhorred by reason of my continuance in sins, yet when thou
commandest, I shall be free from them. Amen.
                                                               —Ambrose.


                               For Pardon

Lord Jesus Christ, who didst stretch out Thine hands on the Cross, and
redeem us by Thy Blood, forgive me, a sinner, for none of my thoughts
are hid from Thee. Pardon I ask, pardon I hope for, pardon I trust to
have. Thou who art pitiful and merciful, spare and forgive me. Amen.
                                                               —Ambrose.


                               For Purity

O Holy Spirit of God, very God, Who didst descend upon Christ at the
River Jordan, and upon the Apostles in the upper chamber, we have sinned
against heaven and before Thee; purify us again, we beseech Thee, with
Thy Divine fire, and have mercy upon us; for Christ’s sake. Amen.
                                                      —Nerses of Clajes.


                           Confession of Sin

O Thou that beholdest all things, we have sinned against Thee in
thought, word, and deed; blot out our transgressions, be merciful to us
sinners, and grant that our names may be found written in the book of
life, for the sake of Christ Jesus our Saviour. Amen.
                                                      —Nerses of Clajes.


                             For Protection

Lord Jesus Christ, Keeper and Preserver of all things, let Thy right
hand guard us by day and by night, when we sit at home, and when we walk
abroad, when we lie down and when we rise up, that we may be kept from
all evil, and have mercy upon us sinners. Amen.
                                                      —Nerses of Clajes.


                    A Prayer for Spiritual Blessings

Most high God, our loving Father, infinite in majesty, we humbly beseech
Thee for all Thy servants everywhere, that Thou wouldst give us a pure
mind, perfect love, sincerity in conduct, purity in heart, strength in
action, courage in distress, self-command in character. May our prayers
ascend to Thy gracious ears, and Thy loving benediction descend upon us
all, that we may in all things be protected under the shadow of Thy
wings. Grant us pardon of our sins; perfect our work; accept our
prayers; protect us by Thine own Name, O God of Jacob; send us Thy
saving help from Thy holy place, and strengthen us out of Zion. Remember
all Thy people everywhere, give us all the grace of devotion to Thy
will; fulfill our desires with good gifts, and crown us with Thy mercy.
When we serve Thee with faithful devotion, pardon our sins and correct
us with Fatherly tenderness. Grant that, being delivered from all
adversity, and both here and eternally justified, we may praise Thee
forever and ever, saying Holy, Holy, Holy; through Jesus Christ our Lord
and Saviour, Who with Thee and the Holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth, ever
one God, world without end. Amen.
                                                 —Gallican Sacramentary.


                     For Those Gathered in Worship

O Lord God, Who hast taught us to pray all together, and hast promised
to hear the united voices of two or three invoking Thy Name; hear now, O
Lord, the prayers of Thy servants unto their salvation, and give us in
this world knowledge of Thy Truth, and in the world to come life
everlasting; for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                      —Armenian Liturgy.


                          For Right Blessings

O Lord our God, teach us, we beseech Thee, to ask Thee aright for the
right blessings. Steer Thou the vessel of our life toward Thyself, Thou
tranquil Haven of all storm-tossed souls. Show us the course wherein we
should go. Renew a willing spirit within us. Let Thy Spirit curb our
wayward senses, and guide and enable us unto that which is our true
good, to keep Thy laws, and in all our works evermore to rejoice in Thy
glorious and gladdening Presence. For Thine is the glory and praise from
all Thy saints forever and ever. Amen.
                                                                 —Basil.


                     For Converts in Mission Fields

Remember, O Lord, all who in heathen lands are under instruction for
Holy Baptism; have mercy upon them and confirm them in the faith; remove
all the remains of idolatry and superstition from their hearts, that
being devoted to Thy law, Thy precepts, Thy fear, Thy truths, and Thy
commandments, they may grow to a firm knowledge of the word in which
they have been instructed, and may be found worthy to be made an
habitation of the Holy Ghost, by the laver of regeneration, for the
remission of their sins, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                                 —Basil.


                         For Light and Guidance

Eternal God, Thou uncreate and primal Light, Maker of all created
things, Fountain of pity, Thou Sea of Bounty, fathomless deep of
Loving-Kindness: lift Thou up the light of Thy countenance upon us!
Lord, shine in our hearts, true Sun of Righteousness, and fill our souls
with Thy beauty.

Teach us always to keep in mind Thy judgments, and to discourse of them,
and own Thee continually as our Lord and Friend. Govern by Thy will the
works of our hands; and lead us in the right way, that we may do what is
well-pleasing and acceptable to Thee, that through us unworthy Thy holy
name may be glorified.

To Thee alone be praise and honor and worship eternally. Amen.
                                                                 —Basil.


                            For Two or Three

Almighty God, who hast given us grace at this time to make our common
supplications unto Thee; and dost promise that when two or three are
gathered together in Thy name Thou wilt grant their requests: fulfill
now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of Thy servants, as may be most
expedient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of Thy truth,
and in the world to come, life everlasting. Amen.
                                                            —Chrysostom.


                             For All People

Remember, O Lord, this city wherein we dwell and every other city and
country, and all the faithful who dwell in them. Remember, O Lord, all
who travel by land or water, all that labour under sickness or slavery;
remember them for health and safety. Remember, O Lord, those in Thy Holy
Church who bring forth good fruit, are rich in good works and forget not
the poor. Grant unto us all Thy mercy and loving-kindness, and grant
that we may with one mouth and one heart praise and glorify Thy great
and glorious name, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, now, henceforth, and
forever. Amen.
                                                            —Chrysostom.


                               Invocation

Lord God, of might inconceivable, of glory incomprehensible, of mercy
immeasurable, of benignity ineffable; do Thou, O Master, look down upon
us in Thy tender love, and show forth, towards us and those who pray
with us, Thy rich mercies and compassions. Amen.
                                             —Liturgy of St. Chrysostom.


                            For Refreshment

O Lord our God, under the shadow of Thy wings let us hope. Thou wilt
support us, both when little, and even to gray hairs. When our strength
is of Thee, it is strength; but, when our own, it is feebleness. We
return unto Thee, O Lord, that from their weariness our souls may rise
towards Thee, leaning on the things which Thou hast created, and passing
on to Thyself, who hast wonderfully made them; for with Thee is
refreshment and true strength. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                               Adoration

O Thou Good Omnipotent, Who so carest for every one of us, as if Thou
caredst for him alone; and so for all, as if all were but one! Blessed
is the man who loveth Thee, and his friend in Thee, and his enemy for
Thee. For he only loses none dear to him, to whom all are dear in Him
who cannot be lost. And who is that but our God, the God that made
heaven and earth, and filleth them, even by filling them creating them.
And Thy law is truth, and truth is Thyself. I behold how some things
pass away that others may replace them, but Thou dost never depart, O
God, my Father supremely good, Beauty of all things beautiful. To Thee
will I intrust whatsoever I have received from Thee, so shall I lose
nothing. Thou madest me for Thyself, and my heart is restless until it
repose in Thee. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            The Holy Spirit

O holy Spirit, Love of God, infuse Thy grace, and descend plentifully
into my heart; enlighten the dark corners of this neglected dwelling,
and scatter there Thy cheerful beams; dwell in that soul that longs to
be Thy temple; water that barren soil, over-run with weeds and briars,
and lost for want of cultivating, and make it fruitful with Thy dew from
heaven. Oh come, Thou refreshment of them that languish and faint. Come,
Thou Star and Guide of them that sail in the tempestuous sea of the
world; Thou only Haven of the tossed and shipwrecked. Come, Thou Glory
and Crown of the living, and only Safeguard of the dying. Come, Holy
Spirit, in much mercy, and make me fit to receive Thee. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            For Entire Love

O Lord, my God, Light of the blind and Strength of the weak; yea, also,
Light of those that see, and Strength of the strong; hearken unto my
soul, and hear it crying out of the depths.

O Lord, help us to turn and seek Thee; for Thou hast not forsaken Thy
creatures as we have forsaken Thee, our Creator. Let us turn and seek
Thee, for we know Thou art here in our hearts, when we confess to Thee,
when we cast ourselves upon Thee, and weep in Thy bosom, after all our
rugged ways; and Thou dost gently wipe away our tears, and we weep the
more for joy; because Thou, Lord, who madest us dost remake and comfort
us.

Hear, Lord, my prayer, and grant that I may most entirely love Thee, and
do Thou rescue me, O Lord, from every temptation, even unto the end.
Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                           For Steadfastness

O God, the light of every heart that sees Thee, the Life of every soul
that loves Thee, the strength of every mind that seeks Thee, grant me
ever to continue steadfast in Thy holy love. Be Thou the joy of my
heart; take it all to Thyself, and therein abide. The house of my soul
is, I confess, too narrow for Thee; do thou enlarge it, that Thou mayest
enter in; it is ruinous, but do Thou repair it. It has that within which
must offend Thine eyes; I confess and know it; but whose help shall I
implore in cleansing it, but Thine alone? To Thee, therefore, I cry
urgently, begging that Thou wilt cleanse me from my secret faults, and
keep Thy servant from presumptuous sins, that they never get dominion
over me. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            For Perseverance

I know, O Lord, and do with all humility acknowledge myself an object
altogether unworthy of Thy love; but sure I am, Thou art an object
altogether worthy of mine. I am not good enough to serve Thee, but Thou
hast a right to the best service I can pay. Do Thou then impart to me
some of that excellence, and that shall supply my own want of worth.
Help me to cease from sin according to Thy will, that I may be capable
of doing Thee service according to my duty. Enable me so to guard and
govern myself, so to begin and finish my course, that, when the race of
life is run, I may sleep in peace, and rest in Thee. Be with me unto the
end, that my sleep may be rest indeed, my rest perfect security, and
that security a blessed eternity. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                               For Mercy

Come, O Lord, in much mercy down into my soul, and take possession and
dwell there. A homely mansion, I confess, for so glorious a Majesty, but
such as Thou art fitting up for the reception of Thee, by holy and
fervent desires of Thine own inspiring. Enter then, and adorn, and make
it such as Thou canst inhabit, since it is the work of Thy hands. Give
me Thine own self, without which, though Thou shouldst give me all that
ever Thou hast made, yet could not my desires be satisfied. Let my soul
ever seek Thee, and let me persist in seeking, till I have found, and am
in full possession of Thee. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            Refuge and Peace

O Thou full of compassion, I commit and commend myself unto Thee, in
whom I am, and live, and know. Be Thou the Goal of my pilgrimage, and my
Rest by the way. Let my soul take refuge from the crowding turmoil of
worldly thoughts beneath the shadow of Thy wings; let my heart, this sea
of restless waves, find peace in Thee, O God. Thou bounteous Giver of
all good gifts, give to him who is weary refreshing food; gather our
distracted thoughts and powers into harmony again; and set the prisoner
free. See, he stands at thy door and knocks; be it open to him, that he
may enter with a free step, and be quickened by Thee. For Thou art the
Well-spring of Life, the Light of eternal Brightness, wherein the just
live who love Thee. Be it unto me according to Thy word. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                              Perfect Love

Grant me, even me, my dearest Lord, to know Thee, and love Thee, and
rejoice in Thee. And, if I cannot do these perfectly in this life, let
me at least advance to higher degrees every day, till I can come to do
them in perfection. Let the knowledge of Thee increase in me here, that
it may be full hereafter. Let the love of Thee grow every day more and
more here, that it may be perfect hereafter; that my joy may be great in
itself, and full in Thee. I know, O God, that Thou art a God of truth, O
make good Thy gracious promises to me, that my joy may be full. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                           For Perfect Light

O Thou holy and unspeakable, Thou wonderful and mighty God, whose power
and wisdom hath no end, before whom all powers tremble, at whose glance
the heavens and the earth flee away, Thou art Love, Thou art my Father,
and I will love and worship Thee forever and ever!

Thou hast deigned to show pity on me, and a ray from Thy light hath
shone upon mine inward eye. Guide me on into the perfect light, that it
may illumine me wholly, and that all darkness may flee away. Let the
holy flame of Thy love so burn in my heart that it be made pure, and I
may see Thee, O God; for it is the pure in heart who see Thee. Thou hast
set me free; Thou hast drawn me to Thee; therefore forsake me not, but
keep me always in Thy grace. Guide me, and rule me, and perfect me for
Thy kingdom. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                             For More Love

Thee, most merciful God, do I now invoke to descend into my soul, which
Thou hast prepared for Thy reception by the desire which Thou hast
breathed into it. Ere ever I cried to Thee, Thou, most Merciful, hadst
called and sought me, that I might find Thee, and finding love Thee.
Even so I sought and found Thee, Lord, and desire to love Thee. Increase
my desire, and grant me what I ask. See, I love Thee, but too little;
strengthen my love. When my spirit aspires to Thee, and meditates on
Thine unspeakable goodness, the burden of the flesh becomes less heavy,
the tumult of thought is stilled, the weight of mortality is less
oppressive. Then fain would my soul find wings, that she might rise in
tireless flight ever upwards to Thy glorious throne, and there be filled
with the refreshing solace that belongs to the citizens of heaven. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                          For Mercy and Grace

O God, our true Life, in whom and by whom all things live, Thou
commandest us to seek Thee, and art ready to be found; Thou biddest us
knock, and openest when we do so. To know Thee is life, to serve Thee is
freedom, to enjoy Thee is a kingdom, to praise Thee is the joy and
happiness of the soul. I praise, and bless, and adore Thee, I worship
Thee, I glorify Thee, I give thanks to Thee for Thy great glory. I
humbly beseech Thee to abide with me, to reign in me, to make this heart
of mine a holy temple, a fit habitation for Thy Divine majesty. O Thou
Maker and Preserver of all things, visible and invisible! keep, I
beseech Thee, the work of Thine own hands, who trusts in Thy mercy alone
for safety and protection. Guard me with the power of Thy grace, here
and in all places, now and at all times, forevermore. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                           For a Safe Voyage

Blessed are all Thy saints, my God and King, who have travelled over the
tempestuous sea of mortality, and have at last made the desired port of
peace and felicity. Oh, cast a gracious eye upon us who are still in our
dangerous voyage. Remember and succor us in our distress, and think on
them that lie exposed to the rough storms of troubles and temptations.
Strengthen our weakness, that we may do valiantly in this spiritual war;
help us against our own negligence and cowardice, and defend us from the
treachery of our unfaithful hearts. We are exceeding frail, and
indisposed to every virtuous and gallant undertaking. Grant, O Lord,
that we may bring our vessel safe to shore, unto our desired haven.
Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            For Perfect Love

Look upon us, O Lord, and let all the darkness of our souls vanish
before the beams of Thy brightness. Fill us with holy love, and open to
us the treasures of Thy wisdom. All our desire is known unto Thee,
therefore perfect what Thou hast begun, and what Thy Spirit has awakened
us to ask in prayer. We seek Thy face, turn Thy face unto us and show us
Thy Glory. Then shall our longing be satisfied, and our peace shall be
perfect. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                         For Obedience and Love

Thou, O Lord, who commandest me to ask, grant that I may receive; Thou
hast put me upon seeking, let me be happy in finding; Thou hast bidden
me knock, I pray Thee open unto me. Be graciously pleased to direct and
govern all my thoughts and actions, that, for the future, I may serve
Thee, and entirely devote myself to obeying Thee. Accept me, I beseech
Thee, and draw me to Thyself, that I may henceforth be Thine by
obedience and love, who am already all Thine own, as Thy creature. Even
Thine, O Lord, who livest and reignest forever and ever. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                               For Light

O God our Father, who dost exhort us to pray, and who dost grant what we
ask, if only, when we ask, we live a better life; hear me, who am
trembling in this darkness, and stretch forth Thy hand unto me; hold
forth Thy light before me; recall me from my wanderings; and, Thou being
my Guide, may I be restored to myself and to Thee, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            For Illumination

Late have I loved Thee, O Thou Eternal Truth and Goodness: late have I
sought Thee, my Father! But Thou didst seek me, and when Thou shinedst
forth upon me, then I knew Thee and learnt to love Thee. I thank Thee, O
my Light, that Thou didst thus shine upon me; that Thou didst teach my
soul what Thou wouldst be to me, and didst incline Thy face in pity unto
me. Thou, Lord, hast become my Hope, my Comfort, my Strength, my All! In
Thee doth my soul rejoice. The darkness vanished from before mine eyes,
and I beheld Thee, the Son of Righteousness. When I loved darkness, I
knew Thee not, but wandered on from night to night. But Thou didst lead
me out of that blindness; Thou didst take me by the hand and call me to
Thee, and now I can thank Thee, and Thy mighty voice which hath
penetrated to my inmost heart. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                          Obligation to Others

O Lord, our Saviour, who hast warned us that thou wilt require much of
those to whom much is given; grant that we whose lot is cast in so
goodly a heritage may strive together the more abundantly to extend to
others what we so richly enjoy; and as we have entered into the labours
of other men, so to labour that in their turn other men may enter into
ours, to the fulfillment of Thy holy will; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            For Refreshment

O Holy Spirit, Love of God, infuse Thy grace, and descend plentifully
into my heart; enlighten the dark corners of this neglected dwelling,
and scatter there Thy cheerful beams; dwell in that soul that longs to
be Thy temple; water that barren soil, over-run with weeds and briars,
and lost for want of cultivating, and make it fruitful with Thy dew from
heaven. Oh come, Thou refreshment of them that languish and faint. Come,
Thou Star and Guide of them that sail in the tempestuous sea of the
world; Thou only Haven of the tossed and ship-wrecked. Come, Thou Glory
and Crown of the living, and only Safeguard of the dying. Come, Holy
Spirit, in much mercy, and make me fit to receive Thee. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                     For Increased Godly Knowledge

Grant us, even us, O Lord, to know Thee, and love Thee, and rejoice in
Thee. And if we cannot do these perfectly in this life, let us, at
least, advance to higher degrees every day, till we can come to do them
in perfection. Let the knowledge of Thee increase in us here, that it
may be full hereafter. Let the love of Thee grow every day more and more
here, that it may be perfect hereafter; that our joy may be great in
itself and full in Thee. We know, O God, that Thou art a God of truth, O
make good Thy gracious promises to us, that our joy may be full. To
Thine honour and glory, Who with the Father and the Holy Ghost liveth
and reigneth one God, world without end. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                                 Praise

Great art Thou, O Lord, and greatly to be praised; great is Thy power,
and Thy wisdom is infinite. Thee would we praise without ceasing. Thou
callest us to delight in Thy praise, for Thou hast made us for Thyself,
and our hearts find no rest until we rest in Thee; Who with the Father
and the Holy Ghost all glory, praise, and honour be ascribed, both now
and forevermore. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                               For Grace

We ask not of Thee, O Father, silver and gold, honour and glory, nor the
pleasures of the world, but do Thou grant us grace to seek Thy Kingdom
and Thy righteousness, and do Thou add unto us things necessary for the
body and for this life. Behold, O Lord, our desire; may it be pleasing
in Thy sight. We present our petition unto Thee through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Who is at Thy right hand, our mediator and Advocate, through
Whom Thou soughtest us that we might seek Thee; Thy Word, through Whom
Thou madest us and all things; Thy only begotten Son, through Whom Thou
callest us to adoption, Who intercedeth with Thee for us, and in Whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; to Him, with Thyself
and the Holy Spirit, be all honour, praise, and glory, now and forever.
Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                               For Peace

O Lord God, grant Thy peace to us, for Thou hast supplied us with all
things—the peace of rest, the peace of the Sabbath, which hath no
evening; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                             Evening Prayer

Watch Thou, dear Lord, with those who wake, or watch, or weep to night,
and give Thine angels charge over those who sleep. Tend Thy sick ones, O
Lord Christ. Rest Thy weary ones. Bless Thy dying ones. Soothe Thy
suffering ones. Pity Thine afflicted ones. Shield Thy joyous ones. And
all, for Thy Love’s sake. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                             For Perfection

Hear, Lord, my prayer; let not my soul faint under Thy discipline, nor
let me faint in confessing unto Thee all Thy mercies whereby Thou hast
drawn me out of all my most evil ways, that Thou mightest become a
delight to me above all the allurements which I once pursued; that I may
most entirely love Thee, and clasp Thy hand with all my affections, and
Thou mayest yet rescue me from every temptation, even unto the end. For
lo, O Lord, my King and my God, for Thy service be whatever useful thing
my childhood learned; for Thy service that I speak, write, read, reckon.
For Thou didst grant me Thy discipline while I was learning vanities;
and my sin of delighting in those vanities Thou hast forgiven. In them,
indeed, I learnt many a useful word, but these may as well be learned in
things not vain; and that is the safe path for the steps of youth. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                               For Light

O let the Light, the Truth, the Light of my heart, not mine own
darkness, speak unto me. I fell off into that, and became darkened; but
even thence, even thence I loved Thee. I went astray, and remembered
Thee. I heard Thy voice behind me, calling me to return, and scarcely
heard it, through the tumultuousness of the enemies of peace. And now,
behold, I return in distress and panting after Thy fountain. Let no man
forbid me! of this will I drink, and so live. Let me not be mine own
life; from myself I lived ill, death was I to myself; and I revive in
Thee. Do Thou speak unto me, do Thou discourse unto me. I have believed
Thy Books, and their words be most full of mystery. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                           Communion with God

O how shall I call upon God, my God and Lord, since, when I call for
Him, I shall be calling Him into myself? And what room is there within
me, whither my God can come into me? Whither can God come into me, God
who made heaven and earth? Is there, indeed, O Lord my God, aught in me
that can contain Thee? Do, then, heaven and earth, which Thou hast made,
and wherein Thou hast made me, contain Thee? Or, because nothing which
exists could exist without Thee, doth therefore whatever exists contain
Thee? Since, then, I too exist, why do I seek that Thou shouldest enter
into me, who were not, wert Thou not in me? Why? Because I am not gone
down in hell, and yet Thou art there also. For if I go down into hell,
Thou art there. I could not be, then, O my God, could not be at all,
wert Thou not in me; or rather, unless I were in Thee, of whom are all
things, by whom are all things, in whom are all things! Even so, Lord,
even so. Whither do I call Thee, since I am in Thee? Or whence canst
Thou enter into me? For whither can I go beyond heaven and earth, that
thence my God should come into me, who hath said, “I fill the heaven and
the earth”?

O God, the vessels which Thou fillest uphold Thee not, since, though
they were broken, Thou wert not poured out, on us, Thou art not cast
down, but Thou upliftest us; Thou art not dissipated, but Thou gatherest
us.... Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                              Rest in Thee

O Lord God, give peace unto us (for Thou hast given us all things): the
peace of rest, the peace of the Sabbath, which hath no evening: Yea,
give us rest in Thee, the Sabbath of eternal life. For Thou shalt rest
in us, as now Thou workest in us; and Thy rest shall be through us, as
Thy works are through us. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                               For Light

O Lord, who art the Light, the Way, the Truth, the Life; in whom there
is no darkness, error, vanity, or death—the Light without which there is
darkness; the Way without which there is wandering; the Truth without
which there is error; the life without which there is Death; say, Lord,
let there be Light, and I shall see Light, and eschew Darkness; I shall
see the way and avoid wandering; I shall see the Truth and shun error; I
shall see Life and escape Death: Illuminate, O illuminate my blind soul
which sitteth in darkness and the shadow of Death; and direct my feet
into the way of peace. Amen.
                                                             —Augustine.


                            A Morning Prayer

O God, who art faithful and true, who “hast mercy on thousands and ten
thousands of them that love Thee,” the lover of the humble, and the
protector of the needy, of whom all things stand in need, for all things
are subject to Thee; look down upon this Thy people, who bow down their
heads to Thee, and bless them with spiritual blessing. “Keep them as the
apple of an eye,” preserve them in piety and righteousness, and
vouchsafe them eternal life in Christ Jesus Thy beloved Son, with whom
glory, honour, and worship be to Thee and to the Holy Spirit, now and
always, and forever and ever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                    The Thanksgiving for the Morning

O God, the God of spirits and of all flesh, who art beyond compare, and
standest in need of nothing, who hast given the sun to have rule over
the day, and the moon and the stars to have rule over the night, do Thou
now also look down upon us with gracious eyes, and receive our morning
thanksgivings, and have mercy upon us; for we have not “spread out our
hands unto a strange God;” for there is not among us any new God, but
Thou, the eternal God, who art without end, who hast given us our being
through Christ, and given us our well-being through Him. Do Thou
vouchsafe us also, through Him, eternal life; with whom glory, and
honour, and worship be to Thee and to the Holy Spirit forever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                            A Morning Prayer

“Glory be to God in the highest, and upon earth peace, good-will among
men.” We praise Thee, we sing hymns to Thee, we bless Thee, we glorify
Thee, we worship Thee by Thy great High Priest; Thee who art the true
God, who art the One Unbegotten, the only inaccessible Being. For Thy
great glory, O Lord and heavenly King, O God the Father Almighty, O Lord
God, the Father of Christ the immaculate Lamb, who taketh away the sin
of the world, receive our prayer, Thou that sittest upon the cherubim.
For Thou only art holy, Thou only art the Lord Jesus, the Christ of the
God of all created nature, and our King, by whom glory, honour, and
worship be to Thee. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                           An Evening Prayer

Save us, O God, and raise us up by Thy Christ. Let us stand up, and beg
for the mercies of the Lord, and His compassions, for the angel of
peace, for what things are good and profitable, for a Christian
departure out of this life, an evening and a night of peace, and free
from sin; and let us beg that the whole course of our life may be
unblamable. Let us dedicate ourselves and one another to the living God
through His Christ. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                           An Evening Prayer

O God, who art without beginning and without end, the Maker of the whole
world by Christ, and the Provider for it, but before all His God and
Father, the Lord of the Spirit, and the King of intelligible and
sensible beings; who hast made the day for the works of light, and the
night for the refreshment of our infirmity,—for “the day is Thine, the
night also is Thine: Thou hast prepared the light and the sun,”—do Thou
now, O Lord, Thou lover of mankind, and Fountain of all good, mercifully
accept of this our evening thanksgiving. Thou who hast brought us
through the length of the day, and hast brought us to the beginnings of
the night, preserve us by Thy Christ, afford us a peaceable evening, and
a night free from sin, and vouchsafe us everlasting life by Thy Christ,
through whom glory, honour, and worship be to Thee in the Holy Spirit
forever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                           An Evening Prayer

“Ye children, praise the Lord: Praise the name of the Lord.” We praise
Thee, we sing hymns to Thee, we bless Thee for Thy great glory, O Lord
our King, the Father of Christ the immaculate Lamb, who taketh away the
sin of the world. Praise becomes Thee, hymns become Thee, glory becomes
Thee, the God and Father, through the Son, in the most holy Spirit,
forever and ever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                              Table Grace

Thou art blessed, O Lord, who nourishest me from my youth, who givest
food to all flesh. Fill our hearts with joy and gladness, that having
always what is sufficient for us, we may abound to every good work, in
Christ Jesus our Lord, through whom glory, honour, and power be to Thee
forever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                          For the First-Fruits

We give thanks to Thee, O Lord Almighty, the Creator of the whole world,
and its Preserver, through Thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
for the first-fruits which are offered to Thee, not in such a manner as
we ought, but as we are able. For what man is there that can worthily
give Thee thanks for those things Thou hast given them to partake of?
The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, and of all the saints,
who madest all things fruitful by Thy word, and didst command the earth
to bring forth various fruits for our rejoicing and our food; who hast
given to the duller and more sheepish sort of creatures juices—herbs to
them that feed on herbs, and to some flesh, to others seeds, but to us
corn, as advantageous and proper food, and many other things—some for
our necessities, some for our health, and some for our pleasure. On all
these accounts, therefore, art Thou worthy of exalted hymns of praise
for Thy beneficence by Christ, through whom glory, honour, and worship
be to Thee, in the Holy Spirit, forever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                         Thanks For Thy Mercies

We give Thee thanks for all things, O Lord Almighty, that Thou hast not
taken away Thy mercies and Thy compassions from us; but in every
succeeding generation Thou dost save, and deliver, and assist, and
protect: for Thou didst assist in the days of Enos and Enoch, in the
days of Moses and Joshua, in the days of the judges, in the days of
Samuel and of Elijah and of the prophets, in the days of David and of
the kings, in the days of Esther and Mordecai, and in our days hast Thou
assisted us by Thy great High Priest, Jesus Christ Thy Son. For He has
delivered us from the sword, and hath freed us from famine, and
sustained us; has delivered us from sickness, has preserved us from an
evil tongue. For all which things do we give Thee thanks through Christ,
who has given us an articulate voice to confess withal, and added to it
a suitable tongue as an instrument to modulate withal, and a proper
taste, and a suitable touch, and a sight for contemplation, and the
hearing of sounds, and the smelling of vapours, and hands for work, and
feet for walking. Thou hast instructed [man] by Thy laws, improved him
by Thy statutes; and when Thou bringest on a dissolution for a while,
Thou hast promised a resurrection. Wherefore what life is sufficient,
what length of ages will be long enough, for men to be thankful? To do
it worthily it is impossible, but to do it according to our ability is
just and right. Thou hast delivered us from error and ignorance; Thou
hast sent Christ among men as a man, being the only begotten God; Thou
hast made the Comforter to inhabit among us; Thou hast set angels over
us; Thou hast put the devil to shame; Thou hast brought us into being
when we were not; Thou takest care of us when made; Thou measurest out
life to us; Thou affordest us food; Thou hast promised repentance. Glory
and worship be to Thee for all these things, through Jesus Christ, now
and ever, and through all ages. Amen.
                                      —Adapted: Apostolic Constitutions.


                          For The Holy Spirit

O God Almighty, the Father of Thy Christ, Thy only begotten Son, give me
a body undefiled, a heart pure, a mind watchful, an unerring knowledge,
the influence of the Holy Ghost for the obtaining and assured enjoying
of the truth, through Thy Christ, by whom glory be to Thee, in the Holy
Spirit, for ever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                            For the Faithful

O Lord Almighty, the Most High, who dwellest on high, the Holy One, that
restest among the saints, without beginning, the Only Potentate, who
hast given to us by Christ the preaching of knowledge, to the
acknowledgment of Thy glory and of Thy name, which He has made known to
us, for our comprehension, do Thou now also look down through Him upon
this Thy flock, and deliver it from all ignorance and wicked practice,
and grant that we may fear Thee in earnest, and love Thee with
affection, and have a due reverence of Thy glory. Be gracious and
merciful to them, and hearken to them when they pray unto Thee; and keep
them, that they may be unmoveable, unblameable, and unreprovable, that
they may be holy in body and spirit, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing; but that they may be complete, and none of them may be
defective or imperfect. O our support, our powerful God, who dost not
accept persons, be Thou the assister of this Thy people, which Thou hast
redeemed with the precious blood of Thy Christ; be Thou their protector,
aider, provider, and guardian, their strong wall of defence, their
bulwark and security. For “none can snatch out of Thy hand:” for there
is no other God like Thee; for on Thee is our reliance. “Sanctify them
by Thy truth: for Thy word is truth.” Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                           On the Lord’s Day

O Lord Almighty, Thou hast created the world by Christ, and hast
appointed the Sabbath in memory thereof, because that on that day Thou
hast made us rest from our works, for the meditation upon Thy laws. Thou
hast also appointed festivals for the rejoicing of our souls, that we
might come into the remembrance of that wisdom which was created by
Thee; how He submitted to be made of a woman on our account; He appeared
in life, and demonstrated Himself in His baptism; how he that appeared
is both God and man; He suffered for us by Thy permission, and died, and
rose again by Thy power: on which account we solemnly assemble to
celebrate the feast of the resurrection on the Lord’s day, and rejoice
on account of Him who has conquered death, and hast brought life and
immortality to light. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                         For the Holy Communion

We thank Thee, our Father, for that life which Thou hast made known to
us by Jesus Thy Son, by whom madest all things, and takest care of the
whole world; whom Thou hast sent to become man for our salvation; whom
Thou hast permitted to suffer and to die; whom Thou hast raised up, and
been pleased to glorify, and hast set Him down on Thy right hand; by
whom Thou hast promised us the resurrection of the dead. Do Thou, O Lord
Almighty, everlasting God, so gather together Thy Church from the ends
of the earth into Thy kingdom, as this corn was once scattered, and is
now become one loaf. We also, our Father, thank Thee for the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed for us, and for His precious body,
whereof we celebrate this representation, as Himself appointed us, “to
show forth His death.” For through Him glory is to be given to Thee for
ever. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.


                        After the Holy Communion

We thank Thee, O God and Father of Jesus our Saviour, for Thy holy name,
which Thou hast made to inhabit among us; and that knowledge, faith,
love, and immortality which Thou hast given us through Thy Son Jesus.
Thou, O Almighty Lord, the God of the universe, hast created the world,
and the things that are therein by Him; and hast planted a law in our
souls, and beforehand didst prepare things for the convenience of men. O
God of our holy and blameless fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
Thy faithful servants; Thou, O God, who art powerful, faithful and true,
and without deceit in Thy promises; who didst send upon earth Jesus Thy
Christ to live with men, as a man, when He was God the Word, and man, to
take away error by the roots: do Thou even now, through Him, be mindful
of this Thy holy Church, which Thou hast purchased with the precious
blood of Thy Christ, and deliver it from all evil, and perfect it in Thy
love and Thy truth, and gather us all together into Thy kingdom which
Thou hast prepared. Let this Thy kingdom come. Amen.
                                               —Apostolic Constitutions.




                               Chapter V
                         FIFTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                             For Thy Peace

Make Thy tranquillity, O Lord, to dwell amongst us, and Thy peace to
abide in our hearts. May our voices proclaim Thy truth, and may Thy
cross be the guardian of our souls. Account us worthy, O Lord, with
boldness which is of Thee, to offer unto Thee of Thy grace a pure and
holy prayer through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                             —Liturgy of The Nestorians.


                              Intercession

Almighty God, we beseech Thee to hear our prayers for all who sin
against Thee, or neglect to serve Thee, all who forget Thee, all who
leave Thee out of their lives. O Lord, have mercy upon them; bestow upon
us all true repentance and an earnest longing for Thyself. Vouchsafe, we
beseech Thee, O Lord, to strengthen and confirm all Thy faithful people,
and to lift up the light of Thy face upon them, giving them continually
heavenly desires; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                    —An Ancient Collect.


                        An Evening Thanksgiving

Accept, we beseech Thee, our evening thanksgiving, O Thou Fountain of
all good, who hast led us in safety through the length of the day; Who
daily blessest us with so many temporal mercies, and hast given us the
hope of resurrection to eternal life; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
                                                    —An Ancient Collect.


                              For Blessing

Bless all who worship Thee, from the rising of the sun unto the going
down of the same. Of Thy goodness, give us; with Thy love, inspire us;
by Thy spirit guide us; by Thy power, protect us; in Thy mercy, receive
us now and always. Amen.
                                                    —An Ancient Collect.


                            For Communicants

Hear us, O merciful Father, we most humbly beseech Thee, and grant to
all communicants of Thy Church this day, true repentance and living
faith. And we pray that all those who shall from time to time receive
Thy creatures of bread and wine, according to Thy Son our Saviour Jesus
Christ’s Holy Institution, in remembrance of His Death and Passion, may
be partakers of His most blessed Body and Blood; to Whom with Thee and
the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, world without end. Amen.
                                                    —An Ancient Liturgy.


                            For Right Living

Grant to us, Lord, we beseech thee, the spirit to think and do always
such things as be rightful; that we, who cannot do anything that is good
without thee, may by thee be enabled to live according to thy will;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                        For Heavenly-Mindedness

Grant us, O Lord, not to mind earthly things, but to love things
heavenly; and even now, while we are placed among things that are
passing away, to cleave to those that shall abide; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                         For Love of God’s Law

We beseech Thee, O Lord, be gracious to Thy people, that we, leaving day
by day the things which displease Thee, may be more and more filled with
the love of Thy commandments, and being supported by Thy comfort in this
present life, may advance to the full enjoyment of life immortal;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                         For Christ’s Presence

Be present, O Lord, to our supplications; that as we trust that the
Saviour of mankind is seated with Thee in Thy Majesty, so we may feel
that, according to His promise, He abideth with us unto the end of the
world; through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                           For National Peace

We beseech Thee, O Lord, be gracious to our times; that both national
quietness and Christian devotion may be duly maintained by Thy bounty;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                         For Light and Guidance

We beseech Thee, O Lord, let our hearts be graciously enlightened by Thy
holy radiance, that we may serve Thee without fear in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life; that so we may survive the
storms of this world, and with Thee for our Pilot attain the haven of
eternal brightness; through Thy mercy, O blessed Lord, Who dost live and
govern all things, world without end. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                        For Acceptable Petitions

Let the prayers of Thy children, O Lord, come up to the ears of Thy
mercy; and that we may obtain what we ask, make us ever to ask what
pleaseth Thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                               For Peace

Mercifully receive, O Lord, the prayers of Thy people, that all
adversities and errors may be destroyed, and they may serve Thee in
quiet freedom, and give Thy peace in our times; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                         For Those Who Minister

O God, Whose ways are all mercy and truth, carry on Thy gracious work,
and bestow, by Thy benefits, what human frailty cannot attain; that they
who attend upon the heavenly mysteries may be grounded in perfect faith,
and shine forth conspicuous by the purity of their souls; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                       For Good Use of Blessings

Almighty and everlasting God, who healest us by chastening, and
preservest us by pardoning; grant unto Thy suppliants, that we may both
rejoice in the comfort of the tranquillity which we desired, and also
use the gift of Thy peace for the effectual amendment of our lives;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                             For Cleansing

Cleanse us, O Lord, from our secret faults, and mercifully absolve us
from our presumptuous sins, that we may receive Thy holy things with a
pure mind; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                  —Leonine Sacramentary.


                        For Grace and Protection

Incline mercifully Thine ear, O Lord, to these our prayers, and fill our
hearts with Thy grace, that loving Thee with an unfeigned love we may
evermore be defended under Thy most gracious protection, and be accepted
in all our prayers and services; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                    —An Ancient Collect.


                            A Morning Prayer

Almighty God, who fillest all things with Thy presence, we meekly
beseech thee, of thy great love, to keep us near unto thee this day;
grant that in all our ways and doings we may remember that thou seest
us, and may always have grace to know and perceive what things thou
wouldst have us to do, and strength to fulfil the same; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                    —An Ancient Collect.


                           For the Sorrowing

Almighty and everlasting God, the Comfort of the sad, the Strength of
sufferers, let the prayers of those that cry out of any tribulation come
unto Thee, that all may rejoice to find that Thy mercy is present with
them in their afflictions; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                             For Protection

O Lord, give ear unto our prayers and dispose the way of Thy servants in
safety under Thy protection, that amid all the changes of this our
pilgrimage, we may ever be guarded by Thine Almighty aid; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                            For Love of God

O God, Who hast prepared for them that love Thee such good things as
pass man’s understanding; pour into our hearts such love towards Thee,
that we, loving Thee above all things, may obtain Thy promises, which
exceed all that we can desire; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                           For God’s Guidance

O Lord, from Whom all good things do come; grant to us, Thy humble
servants, that by Thy holy inspiration we may think those things that be
good, and by Thy merciful guiding may perform the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                            For Refreshment

We beseech Thee, Almighty God, to behold our prayers, and to pour out
upon us Thy loving tenderness; that we who are afflicted by reason of
our sins, may be refreshed by the coming of our Saviour; through the
same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                               For Light

Incline, O Lord, Thy merciful ears, and illuminate the darkness of our
hearts by the light of Thy visitation; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                              For True Joy

Almighty God, who alone canst order the unruly wills and affections of
sinful men; grant unto thy people that they may love the thing which
thou commandest, and desire that which thou dost promise; that so, among
the sundry and manifold changes of the world, our hearts may surely
there be fixed, where true joys are to be found; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                              For Goodness

Lord of all Power and Might, who art the Author and Giver of all good
things; graft in our hearts the love of thy name, increase in us true
religion, nourish us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us
in the same; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                             On a Fast-Day

O God, who in Thy deep counsel and foresight for mankind hast appointed
holy fasts, whereby the hearts of the weak might receive salutary
healing, do Thou purify our souls and bodies, O Saviour of body and
soul, O loving Bestower of eternal happiness! through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                        A Prayer for Divine Help

Stretch forth, O Lord, Thy mercy over all Thy servants everywhere, even
the right hand of heavenly help, that they may seek Thee with their
whole heart, and obtain what they rightly ask for; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                                 Praise

O God of hope, the true Light of faithful souls and perfect Brightness
of the Blessed, Who art verily the Light of the world, grant that our
hearts may both render Thee a worthy prayer, and always glorify Thee
with the offering of praises; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                               For Light

Shed forth, O Lord, we pray Thee, Thy light into our hearts, that we may
perceive the light of Thy commandments, and walking in Thy way may fall
into no error; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                          For the Holy Spirit

We beseech Thee, Almighty God, let our souls enjoy this their desire, to
be enkindled by Thy Spirit, that being filled, as lamps, by the Divine
gift, we may shine like blazing lights before the Presence of Thy Son
Christ at His coming; through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                              For Thy Will

Into thy hands, O Lord, we commit ourselves this day. Give to each of us
a watchful, humble, and a diligent spirit, that we may seek in all
things to know thy will, and when we know it may perform it perfectly
and gladly, to the honor and glory of thy Name; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                            For Forgiveness

We beseech Thee, Almighty God, to receive with Fatherly tenderness Thy
people fleeing from Thine anger to Thyself; that they who dread the
scourge that comes from Thy Majesty may be enabled to rejoice in Thy
forgiveness; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                             To Serve Thee

O God, who art the light of the minds that know thee, the life of the
souls that love thee, the strength of the thoughts that seek thee, help
us so to know thee that we may truly love thee, so to love thee that we
may fully serve thee, whose service is perfect freedom; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                            For Thy Presence

Into Thy hands, O God, we commend ourselves and all who are dear to us
this day. Let the gift of Thy special Presence be with us even to its
close. Grant us never to lose sight of Thee all the day long, but to
worship and pray to Thee, that at eventide we may again give thanks unto
Thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                           General Petitions

O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works
do proceed; give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot
give; that our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that
by thee, we, being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our
time in rest and quietness; through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Saviour. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                    For Christ’s Servants Everywhere

O God of infinite mercy and boundless majesty, Whom no distance can part
from those for whom Thou carest, be present to Thy servants who
everywhere confide in Thee, and through all the way in which they are to
go be pleased to be their Guide and Companion. May no adversity harm
them, no difficulty oppose them; may all things turn out happily and
prosperously for them; that by the aid of Thy right hand, whatsoever
they have asked for with reasonable desire they may speedily find
brought to good effect; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                     For the Spread of Christianity

O God of unchangeable power and eternal light, look favourably on Thy
whole Church, that wonderful and sacred mystery; and by the tranquil
operation of Thy perpetual providence, carry out the work of man’s
salvation; let the whole world feel and see that things which were cast
down are being raised up, that those which had grown old are being made
new, and that all things are returning to perfection; through Him from
Whom they took their origin, even Jesus Christ Thy Son our Lord. Amen.
                                                 —Gelasian Sacramentary.


                               For Grace

O our Lord and God, look not on the multitude of our sins, and let not
Thy dignity be turned away on account of the heinousness of our
iniquities; but through Thine unspeakable grace sanctify this sacrifice
of Thine, and grant through it power and capability, so that Thou mayest
forget our many sins, and be merciful when Thou shalt appear at the end
of time, in the man whom Thou hast assumed from among us, and we may
find before Thee grace and mercy, and be rendered worthy to praise Thee
with spiritual assemblies. Amen.
                                       —Liturgy of the Blessed Apostles.


                           For Enlightenment

Enlighten, O our Lord and God, the movements of our meditations to hear
and understand the sweet listenings to Thy life-giving and divine
commands; and grant unto us through Thy grace and mercy to gather from
them the assurance of love, and hope, and salvation suitable to soul and
body, and we shall sing to Thee everlasting glory without ceasing and
always, O Lord of all. Amen.
                                       —Liturgy of the Blessed Apostles.




                                 INDEX


                                   A
  Adoration, 50, 82
  Ambrose, 42, 43, 44
  Ancient Collect, 78, 79, 83, 84
  Ancient Liturgy, 79
  Armenian Liturgy, 46
  Augustine, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62,
          63, 64, 66

                                   B
  Barnabas, 27, 28
  Basil, 47, 48
  Blessings, For, 17, 32, 35, 79, 83

                                   C
  Charity, 42
  Christ’s Presence, 10, 81
  Christ’s Servants, 90
  Christian Graces, 38
  Chrysostom, 48, 49
  Cleansing, Soul, 24, 83
  Clement of Alexandria, 28
  Clement of Rome, 15, 16, 17, 18
  Clementine Liturgy, 16, 19, 20
  Collect, 78, 83, 84
  Communicants, 79
  Communion with God, 64
  Confession of Sin, 45
  Converts in Mission Fields, 47
  Coptic Liturgy of St. Cyril, 42
  Cross, 10

                                   D
  Daily Help, 38
  Divine Help, 34, 89

                                   E
  Eastern Church, 38, 39, 40
  Enlightenment, 92
  Entire Love, 51
  Evening, 39, 63, 68, 69, 70, 79

                                   F
  Faithful, For the, 73
  Fast Days, 87
  Fifth Century, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90,
          91, 92
  First Century, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20
  First Fruits, 70
  Forgiveness, 11, 14, 18, 19, 89
  Fourth Century, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53,
          54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68,
          69, 70, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76
  Freedom from Sin, 44
  Friends, 12, 37

                                   G
  Gallican Sacramentary, 28, 37, 38, 45
  Gelasian Sacramentary, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91
  Gethsemane, 9
  Gladness, 20
  God’s Will, 12
  Goodness, 86
  Grace, 57, 62, 83, 91
  Growth in Grace, 28
  Guidance, 48, 81, 85

                                   H
  Heavenly Mindedness, 80
  Holy Communion, 33, 75, 76
  Holy Sacrament, 19
  Holy Spirit, 19, 44, 51, 73, 88
  Hope, 14

                                   I
  Ignatius, 23
  Illumination, 40, 59
  Intercession, 22, 78
  Invocation, 49
  Irenaeus, 29

                                   J
  Jesus, 9, 10
  Joy, 20

                                   K
  Knowledge, 12, 43, 61

                                   L
  Leonine Sacramentary, 80, 81, 82, 83
  Light, 32, 40, 48, 55, 59, 64, 66, 81, 86, 88
  Liturgy of the Blessed Apostles, 91, 92
  Liturgy of St. James, 24, 25, 26
  Liturgy of St. Mark, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36
  Liturgy of the Nestorians, 78
  Love, Entire, 51
  Love, More, 56
  Love, Perfect, 55, 58
  Love of God, 85
  Love of God’s Law, 80
  Luke, 8

                                   M
  Magnificat, 8
  Martyr, 10, 22, 23
  Mary, 8
  Mercy, For, 53, 57, 71, 91
  Ministers, 39, 82
  Morning, 16, 36, 38, 67, 68, 84, 89

                                   N
  National Peace, 81
  Nerses of Clajes, 44, 45
  New Testament, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14

                                   O
  Obedience and Love, 58
  Obligation, 60

                                   P
  Pardon, 36, 40, 43, 44
  Patience, 14
  Paul, 12, 13
  Peace, 15, 33, 63, 78, 81, 82
  Peace and Refuge, 54
  Perfection, 55, 61, 63
  Persecuted, 13
  Perseverance, 53
  Peter, 14
  Petitions, General, 90
  Polycarp, 22
  Praise, 62, 87
  Presence, Thy, 89
  Protection, 42, 45, 62, 83, 84
  Pure Heart, 19, 26
  Purity, 44

                                   R
  Refreshment, For, 49, 60, 85
  Refuge and Peace, 54
  Relatives, 12, 37
  Rest in Thee, 66
  Right Blessings, 47
  Right Living, 80
  Rulers, 15, 16

                                   S
  Sabbath, 63, 66, 74
  Salvation, 43
  Sanctify Us, 26
  Second Century Prayers, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28
  Servants, Christ’s, 90
  Simeon, 8
  Sorrowing, 84
  Soul Cleansing, 24
  Spiritual Blessings, 45
  Spiritual Desires, 13
  Spread of Christianity, 91
  Steadfastness, 52
  Stephen, 10
  Stewardship, 27, 28
  Syrian Clementine Liturgy, 16

                                   T
  Table Grace, 16, 17, 35, 36, 38, 39, 47, 62, 68, 70, 78, 79, 80,
          81, 87, 88, 89
  Thanks for Mercies, 71
  Thanksgiving, 36, 67, 79
  Third Century, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40
  Thy Will, 88
  To Serve Thee, 89
  To Teacher, 28
  To Witness, 25
  True Joys, 86
  Trust, 43
  Two or Three, 46, 48

                                   V
  Voyage, Safe, 57

                                   W
  Wisdom, 10
  Witness, 25




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.

--Only in the text versions, delimited italicized text in _underscores_
  (the HTML version reproduces the font form of the printed book.)









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRAYERS OF THE EARLY CHURCH ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


