The Project Gutenberg eBook of Prayers of the Middle Ages: Light from a Thousand Years
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Prayers of the Middle Ages: Light from a Thousand Years

Editor: J. Manning Potts

Release date: February 11, 2015 [eBook #48242]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRAYERS OF THE MIDDLE AGES: LIGHT FROM A THOUSAND YEARS ***

                                PRAYERS
                                 of the
                              MIDDLE AGES


                      Light from a Thousand Years


                               Edited by
                            J. MANNING POTTS

[Illustration: logo]

                             THE UPPER ROOM
             The World’s Most Widely Used Devotional Guide
                           1908 Grand Avenue
                         Nashville 5, Tennessee

                            Second Printing

                           © Copyright, 1954
                                   by
                             The Upper Room
                          Nashville, Tennessee

                            UR-79-25-5-0962
                Printed in the United States of America




                                Preface


This is a companion volume to the Prayers of the Early Church. That
little volume has been started on its way and the editor has been
encouraged to do this one on the Prayers of the Middle Ages.

The period covered by these prayers is that of a thousand years from
A.D. 500 to A.D. 1500. Generally speaking, the period is from the fall
of Rome to the Reformation. This period was formerly called the Dark
Ages. Evidence of the lack of light has been found in the lack of
material in some of the centuries. It has been hard to find any prayers
in a few. However, taken collectively, it is seen that there was much
light that came out of these ages. The Church was kept alive by those
who kept the light burning. The latter half of this period is now called
the Golden Age of Mysticism.

The arrangement of the prayers is century by century. There are some
questions about dates of these as well as authorship. The authorities do
not always agree.

We are indebted to many collections of prayers and to other sources.
Some of the books which have been most valuable are _Prayers of the
Ages_, compiled by Caroline S. Whitmarsh; _Of the Imitation of Christ;
Great Souls at Prayer_, arranged by Mrs. Mary W. Tileston; _The Cloud of
Witness_, by Hon. Mrs. Gell; _Prayers_, from the collection of the late
Baron Bunsen; _A Chain of Prayer Across the Ages_, compiled by Selina
Fitzherbert Fox; _Prayers We Love to Pray_, arranged by Edward Leigh
Pell; _Morning Readings_, compiled by Frank M. Rich; _Prayers of the
Saints_, by Cecil Headlam; _Prayers Ancient and Modern_, compiled by
Mary Wilder Tileston; _Ancient Collects_, by Rev. William Bright;
_Prayers_, Massachusetts Council of the Church Service League;
_Theologia Germanica_; _The Cloud of Unknowing_; _His Words of
Admonition_ and _Praises of God_, by St. Francis of Assisi; _Common
Prayers for Family Use_, by Westcott.

The main purpose of this little volume is for individual and family
devotions. However, it is found that prayers like these are read in
worship services, in prayer cells, and prayer meetings. Young people’s
and women’s groups constantly make use of them. This little book is
recommended for all types of worship services and for use in church
bulletins. Many other ways will be found to use them.

The editor wishes to acknowledge his deep debt of gratitude to the late
lamented Dr. J. Minton Batten, professor of church history in Vanderbilt
University, and to Miss Clarice Winstead, secretary to the editor, for
their invaluable service in compiling this book of prayers.

        J. Manning Potts
        Editor, The Upper Room
        Nashville, Tennessee




                                Contents


                                                                     PAGE
  SIXTH CENTURY                                                         7
      Gregory the Great, Gregorian Sacramentary, Ancient Collects,
      Columba
  SEVENTH CENTURY                                                      15
      Mozarabic Breviary, Mozarabic Liturgy, Mozarabic Sacramentary
  EIGHTH CENTURY                                                       31
      Venerable Bede, Alcuin, Gallican Collect, A Gallican
      Sacramentary, Theodore Studita
  NINTH CENTURY                                                        37
      Dionysius of the Syrian Jacobite Church, John Scotus Erigena,
      Alfred the Great, Old Rheims Manuscript
  TENTH CENTURY                                                        41
      Anonymous, Ethelwold of York, Dunstan of Canterbury
  ELEVENTH CENTURY                                                     45
      Anselm, Sarum Breviary, Roman Breviary
  TWELFTH CENTURY                                                      61
      Bernard of Clairvaux, Dan Jeremy
  THIRTEENTH CENTURY                                                   65
      Francis of Assisi, Richard of Chichester, Thomas Aquinas,
      Bonaventura, Richard Rolle
  FOURTEENTH CENTURY                                                   73
      Johannes Tauler, Thomas Bradwardine, Ludolphus of Saxony,
      Raymond Jordanus, Theologia Germanica
  FIFTEENTH CENTURY                                                    77
      Thomas à Kempis, Michelangelo




                         SIXTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                            For Forgiveness

O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive,
receive our humble petitions; and though we be tied and bound with the
chain of our sins, yet let the pitifulness of Thy great mercy loose us;
for the honour of Jesus Christ, our Mediator, and Advocate. Amen.

                                                      —Gregory the Great


                        For Easter Sunday Giving

O God, who for our redemption didst give Thine only begotten Son to the
death of the Cross, and by His glorious resurrection hast delivered us
from the power of the enemy, grant us to die daily to sin, that we may
evermore live with Him, in the joy of His resurrection; through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Gregory the Great


                               For Mercy

O God, the Protector of all that trust in Thee, without whom nothing is
strong, nothing is holy, increase and multiply upon us Thy mercy; that,
Thou being our Ruler and Guide, we may so pass through things temporal
that we finally lose not the things eternal. Grant this, O heavenly
Father, for Jesus Christ’s sake our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                                Collect

Almighty God, unto whom all hearts are open, all desires known, and from
whom no secrets are hid; cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the
inspiration of Thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love Thee, and
worthily magnify Thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                          For Grace and Power

O Lord, we beseech Thee mercifully to receive the prayers of Thy people
who call upon Thee; and grant that they may both perceive and know what
things they ought to do, and also may have grace and power faithfully to
fulfill the same; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                             For the World

Almighty and everlasting God, the Brightness of faithful souls, fill the
world with Thy glory, we pray Thee, and show Thyself, by the radiance of
Thy light, to all the nations of the world, through Jesus Christ, our
Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                              For Morning

Almighty God who seest that we have no power of ourselves to help
ourselves; keep us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our
souls; that we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to
the body, and from all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the
soul; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                   A Litany for Strength Against Sin

O God, who didst wonderfully create and more wonderfully redeem mankind,
grant us with steadfast mind to resist the allurements of sin that we
may attain to the joys of everlasting life.

_We beseech Thee to hear us, O Lord._ Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                        For Bishops and Pastors

O God, who rulest over Thy people with fatherly love, give the spirit of
wisdom to all who have received from Thee authority of government, that
the welfare of Thy people may turn to the everlasting joy of their
pastors, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                   For the Defense of Christ’s Church

O Lord, we beseech Thee to keep Thy Church and household continually in
Thy true religion, that they who do lean only upon the hope of Thy
heavenly grace may evermore be defended by Thy mighty power; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                    For Forgiveness and Deliverance

O Christ, our Creator and Redeemer, Almighty Lord God, forgive the sins
of all who are joined to us by friendship and relationship, all for whom
we are desired to pray, or have resolved to pray, and all Thy faithful
people. Deliver us all from evil, preserve us in all good, and bring us
at last to everlasting joy; for Thine honour and glory. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                 For All in Special Need of Protection

O God, who willest not the death of a sinner, protect with Thy heavenly
aid those persons who may now be exposed to special temptations; and
grant that in the fulfilment of Thy commandments they may be
strengthened by the assistance of Thy grace; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                                For Love

O God, who by the grace of the Holy Ghost hast poured the gifts of love
into the hearts of Thy faithful people, grant unto all Thy servants in
Thy mercy health of body and soul, that they may love Thee with all
their strength, and with perfect affection fulfill Thy pleasure; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                                Epiphany

Almighty and everlasting God, the Brightness of faithful souls, who
didst bring the Gentiles to Thy light, and made known unto them Him who
is the true Light, and the bright and morning Star, fill, we beseech
Thee, the world with Thy glory, and show Thyself by the radiance of Thy
light unto all nations; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                 —Gregorian Sacramentary


                           Prayer for Pardon

O Lord Jesus Christ, who didst give Thy life for us that we might
receive pardon and peace; mercifully cleanse us from all sin, and
evermore keep us in Thy favour and love, who livest and reignest with
the Father and the Holy Spirit, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

                                                     —An Ancient Collect


                For the Loving Care of the Good Shepherd

O Lord Jesus Christ, Thou, good Shepherd of the sheep, who camest to
seek the lost, and to gather them to Thy fold, have compassion upon
those who have wandered from Thee; feed those who hunger, cause the
weary to lie down in Thy pastures, bind up those who are broken in
heart, and strengthen those who are weak, that we, relying on Thy care
and being comforted by Thy love, may abide in Thy guidance to our lives’
end; for Thy name’s sake. Amen.

                                                     —An Ancient Collect


                               For Light

O Thou who art the Sun of Righteousness and the Light Eternal, giving
gladness unto all things; shine upon us both now and for ever, that we
may walk alway in the light of Thy countenance; through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

                                                     —An Ancient Collect


                                For Rest

Be present, O merciful God, and protect us through the silent hours of
this night, so that we who are wearied by the work and the changes of
this fleeting world may rest upon Thy eternal changelessness; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                     —An Ancient Collect


                              For Morning

O God, who hast folded back the mantle of the night to clothe us in the
golden glory of the day, chase from our hearts all gloomy thoughts, and
make us glad with the brightness of hope, that we may effectively aspire
to unwon virtues, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                     —An Ancient Collect


                           For Love and Light

O Lord, give us, we beseech Thee, in the name of Jesus Christ Thy Son
our God, that love which can never cease, that will kindle our lamps but
not extinguish them, that they may burn in us and enlighten others. Do
Thou, O Christ, our dearest Saviour, Thyself kindle our lamps, that they
may evermore shine in Thy temple, that they may receive unquenchable
light from Thee that will enlighten our darkness, and lessen the
darkness of the world. Lord Jesus, we pray Thee give Thy light to our
lamps, that in its light the most holy place may be revealed to us in
which Thou dwellest as the Eternal Priest, that we may always behold
Thee, desire Thee, look upon Thee in love, and long after Thee, for Thy
sake. Amen.

                                                                —Columba




                        SEVENTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                        A Litany on the Passion

Show us Thy mercy, O Lord, grant pardon, grant remission:

                      _And have mercy graciously._

Thou who, coming to save the world, wert brought to judgment, when Thou
comest as Judge, deliver us not up with the ungodly:

                      _And have mercy graciously._

Thou, who wert hung upon the Cross, bear on Thy shoulders the death due
to our guilt:

                      _And have mercy graciously._

Thou who didst once suffer for the ungodly, and diest no more, mortify
our vices in us, and heal us by the wound of the Cross:

                      _And have mercy graciously._

That in the judgment Thy face may not be turned on us for punishment,
but may shine on us with pardon:

                   _And have mercy graciously._ Amen.

                                                  —Mozarabic Breviary[1]


                        A Litany on the Passion

O good Shepherd, who didst lay down Thy life for the sheep, remember us:

                _Be propitious, and have mercy upon us._

O everlasting Power and Wisdom of the most high God, Thou Word of the
Father, remember us:

                _Be propitious, and have mercy upon us._

O Thou Maker of the world, the Life of all, the Lord of angels, remember
us:

                _Be propitious, and have mercy upon us._

O Lamb of God, who for us wert led as a sheep to the slaughter, remember
us:

                _Be propitious, and have mercy upon us._

O Thou who wert seized, thou guiltless, buffeted, given over to robbers,
remember us:

                _Be propitious, and have mercy upon us._

Thou who alone hast by Thy death overcome the death of our guilt,
remember us:

             _Be propitious, and have mercy upon us._ Amen.

                                                     —Mozarabic Breviary


                        A Litany for Forgiveness

We cry to Thee, O Lord, do Thou have mercy upon us:

                        _And grant forgiveness._

O King of heaven, and everlasting Lord, receive the prayers which we
pour forth:

                        _And grant forgiveness._

Visit the sick—bring forth captives, help the widow and the orphan:

                        _And grant forgiveness._

We have sinned and have departed from Thee, do Thou, who art the
Redeemer of all, save us:

                        _And grant forgiveness._

Have mercy on the penitent, and wash away the stains of sin:

                     _And grant forgiveness._ Amen.

                                                     —Mozarabic Breviary


                         A Litany of Repentance

Turn away, O Lord, the fierceness of Thy wrath, and in pity spare Thy
people:

                           _And have mercy._

Grant a favourable and speedy answer to the prayers of all, we beseech
Thee:

                           _And have mercy._

Do Thou, O Christ, look upon our groanings, loose the bands of death,
and grant us life:

                           _And have mercy._

Behold our tears—consider our sighs, and now at length in pity forgive
our sins:

                           _And have mercy._

Though none of us be worthy to be heard, do Thou, O Christ, for Thine
own self help us:

                        _And have mercy_. Amen.

                                                     —Mozarabic Breviary


                    A Litany for Personal Dedication

O Lord Jesus Christ, who art the ineffable joy of Christians, take away
from us whatever is not Thine, and make us Thine in all things.

              _We beseech Thee to hear us, O Lord._ Amen.

                                                     —Mozarabic Breviary


                      A Litany Against Temptation

Raise up Thy power, and come to deliver us, O Lord our God; that as we
are overwhelmed by the storms of temptation so we may be raised up by
the aid of Thy strength.

              _We beseech Thee to hear us, O Lord._ Amen.

                                                     —Mozarabic Breviary


                               For Pardon

O God, the Son of God—so loving, yet hated—so forbearing, yet assaulted
unto death—who didst show Thyself so gentle and merciful to Thy
persecutors; grant that through the wounds of Thy passion our sins may
be expiated, and as in Thy humiliation Thou didst suffer death for us,
so now, being glorified, bestow on us everlasting brightness. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                            For Illumination

O glorious, holy, almighty God, who being ever pitiful to the manifold
wanderings of mankind, didst doubtless for this end guide the Magi, who
dwelt in dark superstition, by the light of a star to Thy sacred cradle,
that Thou mightest kindle all men who were walking in their own errors
with the desire of knowing Thee; kindle us also, we pray Thee, with the
saving ardour of love for Thee, that we who have already known Thee by
Thy gracious illumination, may be enabled to cleave to Thee for ever.
Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                               Confession

Hear our prayer, O Lord, and listen to our groanings, for we acknowledge
our iniquities, and lay open our sins before Thee. Against Thee, O God,
have we sinned; to Thee we make our confession, and implore forgiveness.
Turn Thy face again, O Lord, upon Thy servants whom Thou hast redeemed
with Thine own blood. Spare us, we pray Thee, and vouchsafe pardon to
our sins, and be pleased to extend to us Thy loving-kindness and Thy
mercy. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                          Daily Morning Prayer

Let our prayer, O Lord, come before Thee in the morning. Thou didst take
upon Thee our feeble and suffering nature; grant us to pass this day in
gladness and peace, without stumbling and without stain; that reaching
the even-tide without any temptation, we may praise Thee the Eternal
King: through Thy mercy, O our God, who art blessed and dost live, and
govern all things, world without end. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                             For Firm Faith

Arise, O Lord, who judgest the earth; and as Thou dwellest in and
possessest the faith of all nations, suffer us not to abide in darkness;
and grant that we may not lay the foundations of our faith on the sand
where the whirlwind may overthrow them, but be established on the rock
which is steadfast in Thee. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                       For Christ’s Companionship

Jesus, our Master, do Thou meet us while we walk in the way, and long to
reach the Country; so that, following Thy light, we may keep the way of
righteousness, and never wander away into the darkness of this world’s
night, while Thou, who art the way, the truth, and the life, art shining
within us; for Thine own name’s sake. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                  For Joy and Peace in the Daily Walk

Grant us, O Lord, to pass this day in gladness and peace, without
stumbling and without stain; that reaching the eventide victorious over
all temptation, we may praise Thee, the eternal God, who art blessed,
and dost govern all things, world without end. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


        “For the Peace of God, which Passeth All Understanding”

O God who art Peace everlasting, whose chosen reward is the gift of
peace, and who hast taught us that the peacemakers are Thy children,
pour Thy peace into our souls, that everything discordant may utterly
vanish, and all that makes for peace be sweet to us for ever; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                           For Light and Love

Let Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, and the brightness of Thy Spirit
illumine our inward souls, that He may kindle our cold hearts, and light
up our dark minds; who abideth evermore with Thee in Thy glory. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                           For Heavenly Light

O God, with whom is the well of life, and in whose light we see light,
increase in us, we beseech Thee, the brightness of divine knowledge,
whereby we may be able to reach Thy plenteous fountain; impart to our
thirsting souls the draught of life, and restore to our darkened minds
the light from heaven; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                             For the Church

Hear us, O God of our salvation, Thou hope of all the ends of the earth,
and in Thy strength, set fast as the mountains, the outposts of Thy
power, and strongholds of lofty virtues. On Thee we rely for gifts of
aspiration, whereby to ascend to the summit of all blessedness; that Thy
Church, as it extends to all corners of the world, may soar in faith,
may rest in hope, and rise to the full height of charity; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                               Christmas

O God, to whom glory is sung in the highest, while on earth peace is
proclaimed among men of goodwill; grant that same goodwill to us Thy
servants; cleanse us from evil, and give peace to all Thy people;
through Thy mercy, O blessed Lord God, who dost live and govern all
things, world without end. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


    For Rightful Recognition of God, “The Giver of All Good Things”

O God, who, by making the evening to succeed the day, hast bestowed the
gift of repose on human weakness, grant, we beseech Thee, that while we
enjoy those timely blessings we may acknowledge Him from whom they come,
even Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                           For Sanctification

O Christ our God, who wilt come to judge the world in the manhood which
Thou hast assumed, we pray Thee to sanctify us wholly, that in the day
of Thy coming our whole spirit, soul, and body may so revive to a fresh
life in Thee, that we may live and reign with Thee for ever, to Thine
honour and glory; who with the Father and the Holy Spirit liveth and
reigneth, ever one God. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                               Repentance

Let Thy Spirit, O Lord, come into the midst of us, and washing us with
the pure water of repentance, prepare us to be always a living sacrifice
unto Thee; who livest and reignest, ever world without end. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                             For Direction

May the infinite and glorious Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, direct our life in good works, and after our passage through this
world, grant to us eternal rest with the righteous. Grant this, O
Eternal and Almighty God. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                       For the Sick and Suffering

O Christ our Lord, who art the Physician of salvation, grant unto all
who are sick the aid of heavenly healing. Look upon all faithful people
who are sick and who love to call upon Thy name, and take their souls
into Thy keeping, and vouchsafe to deliver them from all sickness and
infirmity; through Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                              For New Year

O Thou who art ever the same, grant us so to pass through the coming
year with faithful hearts, that we may be able in all things to please
Thy loving eyes; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                          For the Holy Spirit

O Holy Spirit, the Comforter, who with the Father and the Son abidest
one God, descend this day into our hearts, that while Thou makest
intercession for us, we may with full confidence call upon our Father;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                            For Perseverance

Look upon us and hear us, O Lord our God; and assist those endeavours to
please Thee which Thou Thyself hast granted to us; as Thou hast given
the first act of will, so give the completion of the work; grant that we
may be able to finish what Thou hast granted us to wish to begin;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                      For Guidance and Protection

Be Thou, O Lord, our protection, who art our redemption; direct our
minds by Thy gracious presence, and watch over our paths with guiding
love; that among the snares which lie hidden in the path wherein we
walk, we may so press onwards with hearts fixed on Thee, that by the
track of faith we may come to be where Thou wouldest have us; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                       For Rulers and the Nations

O heavenly Father, we bend the knee before Thee on behalf of all kings,
princes, and governors of this world, beseeching Thee to grant unto them
by Thy inspiration, to rule in righteousness, to rejoice in peace, to
shine in piety, and to labour for the well-being of the people committed
unto them, so that, by the rectitude of the government, all faithful
people may live without disturbance in the knowledge of Thee, and labour
without hindrance for Thy glory. Amen.

                                                      —Mozarabic Liturgy


                               At Evening

O Lord God, the Life of mortals, the Light of the faithful, the Strength
of those who labor, and the Repose of the dead, grant us a tranquil
night free from all disturbance; that after an interval of quiet sleep,
we may, by Thy bounty, at the return of light, be endued with activity
from the Holy Spirit, and enabled in security to render thanks to Thee.
Amen.

                                                 —Mozarabic Sacramentary


                        Litany for True Worship

O God, who hast bidden us to worship Thee in spirit and in truth, shadow
us with the power of Thy Holy Spirit—let Thy mercy and the promised
grace of Thy salvation come upon us, that our prayer may be directed
unto Thee by Him, through whom we believe our sins to be forgiven.

_We beseech Thee to hear us, O Lord._ Amen.

                                                 —Mozarabic Sacramentary


                              Good Friday

Today, O good Jesus, for us Thou didst not hide Thy face from shame and
spitting. Today, Jesus our Redeemer, for us Thou wast mocked, buffeted
by unbelievers, and crowned with thorns. Today, O good Shepherd, Thou
didst lay down Thy life on the Cross for the sheep, and wast crucified
with robbers, and hadst Thy sacred hands nailed through. Today Thou wast
laid in the guarded sepulchre, and the saints burst open their tombs.
Today, O good Jesus, put an end to our sins, that on the day of Thy
resurrection we may joyfully receive Thy holy body, and be refreshed
with Thy sacred blood. Amen.

                                                 —Mozarabic Sacramentary


                                 Easter

The Day of Resurrection has dawned upon us, the day of true light and
life, wherein Christ, the life of believers, arose from the dead. Let us
give abundant thanks and praise to God, that while we solemnly celebrate
the day of our Lord’s resurrection, He may be pleased to bestow on us
quiet peace and special gladness; so that being protected from morning
to night by His favoring mercy, we may rejoice in the gift of our
Redeemer. Amen.

                                                 —Mozarabic Sacramentary


                       For Spiritual Illumination

Hear us, O never-failing Light, Lord our God, our only light, the
fountain of light, the light of Thine angels, thrones, dominions,
principalities, powers, and of all intelligent beings; who hast created
the light of Thy saints. May our souls be lamps of Thine, kindled and
illuminated by Thee. May they shine and burn with the truth, and never
go out in darkness and ashes. May we be Thy house, shining from Thee,
shining in Thee; may we shine and fail not; may we ever worship Thee; in
Thee may we be kindled, and not be extinguished. Being filled with the
splendor of Thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, may we shine forth inwardly;
may the gloom of sins be cleared away, and the light of perpetual faith
abide with us. Amen.

                                                 —Mozarabic Sacramentary


                             A Good Example

Make us, O Lord, to flourish like pure lilies in the courts of Thine
house, and to show forth to the faithful the fragrance of good words,
and the example of a Godly life, through Thy mercy and grace. Amen.

                                                 —Mozarabic Sacramentary


                                Evening

O blessed Spirit of Truth, Thou who searchest the heart and triest the
inmost thoughts, bring, I pray Thee, my sins to my remembrance, and
grant me light to see and find them out. Strengthen me also with courage
to confess them truly, hiding nothing, excusing nothing, keeping back
nothing in my heart; that I may, of Thy mercy, obtain pardon and entire
absolution; and, thus healed, may arise and sin no more, through the
merits and for the sake of Jesus Christ, my Lord and only Saviour. Amen.

                                                 —Mozarabic Sacramentary




                         EIGHTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                               A Petition

And now, we beseech Thee Lord Jesus, that to whom Thou dost vouchsafe
sweet draughts of the words of Thy knowledge, Thou wilt also, of Thy
goodness, grant that we may, in due time, come to Thee, the fountain of
all wisdom, and ever stand before Thy face; for Thy sake. Amen.

                                                         —Venerable Bede


                        For the Spirit of Truth

O glorious King, Lord of all power, who triumphing this day didst ascend
above the heavens, leave us not orphans, but send down on us, from the
Father, the spirit of truth which Thou hast promised. Hallelujah! Amen.

                                                         —Venerable Bede


                             For Cleansing

Almighty and merciful God, the Fountain of all goodness, who knowest the
thoughts of our hearts, we confess unto Thee that we have sinned against
Thee, and done evil in Thy sight. Wash us, we beseech Thee, from the
stains of our past sins, and give us grace and power to put away all
hurtful things; so that, being delivered from the bondage of sin, we may
bring forth worthy fruits of repentance.

O eternal Light, shine into our hearts. O eternal Goodness, deliver us
from evil. O eternal Power, be Thou our support. Eternal Wisdom, scatter
the darkness of our ignorance. Eternal Pity, have mercy upon us. Grant
unto us that with all our hearts, and minds, and strength, we may
evermore seek Thy face; and finally bring us, in Thine infinite mercy,
to Thy holy presence. So strengthen our weakness that, following in the
footsteps of Thy blessed Son, we may obtain Thy mercy, and enter into
Thy promised Joy. Amen.

                                                                 —Alcuin


                            For Illumination

O most merciful God, incline Thy loving ears to our prayers, and
illuminate the hearts of those called by Thee, with the grace of the
Holy Spirit, that they may be enabled worthily to minister to Thy
mysteries, and to love Thee with an everlasting love, and to attain
everlasting joys; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                       —Gallican Collect


                             To Be Set Free

O God, who art the Author of love, and the Lover of pure peace and
affection, let all who are terrified by fears, afflicted by poverty,
harassed by tribulation, worn down by illness, be set free by Thine
indulgent tenderness, raised up by amendment of life, and cherished by
Thy daily compassion, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                —A Gallican Sacramentary


                     For a Friend Before a Journey

O God, who bestowest Thy mercy at all times on them that love Thee, and
in no place art distant from those that serve Thee; direct the way of
Thy servant in Thy will, that having Thee for _his_ Protector and Guide,
_he_ may walk without stumbling in the paths of righteousness, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                —A Gallican Sacramentary


                          For Christian Graces

Give me, O Lord, purity of lips, a clean and innocent heart, and
rectitude of action. Give me humility, patience, abstinence, chastity,
prudence, justice, fortitude, temperance. Give me the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of
knowledge and godliness, and of Thy fear. Make me ever to seek Thy face
with all my heart, all my soul, all my mind; grant me to have a contrite
and humbled heart in Thy presence—to prefer nothing to Thy love. Most
high, eternal, and ineffable Wisdom, drive away from me the darkness of
blindness and ignorance; most high and eternal Strength, deliver me;
most high and eternal Fortitude, assist me; most high and
incomprehensible Light, illuminate me; most high and infinite Mercy,
have mercy on me. Amen.

                                                —A Gallican Sacramentary


                            For Help to All

[O God,] give perfection to beginners, give intelligence to the little
ones, give aid to those who are running their course. Give compunction
to the negligent, give fervor of spirit to the lukewarm, give to the
perfect a good consummation. Amen.

                                                —A Gallican Sacramentary


                               For Mercy

O Lord, who didst give to Thine Apostles peace, shed down upon us all
Thy holy calm; gather together with Thy hand all those who are
scattered, and bring them like sheep into the fold of Thy holy Church,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Strengthen and confirm me, O Lord, by Thy Cross, on the rock of faith,
that my mind be not shaken by the attacks of the enemy. For Thou alone
art holy.

Thou knowest, O Lord, how many and great are my sins, Thou knowest how
often I sin, from day to day, from hour to hour, in the things I do and
the things I leave undone. No more, O Lord, no more, O Lord my God, will
I provoke Thee; no more shall my desire be for anything but Thee, for
Thou alone art truly lovable. And if again I offend in anything, I
humbly beseech Thee of Thy mercy to grant me strength to find favour
again in Thy sight and to live in a manner more pleasing to Thee. Amen.

                                                       —Theodore Studita




                         NINTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                               For Unity

O God the Father, origin of Divinity, good beyond all that is good, fair
beyond all that is fair, in whom is calmness, peace, and concord; do
Thou make up the dissensions which divide us from each other, and bring
us back into a unity of love, which may bear some likeness to Thy divine
nature. And as Thou art above all things, make us one by the unanimity
of a good mind, that through the embrace of charity and the bonds of
affection, we may be spiritually one, as well in ourselves as in each
other; through that peace of Thine which maketh all things peaceful, and
through the grace, mercy, and tenderness of Thy Son, Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                —Dionysius of the Syrian Jacobite Church


                                For Help

O Thou who art the everlasting Essence of things beyond space and time
and yet within them; Thou who transcendest yet pervadest all things,
manifest Thyself unto us, feeling after Thee, seeking Thee in the shades
of ignorance. Stretch forth Thy hand to help us, who cannot without Thee
come to Thee; and reveal Thyself unto us, who seek nothing beside Thee;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                    —John Scotus Erigena


                       For Strength and Guidance

Lord God Almighty, shaper and ruler of all creatures, we pray Thee for
Thy great mercy, that Thou guide us better than we have done, towards
Thee, and guide us to Thy will, to the need of our soul, better than we
can ourselves. And steadfast our mind towards Thy will and to our soul’s
need. And strengthen us against the temptations of the devil, and put
far from us all lust, and every unrighteousness, and shield us against
our foes, seen and unseen. And teach us to do Thy will, that we may
inwardly love Thee before all things, with a pure mind. For Thou art our
maker and our redeemer, our help, our comfort, our trust, our hope;
praise and glory be to Thee now, ever and ever, world without end. Amen.

                                                       —Alfred the Great


                  An Acknowledgment of God’s Supremacy

O Thou who art the Father of that Son which hast awakened us, and yet
urgest us out of the sleep of our sins, and exhortest us that we become
Thine, to Thee, Lord, we pray, who art the supreme truth, for all truth
that is, is from Thee. Thee we implore, O Lord, who art the highest
wisdom, through Thee are wise, all those that are so. Thou art the
supreme joy, and from Thee all have become happy that are so. Thou art
the highest good, and from Thee all beauty springs. Thou art the
intellectual light, and from Thee man derives his understanding. To
Thee, O God, we call and speak. Hear us, O Lord, for Thou art our God
and our Lord, our father and our creator, our ruler and our hope, our
wealth and our honour, our home, our country, our salvation, and our
life; hear, hear us, O Lord. Few of Thy servants comprehend Thee, but at
least we love Thee—yea, love Thee above all other things. We seek Thee,
we follow Thee, we are ready to serve Thee; under Thy power we desire to
abide, for Thou art the Sovereign of all. We pray Thee to command us as
Thou wilt; through Jesus Christ Thy Son our Lord. Amen.

                                                       —Alfred the Great


                            For Forgiveness

We implore the mercy of Thy Majesty, that it may please Thee to give to
us Thy servants, pardon of our sins, that we, being delivered from all
the bonds of the enemy, may cleave to Thy commandments with our whole
heart, and evermore love Thee alone, with all our strength, and one day
be counted worthy to attain to the sight of Thy blessedness. Through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                  —Old Rheims Manuscript




                         TENTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                              Benediction

May our Lord Jesus Christ be near us to defend us, within us to refresh
us, around us to preserve us, before us to guide us, behind us to
justify us, above us to bless us, who liveth and reigneth with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, God for evermore. Amen.

                                                              —Anonymous


                             For a Birthday

We beseech Thee, Lord, open Thy heavens; from thence may Thy gifts
descend to _him_. Put forth Thine own hand from heaven and touch _his_
head. May _he_ feel the touch of Thy hand, and receive the joy of the
Holy Spirit, that _he_ may remain blessed for evermore. Amen.

                                                      —Ethelwold of York


                 Confession and Prayer for Forgiveness

O _Lord_, O King, resplendent on the citadel of heaven, all hail
continually; and of Thy clemency upon Thy people still do Thou _have
mercy_.

_Lord_, Whom the hosts of cherubim in songs and hymns with praise
continually proclaim, do Thou _upon_ us eternally _have mercy_.

The armies aloft, O _Lord_, do sing high praise to Thee, even they to
whom the seraphim reply, “do Thou _have mercy_.”

O _Christ_, enthroned as King above, whom the nine orders of angels in
their beauty praise without ceasing, deign Thou _upon us_, Thy servants,
ever to _have mercy_.

O _Christ_, whom Thy one only Church throughout the world doth hymn, O
Thou to whom the sun, the moon, and stars, the land and sea, do service
ever, do Thou _have mercy_.

O _Christ_, those holy ones, the heirs of the eternal country, one and
all with utter joy proclaim Thee in a most worthy strain: do Thou _have
mercy upon us_.

O _Lord_, O gentle Son of Mary free, O King of Kings, blessed Redeemer,
upon those who have been ransomed from the power of death, by Thine own
blood, ever _have mercy_.

O noblest unbegotten, yet begotten Son, having no beginning of age, yet
without effort (in the weakness of God) excelling all things, upon this
Thy congregation in Thy pity, _Lord have mercy_.

O Sun of Righteousness, in all unclouded glory, supreme dispenser of
justice, in that great day when Thou shalt strictly judge all nations,
we earnestly beseech Thee, upon This Thy people, who here stand before
Thy presence, in Thy pity, _Lord, then have mercy upon us_. Amen.

                                                  —Dunstan of Canterbury


                              Dying Words

Glory be to Thee, Almighty Father, who hast given to them that fear Thee
the heavenly bread of life, that we may be mindful of the marvels which
Thou hast wrought upon the earth, by sending us Thy only begotten Son,
very man, born of a pure virgin. We give thanks, as is most justly due,
to Thee, O Holy Father, who didst create us ere yet we were, and whilst
we were yet sinners didst make us partakers of Thy heavenly grace,
through the same Thy Son, our Lord and God, who with Thee and the Holy
Ghost maketh, ordereth, and ruleth all things for ever and ever, world
without end. Amen.

                                                  —Dunstan of Canterbury




                        ELEVENTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                    For Pardon, Grace, and Guidance

O Thou plenteous source of every good and perfect gift, shed abroad the
cheering light of Thy sevenfold grace over our hearts. Yea, Spirit of
love and gentleness, we most humbly implore Thy assistance. Thou knowest
our faults, our failings, our necessities, the dulness of our
understanding, the waywardness of our affections, the perverseness of
our will. When, therefore, we neglect to practise what we know, visit
us, we beseech Thee, with Thy grace, enlighten our minds, rectify our
desires, correct our wanderings, and pardon our omissions, so that by
Thy guidance we may be preserved from making shipwreck of faith, and
keep a good conscience, and may at length be landed safe in the haven of
eternal rest; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                    For the Afflicted and Distressed

We bring before Thee, O Lord, the troubles and perils of people and
nations, the sighing of prisoners and captives, the sorrows of the
bereaved, the necessities of strangers, the helplessness of the weak,
the despondency of the weary, the failing powers of the aged. O Lord,
draw near to each; for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                            For Blessedness

O God, Thou art life, wisdom, truth, bounty, and blessedness, the
Eternal, the only true Good! My God and my Lord, Thou art my hope and my
heart’s joy. I confess, with thanksgiving, that Thou hast made me in
Thine image, that I may direct all my thoughts to Thee, and love Thee.
Lord, make me to know Thee aright, that I may more and more love, and
enjoy, and possess Thee. And since, in the life here below, I cannot
fully attain this blessedness, let it at least grow in me day by day,
until it all be fulfilled at last in the life to come. Here be the
knowledge of Thee increased, and there let it be perfected. Here let my
love to Thee grow, and there let it ripen; that my joy being here great
in hope, may there in fruition be made perfect. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                            For Our Friends

O fountain of love, love Thou our friends and teach them to love Thee
with all their hearts, that they may think and speak and do only such
things as are well-pleasing to Thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                        For Heavenly-Mindedness

O merciful God, fill our hearts, we pray Thee, with the graces of Thy
Holy Spirit, with love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Teach us to love those who hate
us, to pray for those who despitefully use us, that we may be the
children of Thee our Father, who makest Thy sun to shine on the evil and
on the good, and sendest rain on the just and on the unjust. In
adversity grant us grace to be patient; in prosperity keep us humble;
may we guard the door of our lips; may we lightly esteem the pleasures
of this world, and thirst after heavenly things; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                  For the Presence of the Holy Spirit

O holy Paraclete, sweetest consolation of the sorrowful, gracious Spirit
come down at this time with Thy mighty power into the depths of our
hearts. Gladden there with Thy brightness every dark retreat, and enrich
all with the dew of Thine abundant comfort. Kindle our inward parts with
holy favour, that the incense of our prayers and praises may ever go up
to Thee, O our God; through Jesus Christ Thy Son our Lord. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                                For Zeal

O almighty and merciful Father, who pourest Thy benefits upon us,
forgive the unthankfulness with which we have requited Thy goodness. We
have remained before Thee with dead and senseless hearts, unkindled with
love of Thy gentle and enduring goodness. Turn Thou us, O merciful
Father, and so shall we be turned. Make us with our whole heart to
hunger and thirst after Thee, and with all our longing to desire Thee.
Make us with our whole heart to serve Thee alone and with all our zeal
to seek those things which are well-pleasing in Thy sight; for the sake
of Thine only begotten Son, to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be all
honour and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                           For Union with God

O Lord our God, grant us grace to desire Thee with our whole heart, that
so desiring, we may seek and find Thee; and so finding Thee we may love
Thee; and loving Thee we may hate those sins from which Thou hast
redeemed us; for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                             For Holy Week

O Father, most merciful, who in the beginning didst create us, and by
the passion of Thine only begotten Son hast created us anew, work in us
now, we beseech Thee, both to will and to do of Thy good pleasure. And
forasmuch as we are weak, and can do no good thing of ourselves, grant
us Thy grace and heavenly benediction, that in whatsoever work we engage
we may do all to Thy honour and glory; and that, being kept from sin and
daily increasing in good works, so long as we live in the body we may
ever show forth some service to Thee; and after our departure may
receive pardon of all our sins, and attain eternal life; through Him
who, with Thee and the Holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth for ever and
ever. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                             For Perfection

O Lord Jesus Christ, our redemption and our salvation, we praise Thee
and give Thee thanks; and though we be unworthy of Thy benefits, and
cannot offer unto Thee due devotion, yet let Thy loving-kindness fill up
that which our weakness endeavoureth. Before Thee, O Lord, is all our
desire, and whatsoever our heart rightly willeth, it is of Thy gift.
Grant that we may attain to love Thee even as Thou commandest. Let not
Thy gift be unfruitful in us. Perfect that Thou hast begun, give that
which Thou hast made us to long after, convert Thou our lukewarmness
into fervent love of Thee; for the glory of Thy holy name. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                           For Absent Friends

O blessed Lord and Saviour, who hast commanded us to love one another,
grant us grace that, having received Thine undeserved bounty, we may
love every man in Thee and for Thee. We beseech Thy blessing for all;
but especially for the friends whom Thy love hast given to us. Love Thou
them, O Thou fountain of love, and make them to love Thee with all their
heart, with all their mind, and with all their soul, that those things
only which are pleasing to Thee they may will, and speak, and do. And
though our prayer is cold, because our charity is so little fervent, yet
Thou art rich in mercy. Measure not to them Thy goodness by the dulness
of our devotion; but as Thy kindness surpasseth all human affection, so
let Thy hearing transcend our prayer. Do Thou to them what is expedient
for them, according to Thy will, that they, being always and everywhere
ruled and protected by Thee, may attain in the end to everlasting life;
and to Thee, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all honour and
praise for ever and ever. Amen.

                                                                 —Anselm


                         For Strength and Power

Most merciful God, the helper of all men, so strengthen us by Thy power
that our sorrow may be turned into joy, and we may continually glorify
Thy holy name; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                           For Enlightenment

We beseech Thee, O Lord, let our hearts be graciously enlightened by Thy
holy radiance, that we may serve Thee without fear in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life; that so we may escape the
darkness of this world, and by Thy guidance attain the land of eternal
brightness; through Thy mercy, O blessed Lord, who dost live and govern
all things, world without end. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                           In Time of Trouble

O God, who tellest the number of the stars, and callest them all by
their names: heal, we beseech Thee, the contrite in heart, and gather
together the outcasts, and enrich us with the fulness of Thy wisdom;
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                       For Whitsunday (Pentecost)

O God, who purifiest the heart of man from sin, and makest it more white
than snow, pour down upon us the abundance of Thy mercy; renew, we
beseech Thee, Thy Holy Spirit within us, that we may show forth Thy
praise, and, strengthened by Thy grace, may obtain rest in the eternal
mansions of the heavenly Jerusalem; through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                             For Holy Week

O Lord, who dost wash out our offences, do Thou comfort us who
faithfully call upon Thee; and, we beseech Thee, that Thou wouldest blot
out our transgressions, and restore us from death to the land of the
living; through Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                         For Spiritual Gladness

Hear us, O Lord, we beseech Thee, and in our tribulations pity us, grant
unto us spiritual gladness, and give us everlasting peace; through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                         For Acceptable Service

O glorious and almighty God, in whom all the spirits of the blessed
place the confidence of their hope; grant to us that, by Thy help, we
may be able ever to serve Thee with a pure mind; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                               For Light

Bestow Thy light upon us, O Lord, so that, being rid of the darkness of
our hearts, we may attain unto the true Light; through Jesus Christ, who
is the Light of the World. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                       For Grace and Deliverance

Feed Thy people, O Lord, with Thy grace, and deliver our souls from the
death of sin; so that, being filled with Thy mercy, we may be united
with the joys of the righteous; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                   For the Spread of Christ’s Kingdom

Almighty God and heavenly Father, who of Thine infinite love and
goodness towards us, hast given to us Thy only and most dearly beloved
Son, Jesus Christ, to be our redeemer and the author of everlasting
life, who, after He made perfect our redemption, by His death and was
ascended into heaven, sent abroad into the world His apostles, prophets,
evangelists, doctors, and pastors; by whose labour and ministry He
gathered together a great flock from all parts of the world, to set
forth the eternal praise of Thy holy name: for these so great benefits
of Thy eternal goodness we render unto Thee most hearty thanks. We
praise and worship Thee, and we humbly beseech Thee, by the same Thy
blessed Son, to grant unto all which here or elsewhere, call upon Thy
holy name, that we may continue to show ourselves thankful unto Thee for
these and all other Thy benefits, and that we may daily increase and go
forward in the knowledge and faith of Thee and Thy Son by the Holy
Spirit, so that Thy holy name may be for ever glorified, and Thy blessed
Kingdom enlarged; through the same Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who
liveth and reigneth with Thee in the unity of the same Holy Spirit,
world without end. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                        For Deliverance from Sin

O Lord, vouchsafe to look mercifully upon us, and grant that we may
choose the way of peace; so that, rescued from the captivity of the sins
which have oppressed us, we may attain the dwellings of the heavenly
Jerusalem; through Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                         For Brotherly Kindness

Pour upon us, O Lord, the spirit of brotherly kindness and peace; so
that, sprinkled with the dew of Thy benediction, we may be made glad by
Thy glory and grace; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                               For Health

O God, who through the grace of Thy Holy Spirit, dost pour the gift of
love into the hearts of Thy faithful people, grant unto us health, both
of mind and body, that we may love Thee with our whole strength, and
with entire satisfaction may perform those things which are pleasing
unto Thee this day; through Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                     For Grace to Walk in Holiness

O God of strength, passing all understanding, who mercifully givest to
Thy people mercy and judgment; grant to us, we beseech Thee, faithfully
to love Thee, and to walk this day in the way of righteousness; through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                           A Prayer for Today

In this hour of this day, fill us, O Lord, with Thy mercy, that
rejoicing throughout the whole day, we may take delight in Thy praise;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                              Supplication

Almighty God, we invoke Thee, the fountain of everlasting light, and
entreat Thee to send forth Thy truth into our hearts, and to pour upon
us the glory of Thy brightness; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Sarum Breviary


                           For Divine Control

O Lord God, King of heaven and earth, may it please Thee this day to
order and to hallow, to rule and to govern, our hearts and our bodies,
our thoughts, our works, and our words, according to Thy commandments,
that we, being helped by Thee, may here and for ever be delivered and
saved; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                     For a Knowledge of God’s Will

Most gracious God, to know and love whose will is righteousness,
enlighten our souls with the brightness of Thy presence, that we may
both know Thy will and be enabled to perform it; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                     For Increased Love Toward God

O Lord, we beseech Thee that Thy people may grow ever in love toward
Thee, their Father, who art in heaven, and may so be schooled by holy
works, that ever, as Thou dost pour Thy gifts upon them, they may walk
before Thee in all such things as be well-pleasing in the sight of Thy
Divine Majesty; for the sake of Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                               For Peace

O God, the consolation of all such as be sorrowful, and the salvation of
them that put their trust in Thee, grant unto us, in this dying life,
that peace for which we humbly pray, and hereafter to attain unto
everlasting joy in Thy presence; through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                         For Defense from Evil

Grant unto us, we beseech Thee, O almighty God, that we, who seek the
shelter of Thy protection, being defended from all evils, may serve Thee
in peace and quietness of spirit; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                      For Assistance in Temptation

Almighty and merciful God, who dost grant unto Thy faithful people the
grace to make every path of life temporal, the strait and narrow way
which leadeth unto life eternal, grant that we, who know that we have no
strength as of ourselves to help ourselves, and therefore do put all our
trust in Thine almighty power, may, by the assistance of Thy heavenly
grace, always prevail in all things, against whatsoever shall arise to
fight against us; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                             For Protection

O God, the Shepherd of all Thy people, deliver the same from all sins
which do assail them, that so they may ever be pleasing in Thy sight,
and safe under Thy shelter; for Christ’s sake. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                           For Loyal Service

Almighty and everlasting God, grant that our wills be ever meekly
subject to Thy will, and our hearts be ever honestly ready to serve
Thee; for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                           For Purified Lives

O God, mercifully grant unto us that the fire of Thy love may burn up in
us all things that displease Thee, and make us meet for Thy heavenly
Kingdom; for the sake of Jesus Christ our Saviour. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                              For Strength

Be Thou Thyself, O Lord, the Sanctifier and the Shepherd of Thy people,
that we, who are strengthened by Thy help, may in our daily life walk
with Thee, and in all quietness of spirit serve Thee; through Jesus
Christ our Master. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary


                            For the Prisoner

O God, let the sighing of the prisoner come before Thee, and mercifully
grant unto us that we may be delivered by Thine almighty power from all
bonds and chains of sin, whether in our bodies or in our souls, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                         —Roman Breviary




                        TWELFTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                     Need for Heavenly Refreshment

[O God,] my heart is a vain heart, a vagabond and instable heart; while
it is led by its own judgment, and wanting divine counsel, cannot
subsist in itself; and whilst it divers ways seekest not, findeth none,
but remaineth miserable through labor, and void of peace: it agreeth not
with itself, it dissenteth from itself, it altereth resolutions,
changeth the judgment, frameth new thoughts, pulleth down the old, and
buildeth them up again: it willeth and willeth not; and never remaineth
in the same state.

Come, Holy Spirit, and bring from heaven a ray of Thy light! Come, Thou
father of the poor, Thou giver of gifts, Thou light of the world, the
blessed Comforter, the dear guest of the soul, and its sweetest
refreshment; Thou, our repose in labor, our coolness in heat, our
comfort in affliction! O, most blessed Spirit, fill full the hearts of
Thy faithful people! Without Thy influence there is nothing in man which
is not weakness and guilt. O, cleanse that which is sordid; bedew that
which is dried up; heal that which is wounded; bend that which is
stubborn, cherish in Thy bosom that which is cold; guide that which is
wandering; and grant unto Thy servants, putting their trust in Thee, the
merit of Thy righteousness; grant them final salvation; grant them
everlasting joy! O Lord, hear our prayer, and let our cry come unto
Thee. Amen.

                                                   —Bernard of Clairvaux


                           Delight in Christ

  Jesus, Thou joy of loving hearts!
    Thou fount of life! Thou light of men!
  From the best bliss that earth imparts,
    We turn unfilled to Thee again.

  Thy truth unchanged hath ever stood;
    Thou savest those that on Thee call;
  To them that seek Thee, Thou art good,
    To them that find Thee—All in All!

  We taste Thee, O Thou living bread,
    And long to feast upon Thee still;
  We drink of Thee, the fountain head,
    And thirst our souls from Thee to fill.

  Our restless spirits yearn for Thee,
    Where’er our changeful lot is cast;
  Glad, when Thy gracious smile we see,
    Blest, when our faith can hold Thee fast.

  O Jesus, ever with us stay!
    Make all our moments calm and bright
  Chase the dark night of sin away—
    Shed o’er the world Thy holy light!

                                                                   Amen.

                                       —Ascribed to Bernard of Clairvaux


                               For Grace

O Lord Jesus, grant us Thy grace and give unto us time for repentance.
We would keep Thy commandments and do Thy bidding, choose the better
part and no longer follow after evil; grant us Thy strength that this
may so be, O loving Saviour for Thine own name’s sake. Amen.

                                                             —Dan Jeremy




                       THIRTEENTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                   Make Me an Instrument of Thy Peace

  Lord, make me an instrument of Thy peace;
  Where hate rules, let me bring love,
  Where malice, forgiveness,
  Where disputes, reconciliation,
  Where error, truth,
  Where doubt, belief,
  Where despair, hope,
  Where darkness, Thy light,
  Where sorrow, joy!

  O Master, let me strive more to comfort others than to be comforted,
  To understand others than to be understood,
  To love others, more than to be loved!

  For he who gives, receives,
  He who forgets himself, finds,
  He who forgives, receives forgiveness,
  And dying, we rise again to eternal life. Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                    The Daily Prayer of St. Francis

My God, and my all, who art Thou, sweetest Lord, my God? And who am I, a
poor worm, Thy servant? Holiest Lord, I would love Thee! Sweetest Lord,
I would love Thee! Lord, my God, I give to Thee all my heart and body,
and vehemently desire, if I might know how, to do more for Thy love.
Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                                 Praise

Now to that God, who has suffered so much for us, who at one giving has
conferred on us so many good things, and will yet confer so many more,
to this God let every creature who is in heaven or upon the earth, in
the sea or in the depth of the abyss, render praise, glory, honour and
blessing. He is himself our virtue and our strength. He alone is good,
lofty, almighty, admirable, and glorious; the only holy, worthy of
praise and blessed through ages of ages. Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                    For the Knowledge of God’s Will

God, almighty, eternal, righteous, and merciful, give to us poor sinners
to do for Thy sake all that we know of Thy will, and to will always what
pleases Thee, so that inwardly purified, enlightened, and kindled by the
fire of the Holy Spirit, we may follow in the footprints of Thy
well-beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                              Thanksgiving

Almighty, most holy, most high and supreme God, holy and just Father,
Lord, king of heaven and earth, for Thyself we give thanks to Thee
because by Thy holy will, and by Thine only Son, Thou hast created all
things spiritual and corporal in the Holy Ghost and didst place us made
to Thine image and likeness in paradise, whence we fell by our own
fault. And we give Thee thanks because, as by Thy Son Thou didst create
us, so by the true and holy love with which Thou hast loved us, Thou
didst cause Him, true God and true man, to be born.... And we give
thanks to Thee because Thy Son Himself is to come again in the glory of
His Majesty ... to say to all who have known Thee and adored Thee, and
served Thee in repentance: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess the
Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.” And since all
we wretches and sinners are not worthy to name Thee, we humbly beseech
Thee, that our Lord Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, in whom Thou art well
pleased, together with the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, may give thanks to
Thee as it is pleasing to Thee and Them, for all. Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                          Praise and Guidance

Almighty, most holy, most high, and supreme God, highest good, all good,
wholly good, who alone art good, to Thee we render all praise, all
glory, all thanks, all honor, all blessing, and we shall always refer
all good to Thee.

Almighty, eternal, just, and merciful God, give to us wretches to do for
Thee what we know Thee to will and to will always that which is pleasing
to Thee; so that inwardly purified, inwardly illumined and kindled by
the flame of the Holy Ghost, we may be able to follow in the footsteps
of Thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and by Thy grace alone come to Thee
the Most High, who in perfect Trinity and simple unity livest and
reignest and gloriest God Almighty for ever and ever. Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                            For the Brothers

Lord Jesus, Thou didst choose Thine apostles to the number of twelve,
and if one of them did betray Thee, the others, remaining united to
Thee, preached Thy holy Gospel, filled with one and the same
inspiration; and behold now, remembering the former days, Thou hast
raised up the Religion of the Brothers in order to uphold faith, and
that by them the mystery of Thy Gospel may be accomplished. Who will
take their place if, instead of fulfilling their mission and being
shining examples for all, they are seen to give themselves up to the
works of darkness? Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                              For Thy Love

I beseech Thee, O Lord, that the fiery and sweet strength of Thy love
may absorb my soul from all things that are under heaven, that I may die
for love of Thy love as Thou didst deign to die for the love of my love.
Amen.

                                                      —Francis of Assisi


                              Thanksgiving

Thanks be to Thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, for all the benefits which Thou
hast given us; for all the pains and insults which Thou hast borne for
us. O most merciful Redeemer, friend and brother, may we know Thee more
clearly, love Thee more dearly, and follow Thee more nearly; for Thine
own sake. Amen.

                                                  —Richard of Chichester


                              Daily Prayer

Grant me, I beseech Thee, O merciful God, prudently to study, rightly to
understand, and perfectly to fulfill that which is pleasing to Thee, to
the praise and glory of Thy name.

Thou, O Christ, art the King of glory; Thou art the everlasting Son of
the Father. Amen.

                                                         —Thomas Aquinas


                           For Steadfastness

Grant me, I beseech Thee, almighty and most merciful God, fervently to
desire, wisely to search out, and perfectly to fulfill, all that is
well-pleasing unto Thee. Order Thou my worldly condition to the glory of
Thy name; and, of all that Thou requirest me to do, grant me the
knowledge, the desire, and the ability, that I may so fulfill it as I
ought, and may my path to Thee, I pray, be safe, straightforward, and
perfect to the end.

Give me, O Lord, a steadfast heart, which no unworthy affection may drag
downwards; give me an unconquered heart, which no tribulation can wear
out; give me an upright heart, which no unworthy purpose may tempt
aside.

Bestow upon me also, O Lord my God, understanding to know Thee,
diligence to seek Thee, wisdom to find Thee, and a faithfulness that may
finally embrace Thee. Amen.

                                                         —Thomas Aquinas


                           For Love of Jesus

Ah! sweet Jesus, pierce the marrow of my soul with the healthful shafts
of Thy love, that it may truly burn, and melt, and languish, with the
only desire of Thee; that it may desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Thee; let it hunger alone for the bread of life: let it thirst after
Thee, the spring and fountain of eternal light, the stream of true
pleasure; let it always desire Thee, seek Thee, and find Thee, and
sweetly rest in Thee. Amen.

                                                            —Bonaventura


                     For Pardon, Purity, and Grace

O Holy God, in whom is all goodness, whose pity and mercy made Thee to
descend from the high throne down into this world, the valley of woe and
weeping, and here to take our nature, and in that nature to suffer pain
and death, to bring our souls to Thy Kingdom. Merciful Lord, forgive us
all our sins that we have done, thought, and said. O glorious Trinity,
send us cleanness of heart and purity of soul; restore us with Thy Holy
Spirit, and strengthen us with Thy might, that we may always withstand
evil temptations. Comfort us with Thy Holy Ghost, and fulfill us with
grace and charity, that we may henceforth live virtuously and love Thee
with all our heart, with all our might, and with all our soul, so that
we may never offend Thee, but ever follow Thy pleasure in will, word,
thought, and deed. Now grant us this, good Lord, that art infinite,
which eternally shall endure; through Jesus Christ Thy Son. Amen.

                                                          —Richard Rolle




                       FOURTEENTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                            Times of Anxiety

May Jesus Christ, the King of glory, help us to make the right use of
all the suffering that God sends, and to offer to Him the true incense
of our hearts; for His name’s sake. Amen.

                                                        —Johannes Tauler


                            For Love of God

Grant, most gracious God, that we may love and seek Thee always and
everywhere, above all things and for Thy sake, in the life present, and
may at length find Thee and for ever hold Thee fast in the life to come.
Grant this for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                     —Thomas Bradwardine


                     A Memorial of the Resurrection

O Lord Jesus Christ, by Thy glorious resurrection, in which Thou didst
appear alive and immortal to Thy disciples and faithful followers, by
Thy forty days’ abiding and sweet converse, in which by many infallible
proofs, speaking of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Thou didst
comfort them and assure them of Thine actual resurrection, removing all
doubt from their hearts. We beseech Thee, O Lord, grant that we may be
numbered among those who were fore-ordained by God to be witnesses of
Thy resurrection, not only by word of mouth, but in reality of good
works; for Thine honour and glory, who with the Father and the Holy
Ghost livest and reignest ever one God, world without end. Amen.

                                                    —Ludolphus of Saxony


                        For Heavenly-Mindedness

O most blessed Lord, deign to help us, and of Thy great mercy abolish
our sins; detach our minds from earthly things, and raise them to the
love of heavenly riches. Most merciful God, who dost favour all true
love, do Thou so aid and direct us that we may love Thee above all
things, and recognizing Thine infinite benefits, may keep them in
memory, and give Thee everlasting thanks for them. Finally, grant that
ours may be the blessed life which shall enjoy Thy love for ever;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                       —Raymond Jordanus


                           Self-Renunciation

If a man may attain thereunto, to be unto God as his hand is unto man,
let him be therewith content, and not seek further....

That we may thus deny ourselves, and forsake and renounce all things for
God’s sake, and give up our own wills, and die unto ourselves, and live
unto God alone and to his will, may He help us who gave up His will to
His heavenly Father,—Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be blessing for ever
and ever. Amen.

                                                    —Theologia Germanica


                            The God We Love

Now, he who will hold to God, loves all things in the One which is One
and All; and the One in All, because All is in the One; and he who loves
somewhat, this or that, otherwise than in the One, and for the sake of
the One, loves not God; for he loves somewhat which is not God,
therefore he loves it more than God. But he who loves somewhat more than
God, or equally with God, loves not God; for God must be and will be
alone loved, and in truth nothing ought to be loved but God alone. And
when the True Light and the True divine Love dwell in a man, he loves
nothing else but God alone. For he loves God as the Good, and for the
sake of the Good, and all Goods as One, and One as All. For, verily, All
is One and One is All in God. Amen.

                                                    —Theologia Germanica




                       FIFTEENTH CENTURY PRAYERS


                             The Quiet Hour

Lord, I offer unto Thee all my sins and offences, which I have committed
before Thee, from the day wherein I first could sin even to this hour;
that Thou mayest consume and burn them, one and all, with the fire of
Thy love, and do away all the stains of my sins, and cleanse my
conscience from all offences, and restore to me Thy grace, fully
forgiving me all, and admitting me mercifully to the kiss of peace. I
offer up also unto Thee all that is good in me, though it be very small
and imperfect, in order that Thou mayest amend and sanctify it, that
Thou mayest make it grateful and acceptable unto Thee, and always be
perfecting it more and more; and bring me also, slothful and
unprofitable poor creature as I am, to a good and blessed end. Amen.

                                                     —Thomas à Kempis[2]


                    For Faithful and Prepared Lives

Who can tell what a day may bring forth? Cause us, therefore, gracious
God, to live every day as if it were to be our last, for that we know
not but it may be such. Cause us to live so at present as we shall wish
we had done when we come to die. O grant that we may not die with any
guilt upon our consciences, or any known sin unrepented of, but that we
may be found in Christ, who is our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                          Let Thy Will Be Mine

O most merciful Lord, grant to me Thy grace, that it may be with me, and
labor with me, and persevere with me even to the end. Grant that I may
always desire and will that which is to Thee most acceptable, and most
dear. Let Thy will be mine, and my will ever follow Thine, and agree
perfectly with it. Grant to me, above all things that can be desired, to
rest in Thee, and in Thee to have my heart at peace. Thou art the true
peace of the heart, Thou its only rest; out of Thee all things are hard
and restless. In this very peace, that is, in Thee, the one Chiefest
Eternal Good, I will sleep and rest. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                                 Praise

I will say unto my God, my Lord, and my King, “O how great is the
abundance of Thy goodness, O Lord, which Thou hast laid up for them that
fear Thee.” But what art Thou to those who love Thee? What to those who
serve Thee with their whole heart? In this especially Thou hast showed
me the sweetness of Thy love; that, when I was not, Thou madest me, when
I went far astray from Thee, Thou broughtest me back again, that I might
serve Thee, and hast commanded me to love Thee. I would I were able, at
least for one day, to do Thee some worthy service. Truly, Thou art my
Lord, and I Thy servant, who am bound to serve Thee with all my might;
and this I wish to do, this I desire; and whatsoever is wanting unto me,
do Thou, I beseech Thee, vouchsafe to supply. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                            Thy Will Be Done

O Lord, Thou knowest what is best for us, let this or that be done, as
Thou shalt please. Give what Thou wilt, and how much Thou wilt, and when
Thou wilt. Deal with me as Thou thinkest good, and as best pleaseth
Thee. Set me where Thou wilt, and deal with me in all things just as
Thou wilt. Behold, I am Thy servant, prepared for all things; for I
desire not to live unto myself, but unto Thee; and Oh, that I could do
it worthily and perfectly! Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                           My Hope and Refuge

Ah, Lord God, Thou holy Lover of my soul, when Thou comest into my soul,
all that is within me shall rejoice. Thou art my Glory and the
exultation of my heart; Thou art my hope and refuge in the day of my
trouble. Set me free from all evil passions, and heal my heart of all
inordinate affections; that, being inwardly cured and thoroughly
cleansed, I may be made fit to love, courageous to suffer, steady to
persevere. Nothing is sweeter than love, nothing more courageous,
nothing fuller nor better in heaven and earth; because love is born of
God, and cannot rest but in God, above all created things. Let me love
Thee more than myself, nor love myself but for Thee; and in Thee all
that truly love Thee, as the law of love commandeth, shining out from
Thyself. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                               For Others

I offer up unto Thee my prayers and intercessions, for those especially
who have in any matter hurt, grieved, or found fault with me, or who
have done me any damage or displeasure.

For all those also whom, at any time, I may have vexed, troubled,
burdened, and scandalized, by words or deeds, knowingly or in ignorance;
that Thou wouldst grant us all equally pardon for our offences against
each other.

Take away from our hearts, O Lord, all suspiciousness, indignation,
wrath, and contention, and whatsoever may hurt charity, and lessen
brotherly love.

Have mercy, O Lord, have mercy on those that crave Thy mercy, give grace
unto them that stand in need thereof, and make us such as that we may be
worthy to enjoy Thy grace, and go forward to life eternal. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                             To Do Thy Will

O Lord, my God, Thou art to me whatsoever is good. Remember me because I
am nothing, I have nothing, and I can do nothing. Thou alone art good,
just, and holy; Thou canst do all things, Thou accomplishest all things,
Thou fillest all things. Remember Thy mercies, and fill my heart with
Thy grace, Thou who wilt not that Thy works should be void and in vain.
Turn not Thy face away from me; withdraw not Thy consolation, lest my
soul become as a thirsty land to Thee. Teach me, O Lord, to do Thy will;
teach me to live worthily and humbly in Thy sight. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                     My Salvation and My Redemption

In confidence of Thy goodness and great mercy, O Lord, I draw near unto
Thee, as a sick person to the healer, as one hungry and thirsty to the
fountain of life, a creature to the creator, a desolate soul to my own
tender comforter. Behold, in Thee is all whatsoever I can or ought to
desire; Thou art my salvation and my redemption, my hope and my
strength. Rejoice therefore this day the soul of Thy servant; for unto
Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                          For the Holy Spirit

Strengthen me, O God, by the grace of Thy Holy Spirit. Grant me to be
strengthened with might in the inner man, and to empty my heart of all
useless care and anguish. O Lord, grant me heavenly wisdom, that I may
learn above all things to seek and to find Thee, above all things to
relish and to love Thee, and to think of all other things as being, what
indeed they are, at the disposal of Thy wisdom. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                            For Thee, O Lord

Lord, what is my confidence which I have in this life? Is it not Thou, O
Lord, my God, whose mercies are without number? Where hath it ever been
well with me without Thee, or where could it be ill with me, when Thou
wert present? I rather choose to be a pilgrim on earth, than without
Thee to possess heaven. Where Thou art, there is heaven; and where Thou
art not, there is death and hell. There is none that can help me in my
necessities, but only Thou, my God; Thou art my hope, Thou my
confidence. Although Thou exposest me to divers temptations and
adversities, yet Thou orderest all this to my advantage; in which trial
of me Thou oughtest no less to be loved and praised, than if Thou didst
fill me full of heavenly consolations. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                            For Consolation

O Thou most sweet and loving Lord, Thou knowest mine infirmities, and
the necessities which I endure; in how great evils and sins I am
involved; how often I am weighed down, tempted, and disturbed by them. I
entreat of Thee consolation and support. I speak to Thee who knowest all
things, to whom all my inward thoughts are open, and who alone canst
perfectly comfort and help me. Thou knowest what things I stand in most
need of. Behold, I stand before Thee poor and naked, calling for grace,
and imploring mercy. Refresh Thy hungry supplicant, kindle my coldness
with the fire of Thy love, enlighten my blindness with the brightness of
Thy presence. Suffer me not to go away from Thee hungry and dry, but
deal mercifully with me, as often times Thou hast dealt wonderfully with
Thy saints. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                           For Trust in Thee

O Lord my God, be not Thou far from me; my God, have regard to help me;
for there have risen up against me sundry thoughts, and great fears,
afflicting my soul. How shall I pass through unhurt? How shall I break
them to pieces? This is my hope, my one only consolation, to flee unto
Thee in every tribulation, to trust in Thee, to call upon Thee from my
inmost heart, and to wait patiently for Thy consolation. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                           For the Comforter

Write Thy blessed name, O Lord, upon my heart, there to remain so
indelibly engraven, that no prosperity, no adversity shall ever move me
from Thy love. Be Thou to me a strong tower of defence, a comforter in
tribulation, a deliverer in distress, a very present help in trouble,
and a guide to heaven through the many temptations and dangers of this
life. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                      For Love of God and His Laws

O most gracious God, from whom every good and perfect gift cometh, we
beseech Thee to work in us both to will and to do according to Thy good
pleasure. Enlighten our minds that we may know Thee, and let us not be
unfruitful in that knowledge. Lord, work in our hearts a true faith, a
purifying hope, and an unfeigned love towards Thee. Give us a full trust
in Thee, zeal for Thee, reverence of all things that relate to Thee.
Make us fearful to offend Thee, thankful for Thy mercies, humble under
Thy corrections, devout in Thy service, and sorrowful for our sins.
Grant that in all things we may behave ourselves so as befits a creature
to his Creator, a servant to his Lord. Make us diligent in all our
duties, watchful against all temptations, pure and temperate and
moderate in Thy most lawful enjoyments, that they may never become a
snare to us. Help us, O Lord, to act towards our neighbour that we may
never transgress the royal law of Thine, of loving him as ourselves.
Finally, we beseech Thee, O Lord, to sanctify us throughout, that our
whole spirit, soul, and body, may be preserved blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be all
honour and glory for ever. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                            For Consecration

Almighty God, who hast made all things for man, and man for Thy glory,
sanctify our body and soul, our thoughts and our intentions, our words
and actions, that whatsoever we shall think, or speak or do, may by us
be designed to the glorification of Thy name, and by Thy blessing, it
may be effectual and successful in the work of God, according as it can
be capable. Lord, turn necessities into virtues, the works of Nature
into the works of grace, by making them orderly, regular and temperate,
subordinate and profitable to ends beyond their own proper efficacy; and
let no pride or self-seeking, no impure motive, or unworthy purpose, no
little ends, and low imagination stain our spirit, and unhallow any of
our words and actions. But let our body be a servant to our spirit, and
both body and spirit servants of Jesus Christ, that doing all things for
Thy glory here, we may be partakers of Thy glory hereafter; through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                              For Friends

Almighty, everlasting God, have mercy on Thy servants our friends. Keep
them continually under Thy protection, and direct them according to Thy
gracious favour in the way of everlasting salvation; that they may
desire such things as please Thee, and with all their strength perform
the same. And forasmuch as they trust in Thy mercy, vouchsafe, O Lord,
graciously to assist them with Thy heavenly help, that they may ever
diligently serve Thee, and by no temptations be separated from Thee;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

                                                        —Thomas à Kempis


                             For Thy Spirit

  The prayers I make will then be sweet indeed,
  If Thou the spirit give by which I pray;
  My unassisted heart is barren clay,
  That of its native self can nothing feed;
  Of good and pious works Thou art the seed
  That quickens only where Thou say’st it may.
  Unless Thou show to us Thy own true way,
  No man can find it! Father! Thou must lead;
  Do Thou then breathe those thoughts into my mind
  By which such virtue may in me be bred
  That in Thy holy footsteps I may tread;
  The fetters of my tongue do Thou unbind,
  That I may have the power to sing to Thee,
  And sound Thy praises everlastingly! Amen.

                                                           —Michelangelo




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]Old Spanish liturgy, later named Mozarabic.

[2]Gerhard Groot was the founder of the “Brothers of the Common Life.”
    Some scholars claim The Imitation of Christ, usually attributed to
    Thomas à Kempis, was done by Groot and edited by Thomas à Kempis.




                                 INDEX


                                   A
  Absent Friends, 51, 87
  Acceptable Service, 53
  Adoration, 39
  Afflicted, For the, 46, 48 (2)
  Against Temptation, 19
  Alcuin, 32, 33
  Alfred the Great, 39, 40
  Ancient Collects, 9, 12, 13, 14
  Anselm, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51
  Answer to Prayer, 18 (1), 25 (2)
  Anxiety, 74
  Aquinas, Thomas, 70, 71

                                   B
  Bede, Venerable, 32
  Belief, 66 (1)
  Bereaved, 48 (2)
  Benediction, 42, 55 (1), 67 (1)
  Bernard of Clairvaux, 62, 63
  Birthday, 42
  Blessings, 42 (1)
  Blessedness, 23 (1), 47, 75
  Bonds, 60 (2)
  Bonaventura, 71
  Bradwardine, Thomas, 74
  Brightness, 13, 19 (3), 52 (1), 56 (4), 57 (2), 84
  Brokenhearted, 12 (3)
  Brothers, For the, 69 (1)
  Brotherly Kindness, 55

                                   C
  Care, Loving, 12 (3)
  Charity, 23 (1), 81
  Christian Graces, 34 (2)
  Christmas, 19 (3), 23
  Church, 10, 23
  Cleansing, 9 (1), 11 (1), 12 (3), 17, 24 (2), 32, 62, 78 (1), 80
          (2)
  Clemency, 42 (3)
  Collect, 9, 12, 13, 14
  Columba, 14
  Comfort, 12 (3), 53 (1), 66 (1)
  Comforter, 25 (3), 62, 71, 85
  Commandments, 40, 57 (1), 64
  Companionship, 21
  Compassion, 12 (3)
  Confession, 20, 42, 62
  Consecration, 83 (2), 86
  Consolation, 82 (1), 84, 85 (1)
  Correction, 46
  Cross, 16 (1), 28 (1)

                                   D
  Daily Prayer, 20, 66, 70
  Daily Living, 78
  Darkness, 52 (1), 54 (1)
  Dedication, 18
  Defense from Evil, 58
  Delight in Christ, 63
  Deliverance, 11, 32 (3), 54, 55
  Devotion, 50
  Diligence, 70 (3)
  Direction, 24
  Distress, 46
  Dionysius, 38
  Divine Control, 57
  Dunstan of Canterbury, 42, 43, 44

                                   E
  Easter, 8 (2), 28
  Enemies, 48 (1)
  Enlightenment, 14, 46 (1), 52, 57 (2), 85 (3)
  Epiphany, 12, 19 (3)
  Erigena, John Scotus, 38
  Eternal Rest, 24 (3)
  Ethelwold of York, 42
  Evening, 13 (2), 21 (3), 27, 29
  Evil, From, 11 (1)
  Evil Thoughts, From, 9 (4)
  Example, A Good, 29 (2)

                                   F
  Faith, 21, 23 (1), 26 (2), 48 (1)
  Faithful and Prepared Lives, 78
  For Thee, O Lord, 83
  Forgiveness, 8, 11 (1), 17, 18 (1), 20 (1), 40, 42 (3), 46 (1), 49
          (1), 63, 78 (2)
  Footsteps, 88
  Francis of Assisi, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70
  Friends, 34, 47 (2), 51, 87
  Future Life, 74 (3), 75 (1)

                                   G
  Gallican Collect, 33
  Gallican Sacramentary, 33, 34, 35
  Gentleness, 48 (1)
  Giver of All Good Things, 23
  Gladness, 13 (1), 20 (2), 28 (2), 53
  Gloomy Thoughts, 13 (3)
  God We Love, 76
  God’s Supremacy, 39
  God’s Will, 57, 67
  Good Friday, 28
  Goodness, 48 (1), 79 (2)
  Good Will, 23 (2)
  Grace, 9, 26 (2), 32 (3), 46, 54, 56, 64, 68, 72, 82 (1), 84
  Gregory the Great, 8
  Gregorian Sacramentary, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
  Guidance, 24 (3), 26, 39, 46, 62, 68
  Guilt, 16 (1), 16 (2), 78 (2)

                                   H
  Healing, 25 (1), 52 (2), 62
  Health, 11 (3), 56
  Heavenly Mindedness, 48, 75
  Heavenly Refreshment, 62
  Heavenly Wisdom, 83 (1)
  Help, 38 (2), 56 (2), 85 (2)
  Holy Week, 49, 53
  Holy Spirit, 25, 29 (1), 42 (2), 48, 52 (3), 54 (3), 56 (1), 67
          (2), 83, 85 (1), 88
  Hope, 13 (3), 23 (1), 66 (1), 80, 82 (2)
  Humility, 34 (2), 48 (1), 59 (2), 82 (1), 85 (3)

                                   I
  Ignorance, 32 (3)
  Illumination, 19, 29, 33, 52 (1)
  Indignation, 81
  Instrument of Thy Peace, 66
  Intercession, 81

                                   J
  Jeremy, Dan, 64
  Jordanus, Raymond, 75
  Journey, 34
  Joy, 21, 47 (1), 62, 66 (1)
  Justice, 34

                                   K
  Kempis, Thomas à, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87
  Kingdom, 54
  Knowledge, 32 (1), 47 (1), 67
  Knowledge of God’s Will, 57, 67

                                   L
  Law, God’s, 85
  Liberty, 33 (2)
  Life, 22 (3)
  Life in Thee, 24 (1)
  Light, 12 (1), 13, 14, 21 (2), 22, 29, 32 (3), 39 (2), 54, 66 (1)
  Litany, 10, 16, 17, 18, 19, 27
  Love, 11, 14, 19 (2, 3), 22, 39, 40, 46, 48 (1), 49 (2), 56 (1),
          57, 66 (1, 2), 69 (2), 71, 80
  Love of God, 74, 85
  Love of Thee, 50
  Loving Care, 12
  Loving-kindness, 20 (1), 50
  Longsuffering, 48 (1)
  Loyal Service, 59
  Ludolphus of Saxony, 74, 75

                                   M
  Make Me an Instrument, 66
  Meekness, 48 (1)
  Mercy, 8 (3), 16 (1, 2), 17, 18 (1), 20 (2), 22 (2), 23 (2), 27
          (2), 32 (3), 35 (2), 39 (1), 40, 42 (3), 52 (1), 55 (1),
          56 (2), 81, 82 (1), 84
  Michelangelo, 88
  Ministers, 33 (1)
  Morning, 9, 13, 20, 21 (3), 56 (2)
  Mozarabic Breviary, 16, 17, 18, 19
  Mozarabic Liturgy, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27
  Mozarabic Sacramentary, 27, 28, 29, 30

                                   N
  Nations, For, 26
  New Year, 25
  Night, 13 (2)

                                   O
  Old Rheims Manuscript, 40
  Orphan, For the, 17
  Others, 12 (3), 81

                                   P
  Pardon, 12, 18 (1), 19, 46, 71
  Passion, 16 (1, 2)
  Passion Week, 49
  Pastors, For, 10, 33 (1)
  Patience, 48 (1), 85 (1)
  Peace, 12 (2), 20 (2), 21 (3), 22, 28 (2), 33 (3), 48 (1), 53 (2),
          55 (1), 58
  Penitent, 17
  Pentecost, 52
  Perfection, 11 (3), 35, 50, 78 (1)
  Perseverance, 26
  Personal Dedication, 18
  Petition, 32
  Pity, 53 (2)
  Power, 9 (2), 39 (2), 51
  Praise, 56 (3), 67, 68, 79
  Prisoner, 60
  Protection, 8 (3), 11, 26, 59
  Prudence, 34 (2)
  Purified Lives, 59
  Purity, 34 (2), 59, 71
  Purity of Heart, 52 (3)

                                   Q
  Quiet Hour, 78

                                   R
  Recognition of God, 23
  Reconciliation, 66 (1)
  Redemption, 82
  Refuge, 80
  Rejoicing, 56 (3)
  Release from Sins, 8 (1)
  Remission of Sins, 16 (1)
  Repentance, 18, 24, 63, 78 (1)
  Repose, 23 (3)
  Rest, 13, 79 (1)
  Resurrection, 28 (2), 74
  Reveal Thyself, 38 (2)
  Richard of Chichester, 70
  Righteousness, 57 (2)
  Rock, 21 (1)
  Rolle, Richard, 71, 72
  Roman Breviary, 57, 58, 59, 60
  Rulers, 10, 26

                                   S
  Salvation, 17, 27 (2), 57 (1), 62, 82
  Sanctification, 24
  Sarum Breviary, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57
  Self-Renunciation, 75 (2)
  Servants, 86
  Service, 59
  Set Free, 33
  Sick, For the, 17, 25
  Sin, 10 (1), 12 (2), 55, 59 (3), 75, 85 (3)
  Sleep, 27 (1)
  Sorrow, 51 (2)
  Spirit, Thy, 88
  Spirit of Truth, 32
  Spiritual Gladness, 53
  Spiritual Illumination, 29
  Spiritual Oneness, 38 (1)
  Steadfastness, 70
  Strength, 10 (1), 11 (2), 12 (3), 21 (2), 39, 40, 51 (2), 58 (3),
          60, 82 (2)
  Studita, Theodore, 35, 36
  Supplication, 56
  Suffering, 25
  Suspicion, 81
  Sweetness, 79 (2)

                                   T
  Tauler, Johannes, 74
  Teach Us, 39 (1)
  Temperance, 34 (2)
  Temptation, 10 (1), 11 (2), 19, 20 (2), 21 (2, 3), 39 (1), 58, 83
          (2), 85 (3)
  Thanksgiving, 28 (2), 54 (3), 67, 70
  Theologia Germanica, 75, 76
  Thomas à Kempis, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87
  Thy Glory, 12 (1)
  Thy Presence, 83 (1)
  Thy Will, 80, 82
  Today, For, 56
  Transgressions, 53 (1)
  Tribulations, 53 (2), 85 (1)
  Trouble, In Time of, 52
  True Worship, 27
  True Peace, 79 (1)
  Trust, 85
  Truth, 32 (2), 56 (4), 66 (1)

                                   U
  Unanimity, 38
  Understanding, 34, 39 (2)
  Union with God, 49
  Unity, 38
  Unrest, 62

                                   V
  Venerable Bede, 32

                                   W
  Walk in Holiness, 56
  Watchful Love, 26 (2)
  Weakness, 50
  Widow, For the, 17
  Will, Thy, 79, 82
  Whitsunday, 52
  Wisdom, 32 (1), 34 (2), 52 (2)
  Words, Dying, 44
  World, 9
  Worship, 27
  Wrath, 81

                                   Z
  Zeal, 49




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.

--Only in the text versions, delimited italicized text in _underscores_
  (the HTML version reproduces the font form of the printed book.)









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRAYERS OF THE MIDDLE AGES: LIGHT FROM A THOUSAND YEARS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


