The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Waterloo Roll Call
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Waterloo Roll Call

Author: Charles Dalton

Release date: February 7, 2016 [eBook #51143]
                Most recently updated: October 22, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by KD Weeks, Brian Coe and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
        created from images of public domain material made available
        by the University of Toronto Libraries
        (http://link.library.utoronto.ca/booksonline/).)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WATERLOO ROLL CALL ***

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

The bulk of this text consists of annotated tables containing names,
dates, and ranks achieved of participants in the British Army at the
battle of Waterloo. Most entries are accompanied by brief biographical
sketches. The notes follow each table, as printed.

The numbering of the notes for each table has been retained, beginning
anew with ‘1’ for each table.

The footnotes to the prefatory material, and to the headings of many
tables, originally appeared as an asterisk. These have been re-sequenced
from A to W and appear after the paragraph where they are referenced.

                                  THE
                          WATERLOO ROLL CALL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  THE
                          WATERLOO ROLL CALL.
                _WITH BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES AND ANECDOTES._

                                   BY
                       CHARLES DALTON, F.R.G.S.,

  AUTHOR OF “HISTORY OF THE WRAYS OF GLENTWORTH,” “LIFE OF GENERAL SIR
      EDWARD CECIL,” “MEMOIR OF CAPTAIN JOHN DALTON, COMMANDANT OF
         TRICHINOPOLY, 1752–1753”; AND EDITOR OF “ENGLISH ARMY
              LISTS AND COMMISSION REGISTERS, 1661–1714,”
                       “THE BLENHEIM ROLL,” ETC.

                                -------

                        =Second Edition,=

                        _REVISED AND ENLARGED_.




                                LONDON:
                         EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE,
              =Government and General Publishers,=
                       EAST HARDING STREET, E.C.
                                  1904
                        [_All Rights Reserved._]

[Illustration]

                           =Dedicated=

                                   TO

                        GEORGE TANCRED, ESQUIRE

                      (LATE CAPTAIN SCOTS GREYS),

                                   OF

                         WEENS, ROXBURGHSHIRE.

                       PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.

                                -------


Time does not diminish the interest of Waterloo, for that combat of
giants is indissolubly connected with Napoleon—the greatest master of
the art of war the world has ever known.

Since the publication of my ROLL CALL in 1890, I have received much
additional information from the relatives of Waterloo officers. This has
enabled me to bring out the present revised and enlarged edition. And I
wish particularly to mention that many of the obituary notices of
Waterloo officers given in the following pages were collected by the
late Mr. J.W. O’Brien, of the British Museum Library (formerly in the
ranks of the 4th Dragoon Guards), whose annotated copy of the ROLL CALL
came into my possession by purchase. Mr. O’Brien’s researches were not
made at my instigation or wish, but having been made, and brought to my
notice, I thought it advisable to secure and utilise this copy of my
book containing the aforesaid MS. entries.

A special feature of the Second Edition is the list of non-commissioned
officers and men (given in Part III.) who served at Waterloo, and
subsequently received commissions in the British army.

                                                         CHARLES DALTON.

  _September 1st, 1904._

                                -------

                               CONTENTS.


                                PART I.
                                                                 PAGE

   Preface to Second Edition                                      vii

   Introduction to First Edition                                ix-xv

   Abbreviations                                                  xvi

   List of the Staff                                              1–8

   Biographical Memoirs of the Staff                             9–39

   British and Hanoverian Army, as formed in Divisions and      40–44
     Brigades on the 18th June, 1815

   Annotated Lists of Regiments engaged at Waterloo            46–230

   Medical Staff and Departmental Officers                    231–235

   Annotated Lists of Regiments which formed the Reserve      236–249
     on 18th  June, 1815

                                PART II.

   Muster Roll of the Scots Greys                             250–255


                               PART III.

   Non-Commissioned Officers and Men at Waterloo who          256–266
     subsequently   received Commissions in the British
     Army

                                PART IV.

   A few Waterloo Heroes                                      267–273

   Appendix                                                   275–278

   Index                                                          279

                     INTRODUCTION TO FIRST EDITION.

            _Ah! Je les tiens donc, ces Anglais!_—NAPOLEON.


Never since the days of Oliver Cromwell had any name caused so much fear
in England as did that of Napoleon Bonaparte. From 1802 until his first
downfall, in 1814, a spirit of alarm and uneasiness pervaded all classes
in Great Britain, from the King and his Ministers down to the most
illiterate peasant. Those who were witnesses of, and participators in,
this panic have now passed away, but the national pride which our
victory over Napoleon at Waterloo excited in every Briton’s breast is as
strong as ever, and will last till the crack of doom.

In July, 1803, a little pamphlet, entitled _Important Considerations for
the People of this Kingdom_, was published in London, and “sent to the
officiating minister of every parish in England.” This pamphlet, which
bears the Royal Arms of England, was an appeal from the Government to
the Nation, and a diatribe against Napoleon. Mark the closing lines of
this appeal: “Shall we, who are abundantly supplied with iron and steel,
powder and lead—shall we, who have a fleet superior to the maritime
force of all the world, and who are able to bring two millions of
fighting men into the field—shall we yield up this dear and happy land,
together with all the liberties and honours, to preserve which our
fathers so often dyed the land and the sea with their blood?... No, we
are not so miserably fallen; we cannot, in so short a space of time,
have become so detestably degenerate; we have the strength and the will
to repel the hostility, to chastise the insolence of the foe. Mighty,
indeed, must be our efforts, but mighty also is the need.” The idea of a
French invasion was slow in forcing its way into the minds of the
uneducated classes in England. When they first heard of such a
possibility they thought it of no more consequence than the invasion of
Scotland by Charles Edward Stuart with a mere handful of Frenchmen at
his back. They also thought less of the projected descent from having
heard so much in 1797, and during the Rebellion in Ireland in 1798, of a
French army coming to the relief of the National party in that kingdom:—

                    “For the French are on the sea,
                      Says the Shan Van Vaugh,
                    And Ireland will soon be free,
                      Says the Shan Van Vaugh.”

And yet nothing had come of all this talk! But when the nation at large
had fully grasped the possibility of a Napoleonic invasion, Pitt had no
difficulty in raising the sinews of war. No fewer than 300,000 men
enrolled themselves in volunteer corps and defence associations. The
army and navy were increased, and everything was done that was possible
to counteract the power of that wonderful man, who, in the short space
of a few years, had, speaking metaphorically, built a Great Wall of
China round the British Isles, shutting the English out of the commerce
of Europe. Our preparations were none too soon. In 1805 the battle of
Austerlitz established the supremacy of Napoleon over Austria and
Russia. Fortunately for England, Nelson’s crowning victory at Trafalgar
indefinitely postponed Napoleon’s invasion scheme; but we were still
engaged in a gigantic war, single-handed, with half of Europe our
declared, and the other half our enforced, enemies. Nelson was dead;
Pitt was dying from the weight of anxieties which pressed upon him in
this tremendous crisis; Hanover had been taken from us. The outlook was
very gloomy, and affairs became more complicated in 1807, when the
military expeditions, arranged by Lord Grenville’s ministry, against
Constantinople and Egypt, had turned out failures, and resulted in the
Turks declaring war against us and confiscating all British property.
And yet in 1807 Napoleon had not yet reached the zenith of his power.
For the next five years he held the destinies of nearly the whole of
Europe in his own hands. Monarchies of long standing were disestablished
and new kingdoms—Napoleonic kingdoms—were raised up in their place.
Immense French armies traversed Europe from Portugal to the heart of
Russia, and every capital within that limit was, in its turn, subjugated
to the French yoke. But in 1808 two British Generals stemmed the tide of
French conquest in the Peninsula, viz., Sir John Moore and Sir Arthur
Wellesley. The first met a soldier’s death at Corunna, and the latter
was superseded by an incapable commander. But the British Government
soon found that they had made a grievous mistake, and Wellesley was
again entrusted with the supreme command in Portugal. Then commenced
that series of brilliant campaigns which liberated Portugal and Spain
from the Napoleonic grasp, and only ceased after the battle of Toulouse
by Napoleon’s abdication at Fontainebleau. In the spring of 1814 England
had a large army, composed for the most part of seasoned veterans, who
were fit for anything and worth millions. When war broke out again, in
the spring of 1815, at least half of the Peninsular army had been
disbanded—dispersed—and not to be had at any price. Some of the best of
the old Peninsular regiments had been sent to America in 1814, and
several of them—the gallant 43rd Light Infantry being one—did not reach
Waterloo in time to take part in the battle. Raw levies took their
place, and foreign auxiliaries helped to bring up Wellington’s army in
Flanders to the required strength. Of Wellington’s 106,000 barely
one-third were British. The remainder consisted of “King’s German
Legion,” “Hanoverian Levies,” “Brunswick Contingent,” “Nassau
Contingent,” “Dutch and Belgian Troops,” and “Nassauers in Dutch
service.” Of this polyglot force the German Legion, both cavalry and
infantry, were deserving of the highest praise for their conduct on
Waterloo Day. They formed part of the British army for nearly a dozen
years, and many British officers held commissions in the “Legion.” I
have been obliged to leave out the German Legion officers in the
following ROLL CALL (excepting those who served on the Staff), and it
would be invidious, when all did so well, to pick out the British
officers who served in the “Legion” at Waterloo and record their
services when those of their German brother-officers are omitted. I
cannot even make an exception of Colonel (afterwards Baron) Hugh
Halkett, who, like a knight in the olden days of chivalry, singled out a
French general (Cambronne) in single combat, and took him prisoner.

The Hanoverian levies did well also, excepting one regiment, which
refused to charge the French when commanded so to do. And this was
doubtless owing to the _lâcheté_ of their colonel, who, when ordered to
lead his regiment to the charge, declined to do so, saying he had no
confidence in his men. It is related that Captain Horace Seymour, who
had brought this officer Lord Uxbridge’s orders, addressed “a few words
of plain Saxon” to him, “which no gentleman ought to have listened to
unmoved,” but the only effect they had on the Hanoverian was to hasten
his departure to the rear. The Brunswick Contingent fought at a
disadvantage at Waterloo, having lost their brave leader (the Duke of
Brunswick) at Quatre Bras. Of the Nassau, Dutch, and Belgian troops it
is only fair to say that they were, mostly, utterly useless at Waterloo.
The glamour of Napoleon was upon them. They had lately been in his
service, and had a settled conviction that Wellington would be defeated
and his army cut to pieces. “Come over to us, brave Belgians!” shouted a
French regiment at Waterloo to their Belgian opponents in the battle.
But the “brave Belgians” preferred making “a retrograde movement for
strategical reasons,” and retired from the field, carrying news of
Wellington’s defeat to Brussels.

Now for Napoleon’s army: This consisted on the 15th of June of about
128,000 men[A]—mostly veterans who had served in many campaigns, and to
whom defeat was rare. Add to this, that they all belonged to one nation,
and were all equally devoted to their beloved emperor. “No army,” says
Colonel Chesney, in his _Waterloo Lecture_, “was probably ever so well
furnished with leaders as his, as none had ever the like experience
wherewith to train them.” It is no slight to Wellington to say that
Napoleon was, for rapid and offensive warfare, by far the first general
of his day. In defensive warfare Wellington was much in advance of his
great rival. Taking the words out of Philip the Second’s mouth,
Wellington might have with truth said, “Time and I against any other
two.” Once more: Wellington himself told Earl Stanhope that he
considered the presence of Napoleon with the French army at Waterloo
fully equivalent to an additional force of 30,000 men! Now this was the
total of the force sent under Marshal Grouchy, on the 17th June, to
follow the Prussian army, which had been defeated at Ligny by Napoleon
on the previous day, and which was supposed to be in full retreat on
Namur and Liége, so that, in round numbers, Napoleon was himself
considered equal to a whole army corps! If the British had a Picton, the
French had a Ney, who was considered almost Napoleon’s equal in handling
troops in the field, and who had pressed us so sorely at Quatre Bras, on
the 16th of June, when only half our army had arrived at that position.
Then as a leader of cavalry Lord Uxbridge was well matched by
Kellermann, whose fame as a cavalry general dated from Marengo. And
General Mouton (Count Lobau) was an infantry leader of whom any army
might have been proud. It was he who, at the head of the Imperial Foot
Guards, had wrested the victory from the Prussians on the bloody field
of Lützen, in 1813, and saved the French army from a reverse. Enough has
now been said to show what a splendid army the British had opposed to
them on the 18th of June, 1815. “I have them at last, these English!”
exclaimed Napoleon, in a transport of joy, early in the morning of that
day, when he saw our army drawn up in position, with their backs to the
forest of Soignies. But he underrated Wellington’s generalship, nor
could he foresee how the British generals, officers, and men of all
ranks would fight that memorable day, when the eyes of all Europe were
upon them, because upon the issue of that contest depended the fate of
empires and kingdoms, as well as the future peace of the world. And
knowing, as we all do, what glory the victory at Waterloo brought to our
countrymen and our country, we must be generous enough to give the brave
Prussians the full share due to them for their co-operation on that day.
Had it not been for them, Waterloo would have been as barren a victory
as Borodino, and Napoleon would have retreated in as good order,
probably, as Blucher was able to do after his defeat at Ligny. As it
was, our troops bore the whole brunt of the battle without losing an
inch of ground, and the arrival of the Prussians, at the close of the
day, sealed the fate of Napoleon.[B]

Footnote A:

  Lord Wolseley, in his _Decline and Fall of Napoleon_, says the French
  army consisted of about 123,000 men of all arms and 344 guns.—ED.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In offering this, the first annotated Waterloo Army List, to the British
public, I must ask their indulgence for any omissions and errors it may
contain. Although I have spared no trouble in the matter, there must be,
I well know, a few names of British Waterloo officers who have escaped
my notice. But when the following list is compared with the very
defective lists given by Siborne and George Jones (the foundation of all
other lists), I think the following ROLL CALL will be found infinitely
more trustworthy. I have also added the regimental and army commissions
of the Waterloo officers up to the date of the battle, and the honours
and promotions bestowed after Waterloo. The war services of _many_ of
these same officers now appear in print for the first time, and are not
to be found in the _Military Calendar_ of field officers which was
published in 1820, nor in Hart’s _Army Lists_, which date from 1840, and
are such valuable works of reference. Of course, a large proportion of
the names I have annotated, genealogically, are names of well-known
families of the present time, but there are also many names in the
following ROLL CALL which belong to families that are now extinct or
lost sight of. I have endeavoured to rescue as many names from oblivion
as time would allow, but there are a certain number of whom I can give
no information beyond their obituary notices:

             “Here lies Pat Steele. That’s very true.
             Who was he? What was he? What’s that to you?”

As regards the orthography of the names in the regimental lists, I am
not responsible, as they are copied from the “official” _Army List_. The
same rule applies to the precedence of the different regiments.

I am indebted to Colonel F.A. Whinyates, late R.H.A., for some
interesting information regarding artillery officers, and to George
Tancred, Esq., late captain Scots Greys, for the Waterloo muster-roll
and some memoranda relating to the Scots Greys.

                                                       CHARLES DALTON.

32 WEST CROMWELL ROAD, LONDON, S.W.

            _June 1, 1890._

Footnote B:

  “I should not do justice to my feelings, or to Marshal Blücher and
  the Prussian Army, if I did not attribute the success of this
  arduous day to the cordial and timely assistance I received from
  them.”—_Wellington’s despatch to Earl Bathurst._

                             ABBREVIATIONS.


 Par.                        = Peninsular.

 Pa.                         = Peninsula.

 G.C.H.                      = Knight Grand Cross of Hanover.

 K.C.H.                      = Knight Commander of Hanover.

 K.H.                        = Knight of Hanover.

 K.M.T.                      = Knight of Maria Theresa of Austria.

 K. St. A.                   = Knight of St. Anne of Russia.

 K. St. V.                   = Knight of St. Vladimir of Russia.

 K. St. G.                   = Knight of St. George of Russia.

 K.T.S.                      = Knight of the Tower and Sword of
                               Portugal.

 K.M.B.                      = Knight of Maximilian of Bavaria.

 K.W.                        = Knight of Wilhelm of Holland.

 W. after an officer’s name  = Wounded.

 K.       ”        ”         = Killed.


 M.I.                        = Monumental inscription.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        THE WATERLOO ROLL CALL.

                                -------


                                 STAFF.

                          COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF.

       F.-M. Arthur, DUKE OF WELLINGTON, K.G., G.C.B., &c.

                          MILITARY SECRETARY.

       Lt.-Col. Lord Fitzroy Somerset, 1st Ft. Gds., W.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Lt.-Col. J. Fremantle, 2nd Ft. Gds.
       Lt.-Col. C.F. Canning, 3rd Ft. Gds., K.
       Hon. Sir Alexander Gordon, K.C.B., 3rd Ft. Gds., K.
       Lt. Lord George Lennox, 9th Lt. Dns.
       Hered. Prince of Nassau-Usingen.

                          EXTRA AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Maj. Hon. Henry Percy, 14th Lt. Dns.
       Capt. Lord Arthur Hill, h. p.
       Lt. Hon. George Cathcart, 6th Dn. Gds.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                                GENERAL.

       H.R.H. The Prince of Orange, W.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Lt.-Col. Baron Tripp, 60th Foot.
       Capt. Lord John Somerset, h. p.
       Capt. Hon. Francis Russell, h. p.

                          EXTRA AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. The Earl of March, 52nd Foot.
       Capt. Viscount Bury, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Lt. H. Webster, 9th Lt. Dns.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

       The Earl of Uxbridge, G.C.B., W.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Major W. Thornhill, 7th Hussars, W.
       Capt. H.B. Seymour, 18th Hussars, W.

                          EXTRA AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. T. Wildman, 7th Hussars, W.
       Capt. J. Fraser, 7th Hussars, W.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

       Lord Hill, G.C.B.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Lt.-Col. C. Hill, R.H. Gds., W.
       Major R. Egerton, 34th Foot.
       Major C.H. Churchill, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Capt. D. Mackworth, 7th Foot.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. Hon. O. Bridgeman, 1st Ft. Gds., W.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

       Sir Thomas Picton, G.C.B., K.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. Algernon Langton, 61st Foot, W.
       Capt. J. Tyler, 93rd Foot, W.
       Capt. N. Chambers, 1st Ft. Gds., K.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. B. Price, h. p.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

       Sir Henry Clinton, G.C.B.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. F. Dawkins, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Capt. J. Gurwood, 10th Hussars, W.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

       Charles, Count Alten, K.C.B.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. W. Havelock, 43rd Foot, W.
       Bt. Maj. A. Heise, 2nd Lt. Batt. K.G.L.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

       Sir Charles Colville, G.C.B.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. J. Jackson, 37th Foot.
       Lt. F.W. Frankland, 2nd Ft. Gds.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. Lord James Hay, 1st Ft. Gds.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       V. Count Alten.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. Baron Estorff, 2nd Dns. K.G.L.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. Einem, K.G.L.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir John Vandeleur, K.C.B.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. W. Armstrong, 19th Lt. Dns.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Maj. M. Childers, 11th Lt. Dns.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Maj.-Gen. Cooke, W.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. G. Disbrowe, 1st Ft. Gds.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Ensign Augustus Cuyler, 2nd Ft. Gds.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir James Kempt, K.C.B., W.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. Hon. Charles Gore, 85th Foot.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. Charles Eeles, 95th Foot, K.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Hon. Sir Wm. Ponsonby, K.C.B., K.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. B. Christie, 5th Dn. Gds.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Maj. D. Evans, 5th W.I. Regt.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Maj. T. Reignolds, 2nd Dns., K.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir John Byng, K.C.B.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. H. Dumaresq, 9th Foot, W.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. Wm. Stothert, 3rd Ft. Gds., K.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir Denis Pack, K.C.B., W.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Maj. E. L’Estrange, 71st Foot, K.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Bt.-Maj. Charles Smyth, 95th Foot, K.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Lord Edward Somerset, K.C.B.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. H. Somerset, 18th Hussars.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir John Lambert, K.C.B.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. T. Baynes, 39th Foot.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Maj. H.G. Smith, 95th Foot, W.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir Colquhoun Grant, K.C.B., W.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. R. Mansfield, 15th Hussars, W.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. W. Moray, 17th Lt. Dns., W.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. Jones, h. p.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir James Lyon, K.C.B.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. Jas. McGlashan, 2nd Lt. Batt. K.G.L.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. Richter, 1st Ceylon Regt.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Maj.-Gen. P. Maitland.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Ensign Lord Hay, 1st Ft. Gds., K.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. J. Gunthorpe, 1st Ft. Gds.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Maj.-Gen. G. Johnstone.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. C.G. Gray, 95th Foot.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. S. Holmes, 78th Foot.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Maj.-Gen. F. Adam, W.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. R.P. Campbell, 7th Foot.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. C. Yorke, 52nd Foot.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Maj. Thos. Hunter-Blair, 91st Foot, W.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir Colin Halkett, K.C.B., W.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. H. Marschalk, 1st Lt. Batt., K.G.L., K.
       Capt. A. Home, 2nd Lt. Batt., K.G.L.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. W. Crofton, 54th Foot, K.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

       Sir Hussey Vivian, K.C.B.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Capt. Edward Keane, 7th Hussars.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Lt. C.A. Fitzroy, R.H. Gds.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

       Capt. Thos. Noel Harris, h. p., W.
                  *       *       *       *       *

                           ADJUTANT-GENERAL.

       Maj.-Gen. Sir Edward Barnes, K.C.B., W.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

       Maj. Andrew Hamilton, 4th W.I. Regt.

                        DEPUTY ADJUTANT-GENERAL.

       Col. Sir John Elley, K.C.B., R.H. Gds., W.

                      ASSISTANT ADJUTANTS-GENERAL.

       Lt.-Col. J. Waters, Unattached, W.
       Lt.-Col. Sir George H. Berkeley, K.C.B., 35th Foot, W.
       Lt.-Col. Sir Guy Campbell, Bt., 6th Foot.
       Lt.-Col. Sir Noel Hill, K.C.B., 1st Ft. Gds.
       Lt.-Col. D. Barclay, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Lt.-Col. H. Rooke, 3rd Ft. Gds.
       Lt.-Col. E. Currie, 90th Foot, K.
       Maj. A. Wylly, 7th Foot.
       Maj. G. Evatt, 55th Foot.
       Maj. W. Darling, h. p.
       Maj. F. Breymann, 2nd Lt. Batt., K.G.L.

                  DEPUTY ASSISTANT ADJUTANTS-GENERAL.

       Capt. Hon. E.S. Erskine, 60th Foot, W.
       Capt. Lord Charles Fitzroy, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Capt. C.A.F. Bentinck, 2nd Ft. Gds.
       Capt. George Black, 54th Foot.
       Capt. H. Blanckley, 23rd Foot.
       Capt. Hon. Wm. Curzon, 69th Foot, K.
       Lt. Jas. Henry Hamilton, 46th Foot, W.
       Lt. John Harford, 7th Rl. Veteran Batt.
       Lt. E. Gerstlacher, 3rd Hussars, K.G.L.
       Lt. Jas. Rooke, h. p.

                         DEPUTY JUDGE ADVOCATE.

       Lt.-Col. Stephen Arthur Goodman, h. p.

                     DEPUTY QUARTERMASTER-GENERAL.

       Col. Sir Wm. Howe de Lancey, K.C.B., K.

                   ASSISTANT QUARTERMASTERS-GENERAL.

       Col. the Hon. Alex. Abercromby, 2nd Ft. Gds., W.
       Col. F.E. Hervey, 14th Lt. Dns.
       Lt.-Col. Robt. Torrens, 1st W.I. Regt.
       Lt.-Col. Sir Charles Broke, K.C.B. (Permanent).
       Lt.-Col. Sir Jeremiah Dickson, K.C.B. (Permanent).
       Lt.-Col. Lord Greenock (Permanent).
       Lt.-Col. John George Woodford, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Lt.-Col. C. Grant, 11th Foot.
       Lt.-Col. Sir Wm. Gomm, K.C.B., 2nd Ft. Gds.
       Lt.-Col. Sir Henry Hollis Bradford, K.C.B., 1st Ft. Gds., W.
       Lt.-Col. Sir George Scovell, K.C.B., h. p.
       Lt.-Col. D. Kelly, 73rd Foot.
       Maj. Wm. Campbell, 23rd Foot.
       Maj. Hon. George Lionel Dawson, 1st Dn. Gds., W.
       Maj. Chas. Beckwith, 95th Foot, W.
       Capt. Jas. Shaw, 43rd Foot.
       Capt. J. Jessop, 44th Foot, W.

                DEPUTY-ASSISTANT QUARTERMASTERS-GENERAL.

       Capt. E.T. Fitzgerald, 25th Foot, W.
       Capt. Richard Brunton, 60th Foot.
       Capt. Thos. Wright, Rl. Staff Corps, W.
       Capt. H. MacLeod, 35th Foot, W.
       Capt. J.J. Mitchell, 25th Foot, W.
       Capt. W. Moore, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Capt. Geo. Hillier, 74th Foot.
       Capt. W.G. Cameron, 1st Ft. Gds.
       Capt. F. Read, Rl. Staff Corps.
       Lt. P. Barrailler, 33rd Foot.
       Lt. Basil Jackson, Rl. Staff Corps.
       Lt. A. Brauns, Rl. Staff Corps.

                      COMMANDANT AT HEAD-QUARTERS.

       Col. Sir Colin Campbell, K.C.B., 2nd Ft. Gds.




                                 STAFF.


                          COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF.

F.-M. Arthur, Duke of WELLINGTON, K.G., G.C.B., &c.

    Born in Dublin, 1st May, 1769. 3rd son of Garrett, 1st Earl of
    Mornington, by Anne, eldest dau. of Arthur (Hill), 1st Viscount
    Dungannon. Educated at Eton and Angers Military Academy. Like Clive,
    he was “a heaven-born general.” His fame far exceeded the many
    titles he won by his genius. “I am going to dine with Wellington
    to-night,” said a young Irish staff officer to a group of brother
    officers at the close of a hard-fought battle in Spain. “Give me at
    least the prefix of Mr. before my name,” said Lord Wellington, who
    happened to ride by at the moment and had overheard the jubilant
    remark. “My Lord,” replied the officer, “we do not speak of Mr.
    Cæsar, or Mr. Alexander, so why should I speak of Mr. Wellington?”
    The Duke d. at Walmer Castle, 14th Sept., 1852, and was buried in
    St. Paul’s Cathedral. He had m., in 1806, the Hon. Catherine
    Pakenham, 3rd dau. of Edward, 2nd Lord Longford, and by her, who d.
    in 1831, left issue.

                          MILITARY SECRETARY.

Lt.-Col. Lord Fitzroy Somerset, 1st Ft. Gds., W.

    Youngest son of Henry, 5th Duke of Beaufort. Was Wellington’s A.D.C.
    and “right hand” throughout the campaign in Spain and Portugal. Lost
    his right arm at Waterloo, from a shot fired from the top of La Haye
    Sainte farmhouse after its capture by the French. Created Baron
    Raglan a month after Wellington’s death. F.-M. and C.-in-C. of the
    British army in the Crimea in Nov., 1854. D. in the Crimea during
    the siege of Sebastopol, at a farmhouse overlooking the plains of
    Balaklava. In the principal room is still to be seen a marble slab
    with the inscription, “In this room died F.-M. Lord Raglan, G.C.B.,
    Commander-in-Chief of the British Army in the Crimea, 28th June,
    1855.” Lord Raglan’s body was brought to England and interred at
    Badminton with his ancestors. He had m., in 1814, Lady Emily Harriet
    Wellesley-Pole, 2nd dau of Wm., 3rd Earl of Mornington, and by her,
    who d. 1881, left issue.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Lt.-Col. J. Fremantle, 2nd Ft. Gds. (1st Batt.)

    Served as A.D.C. to Wellington at Vittoria, and brought home the
    despatch. Eldest son of Col. Stephen Fremantle, by Albinia, dau. of
    Sir John Jeffrys, Bart.; C.B. M., 17th Feb., 1829, Agnes, 3rd dau.
    of David Lyon. Died a maj.-gen. on ret. list.

Lt.-Col. C.F. Canning, 3rd Ft. Gds., K.

    3rd son of Stratford Canning, by Mehetabel Patrick, of Summerhill,
    Dublin, and brother of the subsequently celebrated diplomatist,
    Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe. Had acted as A.D.C. to Wellington
    in the Pa., and it was by the former’s special request that the Duke
    took him again on his personal staff just before Waterloo.

               “Dying lamented CANNING lay,
                 On MARCH he wistful gaz’d.
               ‘How fares the Duke?’ ‘How goes the day?’
               ‘All well’—his head he raised.”

Lt.-Col. Hon. Sir Alexander Gordon, K.C.B., 3rd Ft. Gds., K.

    It is said that when Wellington was roused from sleep by Dr. Hume
    early on the morning after Waterloo and told that Gordon had died
    from the effect of his wounds, he burst into tears. Alex. Wm. Gordon
    was 3rd son of George, Lord Haddo, by Charlotte, youngest daughter
    of Wm. Baird, of Newbyth. He had served as A.D.C. to his uncle, Sir
    David Baird, at the capture of the Cape of Good Hope and in several
    subsequent campaigns.

Lt. Lord George Lennox, 9th Lt. Dns.

    2nd son of Charles, 4th Duke of Richmond, by Lady Charlotte Gordon,
    eldest daughter of Alexander, 4th Duke of Gordon. He and his eldest
    brother took an active part in the drama of the 18th June, whilst
    the duke, his father, and Lord Wm. Pitt Lennox, his younger brother,
    were spectators of a battle in which they were unable to play a more
    active part. (See notes to 35th Regt. of Foot.) Lord George m., 29th
    June, 1818, Louisa, dau. of the Hon. F. Rodney, and had issue. Was
    M.P. for West Sussex, 1832–41, and Gent. of the Bed-chamber to
    Prince Albert. D. 1873.

Hered. Prince of Nassau-Usingen.

    Son of Duke Bernard of Nassau, who sent a contingent of Nassau
    troops to fight at Waterloo. In the Wellington Despatches is a
    letter from Wellington to Duke Bernard, in July, 1815, in which he
    speaks highly of the bravery of the young Prince.

                          EXTRA AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Maj. Hon. Henry Percy, 14th Lt. Dns.

    Sent home with the Waterloo Despatch, and recd. the bonus usual on
    such occasions and a brevet of Lt.-Col. A Jew—an agent of
    Rothschild, who was at Ghent when news was brought to Louis XVIII.
    of the defeat of the French army, drew his own conclusions from the
    king’s happy face which he saw through a window—set off at once for
    London and did his little business on the Stock Exchange a few hours
    before Percy reached the metropolis. 5th son of Algernon, 1st Earl
    of Beverley, by Isabella, 2nd dau. of Peter Burrell, of Beckenham.
    Was A.D.C. to Sir J. Moore at Corunna. C.B. D. unm. 15 April, 1825.

Capt. Lord Arthur Hill, h. p.

    2nd son of Arthur, Marquis of Downshire, by Mary, Baroness Sandys in
    her own right. Succeeded his mother as Baron Sandys in 1836.
    Lt.-Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 2nd Dns. D. unm. 1860.

Lt. Hon. George Cathcart, 6th Dn. Gds.

    3rd son of William, 10th Baron, and 1st Earl, Cathcart, by
    Elizabeth, dau. of Andrew Elliott, Gov. of New York. Bn. 12th May,
    1794. M., 1824, Lady Georgiana Greville (dau. of Louisa, Countess of
    Mansfield, by her 2nd husband, the Hon. Robert Greville), and had
    issue. G.C.B. Lt.-Gen., Com. of the forces at the Cape of Good Hope.
    Commanded the 4th Division of the British Army in the Crimea, and
    fell at Inkerman. He was a worthy descendant of the founder of his
    family—Sir Alan de Cathcart—whose bravery at the battle of Loudoun
    Hill is thus recorded in an old rhyme:—

                 “A knight that then was in his rout,
                 Worthy and wight, stalwart and stout,
                 Courteous and fair, and of good fame,
                 Sir Alan Cathcart was his name.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

                                GENERAL.

H.R.H. the Prince of Orange, W.

    Bn. 6th Dec., 1792. Appointed a maj.-gen. in the Brit. Army in Dec.,
    1813. Succeeded his father, William I. King of Holland (who d. in
    1843), as William II. Became a F.-M. of England in 1845. D. in 1849,
    and was succeeded by his son, the reigning King of Holland.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Lt.-Col. Baron Tripp, 60th Foot.

    Ernest Otto, Baron Tripp, C.B., was maj. in the 60th Rifles and
    brevet lt.-col. He d. 1816.

Capt. Lord John Somerset, h.p.

    Brother to Lord Fitzroy Somerset. Bn. 30th Aug., 1787. M., 4th Dec.,
    1814, Lady Catherine Annesley, and had issue. Col., 10th Jan., 1837.
    D. 3rd Oct., 1846, whilst holding the appointment of Inspecting
    Field Officer, Recruiting District.

Capt. Hon. Francis Russell, h. p.

    Placed on h. p., 2nd Garrison Batt., 28th April, 1814. Restored to
    f. p. as capt., 57th Regt., in 1816. Afterwards capt. and lt.-col.,
    Coldstream Guards. Eldest son of Lord Wm. Russell, who was murdered
    by his valet in 1840. In the _Army List_ for 1815 is styled
    “Honourable.” May have been a royal page.

                          EXTRA AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Capt. the Earl of March, 52nd Foot.

    At the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo, the Earl of March, then a lt. in the
    13th Lt. Dns., and serving as A.D.C. to Visct. Wellington, entered
    the breach as a volunteer with the storming party of the 52nd. The
    Prince of Orange and Lord Fitzroy Somerset were Lord March’s
    companions in this adventure. On the following morning, when
    breakfasting with Wellington, they received a gentle reproof, being
    staff officers, for thus risking their lives. Succeeded his father
    as 5th Duke of Richmond in 1819. Placed on h. p., 25th July, 1816.
    Served in the Pa. with the 52nd Regt. and was severely wounded at
    the battle of Orthes. M., 10th April, 1817, Lady Charlotte Paget,
    eldest dau. of the 1st Marquis of Anglesey, and had issue. A.D.C. to
    the Queen. K.G. Lt.-col. in the army, and col. Sussex Militia. D.
    21st Oct., 1860.

Capt. Viscount Bury, 1st Ft. Gds.

    Eldest son of William Charles, 4th Earl of Albemarle, by the Hon.
    Eliz. Southwell, dau. of Edward, Lord de Clifford. Bn. 2nd June,
    1794. Served in the Pa. M., 4th May, 1816, Frances, dau. of Charles
    Steer, of Chichester. Succeeded as 5th earl in 1849. D. s. p. 15th
    March, 1851.

Lt. H. Webster, 9th Lt. Dns.

    Afterwards Col. Henry Vassall Webster, K.T.S., 2nd son of Sir
    Godfrey Webster, Bart., by Eliz. Lady Holland, dau. and heir of
    Robt. Vassall, of Jamaica. Made a Knt. of Wilhelm of the Netherlands
    for his services at Waterloo. M. Grace, dau. of Samuel Boddington.
    Killed himself in a fit of insanity, 19th April, 1847.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

The Earl of Uxbridge, G.C.B., W.

    “The Prince Murat of the British Army.” This brilliant cavalry
    leader served with distinction in the early part of the war in the
    Pa. The way he handled the cavalry at Waterloo is a matter of
    history known to every Briton. Wounded in the right knee during the
    last charge; his right leg was amputated after the battle and buried
    under a tree. A board was afterwards affixed to this tree with this
    verse:—

                 “Here lies the Marquis of Anglesey’s leg;
                 Pray for the rest of his body, I beg.”

    Was created Marquis of Anglesey 23rd June, 1815. Bn. 17th May, 1768.
    Succeeded his father as 2nd Earl of Uxbridge in 1812. Attained the
    rank of F.-M. in Nov., 1846. Was twice m., and left issue by both
    wives. D. 29th April, 1854. Bd. in Lichfield Cathedral.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Maj. W. Thornhill, 7th Hussars, W.

    2nd son of Bache Thornhill, of Stanton-in-Peak, near Bakewell, by
    Jane, dau. of Edward Gould, of Mansfield Woodhouse. Promoted
    lt.-col. of 7th Hussars 12th Aug., 1819. K.H. He had received his
    brevet lt.-colcy. in June, 1815, at Lord Anglesey’s request. D. at
    Wimborne, 9th Dec., 1850.

Capt. H.B. Seymour, 18th Hussars, W.

    “The strongest man in the British Army,” who is said to “have slain
    more men at Waterloo than any other single individual.” Was taken
    prisoner on the 18th June, but rescued by some of our cavalry sent
    by Wellington himself for the purpose. He is the identical “Capt.
    Trevanion” in Charles Lever’s _Harry Lorrequer_, who was grossly
    insulted by a French officer—a noted bully—at a restaurant in Paris
    a few weeks after Waterloo. After repeated insults the French bully
    ordered a glass of brandy, and, whilst sitting just opposite
    Trevanion, drank it off, saying, in a loud voice that could be heard
    all over the café, “A votre courage, Anglais.” “Trevanion slowly
    rose from his chair, displaying to the astonished Frenchman the
    immense proportions and gigantic frame of a man well known as the
    largest officer in the British Army. With one stride he was beside
    the chair of the Frenchman, and with the speed of lightning, he
    seized his nose by one hand while with the other he grasped his
    lower jaw, and, wrenching open his mouth with the strength of an
    ogre, he spat down his throat.” The bully’s jaw was broken by his
    adversary’s iron grasp, and he disappeared to be seen no more.

    Horace Beauchamp Seymour was transferred, in 1815, to a troop in the
    1st Life Guards. Was put on h. p. 1819, K.C.H.; M.P. for Lisburn.
    3rd son of Adml. Lord Hugh Seymour, by Lady Anne Waldegrave, dau. of
    2nd Earl Waldegrave. M. twice, and by his first wife (Eliz., dau. of
    Sir L. Palk, Bt.) was father of Adml. Lord Alcester. D. at Brighton
    23rd Nov., 1851.

                          EXTRA AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Capt. T. Wildman, 7th Hussars, W.

    Purchased the Newstead Abbey estate for £95,000 from Mr. Clawton,
    who had bought it of Lord Byron for £14,000. Eldest son of Thos.
    Wildman of Bacton Hall, Suffolk, by Sarah, dau. of Henry Hardinge,
    of Durham. Served at Corunna and in many of the subsequent
    engagements. M., 1816, Louisa Preisig, a Swiss lady. D. s. p., 20
    Sept., 1859.

Capt. J. Fraser, 7th Hussars, W.

    Aftds. Sir James John Fraser, Bart. Succeeded his brother, Sir Wm.
    Fraser, in 1827. Son of Wm. Fraser (a direct descendant of 1st Lord
    Lovat), who was created a bart. in 1806, by Elizabeth Farquharson.
    M. Charlotte, only child of D. Craufurd. D. 5th June, 1834, and was
    succeeded by his son, Wm. Augustus.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

Lord Hill, G.C.B.

    The 2nd son and 4th child of a family of sixteen. His father was Sir
    John Hill, a Shropshire bart. His mother, the dau. and co-heir of
    John Chambré, of Petton, in the same county. Bn. 11th Aug., 1772, at
    The Hall, in the village of Prees, in Shropshire. Entered the 53rd
    Regt. as lieut., in 1793. Was A.D.C. to Gen. O’Hara, at Toulon.
    Commanded the 90th Regt. at the age of 23. Appointed to a brigade
    command in the Pa., in 1808, and to a division in 1809. Greatly
    distinguished himself at Arroyo and Almaraz—victories that were
    entirely his. K.C.B. In 1814 was created a baron of England. At
    Waterloo had a horse shot under him—was rolled over and severely
    bruised. In a letter to his sister, dated 24th July, 1815, he said:
    “I verily believe there never was so tremendous a battle fought as
    that at Waterloo.” C.-in-C. 1828–42. Created a viscount, 1842, with
    remainder to his nephew, Sir Rowland Hill. D., unm., 10th Dec.,
    1842, at Hardwick Grange.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Lt.-Col. C. Hill, R.H. Gds., W.

    Brother to the above. Bn. 6th Dec., 1781. As a Maj.-Gen. commanded
    the forces at Madras. Equerry to H.R.H. the Duchess of Kent. D.
    unm., 20th Jan., 1845.

Maj. R. Egerton, 34th Foot.

    9th and youngest son of Philip Egerton, of Oulton, Cheshire, by
    Frances, dau. and co-heir of Sir Griffith Jefferies, Knt. As a
    subaltern served in North America with the 29th Foot, and in South
    America with the 89th Foot. Served with the 2nd Batt. 34th Foot in
    the Pa., in 1809. In 1810 was appointed to the Staff of Wellington’s
    army. In 1812 was A.D.C. to Lord (then Sir Rowland) Hill, and served
    in that capacity at Waterloo, and with the army of occupation in
    France. In 1828 Lord Hill chose Col. Egerton for his first A.D.C.
    and private sec. C.B. Par. medal with 8 clasps. Col.-in-Chf. 46th
    Foot. M., 1st Dec., 1814, Arabella, youngest dau. of H. Tomkinson,
    of Dorfold. D. at Eaton Banks, Cheshire, aged 72, 21st Nov., 1854.

Maj. C.H. Churchill, 1st Ft. Gds.

    Col. Chatham Horace Churchill, C.B., appears to have sprung from the
    Dorsetshire family of this name. This officer, who took a prominent
    part in the Waterloo drama, evinced the enthusiasm which
    characterized his great namesake a century before. “By G—, they
    deserve to have Bonaparte!” he was heard to exclaim, as he watched
    the French “Invincibles” ride into the jaws of death. Writing home
    to his family the day after the battle he said: “I had rather have
    fallen yesterday as a British Infantryman, or a French Cuirassier,
    than die ten years hence in my bed!” He d. in action at Gwalior,
    India, 27th Dec., 1843, whilst holding the appointment of Q.-M.-G.
    in India. He left a dau., Louisa, who m. Lt.-Col. John Michel, who
    became F.-M., 1886. See Appendix.

Capt. D. Mackworth, 7th Foot.

    Aftds. Sir Digby Mackworth, Bart. As a subaltern in 7th Fusiliers,
    was at the battle of Albuera, and was one of the 150 men who
    remained unwounded in the 7th and 23rd Regts. at the close of the
    action. Succeeded his father Sir Digby, in 1838. K.H. Lt.-Col. 1837.
    Was twice married and left issue. Died at Glen Usk, co. Monmouth,
    1852, aged 63.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. Hon. O. Bridgeman, 1st Ft. Gds., W.

    3rd son of Orlando, 2nd Baron Bradford, by Lucy Elizabeth, dau. of
    4th Visct. Torrington. M., 1817, Selina, dau. of Francis, Earl of
    Kilmorey, and had issue. Placed on h. p. 1819. D. 1827.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

Sir Thomas Picton, G.C.B., K.

    Son of Thos. Picton, of Poyston, co. Pembroke. The leader of the
    “fighting” third division in the Par. War. Victory and glory went
    hand in hand with this heroic leader, whose memory is so dear to
    every Briton. Received a probably mortal wound at Quatre Bras but
    concealed the fact from everyone, excepting an old servant, in order
    that he might be present at what he foresaw was to be a tremendous
    struggle. Fell whilst gloriously leading a charge of infantry to
    repel “one of the most serious attacks made by the enemy on our
    position.” It is said that on the morning of the 18th June, one of
    the first questions asked by Napoleon of his Staff was: “_Où est la
    division de Picton?_” A few hours later, the broken ranks and
    decimated companies of many French regts. answered the question.
    Picton’s body was conveyed to England and interred in the burial
    ground of St. George’s, Hanover Square. In 1859 his remains were
    finally deposited in St. Paul’s Cathedral. Pensions were granted to
    the sisters of Sir Thos. Picton, G.C.B., in consideration of his
    great services.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Capt. Algernon Langton, 61st Foot, W.

    3rd son of Bennet Langton, of Langton, co. Lincoln, by Mary, dowager
    Countess of Rothes. Wounded at Quatre Bras. Made a bt.-maj. On h. p.
    1817. Took holy orders. M. Mary Anne, sister of Edward Drewe, of
    Grange, co. Devon, and had issue a son, Bennet. D. 1829.

Capt. J. Tyler, 93rd Foot, W.

    Picton’s first A.D.C. in the Pa. Was by his General’s side when he
    was killed at Waterloo. Sent home with the body. Made bt.-maj. for
    Waterloo. Placed on h. p. 1820. Appointed junior maj. of the 97th
    Regt. in 1829. Belonged to a Glamorganshire family. D. 4th June,
    1842.

Capt. N. Chambers, 1st. Ft. Gds., K.

    Son of George Chambers by the Hon. Jane Rodney, eldest dau. of the
    “Great” Lord Rodney by his 2nd wife, Henrietta Clies. Killed a few
    minutes after Picton fell.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. B. Price, h. p.

    Barrington Price commenced his career in the 43rd Regt., and was
    present at Vimiero and Corunna. Capt. 102nd Regt. 1811; h. p. 50th,
    1815. D. in London, 21st Jan., 1816. Grandson of Robert Price, of
    Foxley, who married, in June, 1746, Sarah, dau. of John, 1st Visct.
    Barrington. It is worthy of note that it was a Welsh gentleman of
    the name of Price who was the first to smoke tobacco in the streets
    of London.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

Sir Henry Clinton, G.C.B.

    2nd son of Sir H. Clinton, K.C.B., the C.-in-C. of the Brit. forces
    in America during the war, by Harriet, dau. and co-heir of Thos.
    Carter. Received the thanks of Parliament for his services at
    Waterloo. M., in 1799, 2nd dau. of Francis, Lord Elcho. D. s. p.
    11th Dec., 1829.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Capt. F. Dawkins, 1st Ft. Gds.

    4th son of Henry Dawkins, M.P. for Aldborough, by Augusta, dau. of
    Gen. Sir H. Clinton, Commander of the forces in North America. Bn.
    1796. M., 1836, Ann, eldest dau. of Gen. Sir Howard Douglas, Bart.,
    and had issue. Dep. Q.-M.-G. in the Ionian Islands, 1837. Col. in
    the army, 1841. D. 1847.

Capt. J. Gurwood, 10th Hussars, W.

    As a subaltern in 52nd Regt., commanded the forlorn hope, at the
    lesser breach, at the assault on Ciudad Rodrigo, and received a
    severe wound in his head. On this occasion he took the Governor,
    Gen. Barrié, prisoner, whose sword was presented to Gurwood by
    Wellington. Came of poor but honest parents in the East Riding of
    Yorkshire. Was a frequent visitor at Langton Hall, near Malton, the
    seat of his friend, Col. (aftds. Maj.-Gen.) Norcliffe, K.H., who
    persuaded Gurwood to sit to Morton, the painter, for his portrait,
    which is still at Langton. Editor of _The Wellington Dispatches_.
    C.B. and Col. Dep. Lt. of the Tower. D. at Brighton, 25 Dec., 1843.
    Bd. in the Tower Chapel.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

Chas., Count Alten, K.C.B.

    Served throughout the Par. War with the German Legion. Specially
    mentioned in the Waterloo dispatch. Aftds. Minister of War and
    Inspector-Gen. Hanoverian army.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Lt. W. Havelock, 43rd Foot, W.

    “_El chico bianco_” of the Par. War. Bn. 1795. Eldest son of Wm.
    Havelock, of Ingress Park, Kent. Ensign, 43rd Regt., 12th July,
    1810. K.H. Killed in action at Ramnuggur, India, 22nd Nov., 1848,
    whilst commanding 14th Lt. Dragoons. The following account of the
    sanguinary action with the Sikh army is given in the _Annual
    Register_ for 1848:—“A more fearful sight was perhaps never
    witnessed on a field of battle, for the British army stood drawn up
    silent spectators of the bloody conflict of 450 sabres against an
    army amounting to more than 15,000 men with heavy cannon ... the
    gallant Havelock, in the front of his regt., charged amidst the
    undeviated fire from the batteries of the enemy, and was almost cut
    to pieces.”

Bt.-Maj. A. Heise, 2nd Lt. Batt. K.G.L.

    Aftds. Lt.-Col. Sir Augustus Heise, K.C.H. D. at Tübingen, in State
    of Wurtemburg, 1st Aug., 1819.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                          LIEUTENANT-GENERAL.

Sir Charles Colville, G.C.B.

    Commanded the Reserves at Hal, on 18th June, and was not present at
    Waterloo. Commanded the British troops at the siege of Cambray, and
    accompanied the allied army to Paris. 2nd son of John, 9th Baron
    Colville (and father of 11th Baron), by Amelia Webber. Served in the
    Pa., and was wounded when commanding the principal attack on
    “Badajoz’s breeches,” 6th April, 1812. Bn. 7th Aug., 1770. M. 16th
    Feb., 1818, Jane eldest dau. of Wm. Mure, of Caldwell, co. Ayr.
    G.C.B.; G.C.H.; K.T.S.; Col. 5th Foot; Gen. and Gov. of Mauritius
    1828. D. 27th May, 1843, at Hampstead.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Capt. J. Jackson, 37th Foot.

    Capt. 6th Dn. Gds. 4th Dec., 1817. Aftds. Gen. Sir James Jackson,
    G.C.B., and Col.-in-Chf., K.D.G. Served in the Pa. and in Arabia,
    and was for some time Lt.-Gov. at the Cape of Good Hope. 3rd son of
    Col. George Jackson, of Enniscoe, by Maria, only dau. and heir of
    Wm. Rutledge, of Foxford, co. Mayo. D. 31st Dec., 1871.

Lt. F.W. Frankland, 2nd Foot.

    Aftds. Sir Fredk. Wm. Frankland, Bart., of Thirkelby, co. York.
    Descended from Oliver Cromwell, through his daughter Frances
    Cromwell’s marriage with Sir John Russell, Bart. Served at
    Pampeluna, the battles of the Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, Bidassoa, and
    Toulouse. Sir Frederick m. Katharine, only dau. of Isaac Scarth, and
    left at his decease, in 1878, a son, the late Sir Wm. Frankland,
    Bart., R.E., of Thirkelby.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. Lord James Hay, 1st Ft. Gds.

    2nd son of George, 7th Marquis of Tweeddale, by Lady Hannah
    Maitland, dau. of 7th Lord Lauderdale. M., 1813, Eliz., only child
    of James Forbes, of Seaton, co. Aberdeen. Lt.-gen. and col. 86th
    Regt. D. 17th Aug., 1862, leaving issue.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

V. Count Alten.

    Count Victor Alten distinguished himself in the Pa. D. at Osnabruck,
    a lt.-gen. in the Hanoverian Service.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. Baron Estorff, 2nd Dns., K.G.L.

    D. at Osnabruck, 28th April, 1827.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. Einem, K.G.L.

    Afterwards Lt.-Col. Gottfried von Einem. D. 23rd Aug., 1820.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir John Vandeleur, K.C.B.

    Only son of Richard Vandeleur of Rutland, Queen’s Co., a captain 9th
    Lt. Dns., by Elinor, dau. of John Firman of Firmount. Bn. 1763.
    Served under Lord Lake in India; commanded a cavalry brigade in the
    Pa., and received the gold cross. G.C.B. for Waterloo. Gen. and
    Col.-in-Chf. 16th Lt. Dns. in 1830. M., 1829, Catherine, dau. of
    Rev. John Glasse, and had issue. D. 1st Nov., 1849.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. W. Armstrong, 19th Lt. Dns.

    The 19th Dragoons was Sir John Vandeleur’s old regt. Wm. Armstrong
    was placed on h. p. as capt. in the Royal African Corps in 1819. In
    the h. p. list 1830.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Maj. M. Childers, 11th Lt. Dns.

    Eldest son, by a 2nd marriage, of Chas. Walbanke-Childers, who
    assumed the latter name on inheriting the estates of his
    grandfather, Leonard Childers, of Carr House, co. York. Michael
    Childers became jun. lt.-col. of 11th Dns. in 1820. C.B. Col. 1837.
    D. at Sand Hutton, co. York, 9th Jan., 1854, unm.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Maj.-Gen. George Cooke, W.

    Son of Col. G. Cooke, of Harefield Park, Mdx., and brother of Sir
    H.F. Cooke (private sec. to Duke of York) and Adl. Sir Edward Cooke.
    His mother was Penelope, sister of Adl. Boyer. Appointed ens. 1st
    Guards, 1784. In 1794 served in Flanders, and was A.D.C. to
    Maj.-Gen. (aftds. F.-M.) Hulse. As lt.-col. in the Guards was sev.
    wnded. when serving in Holland in 1799. Held a command in the Pa.
    under Sir T. Graham. Appointed maj.-gen. 4th June, 1811. Lost his
    right arm at Waterloo. K.C.B. 22nd June, 1815; K. St. George of
    Russia, &c.; Col.-in-Chf. 40th Foot. D. 3rd Feb., 1887, at
    Harefield, Mdx.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. G. Disbrowe, 1st Ft. Gds.

    The Desboroughs, or Disbrowes, were brought into notice during the
    Civil Wars when John Desborough, a noted Republican, exchanged his
    plough for a sword, and attained high renown as a soldier. The
    Gen.’s family came still more into notice when he married Cromwell’s
    youngest sister. George Disbrowe was placed on h. p. as lt.-col.
    1821. K.H. He was 2nd son of Edward Disbrowe, of Walton-upon-Trent,
    co. Derby, by Lady Charlotte Hobart, youngest dau. of George, 3rd
    Earl of Buckinghamshire. Col. G. Disbrowe d. about 1875.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Ens. Augustus Cuyler, 2nd Ft. Gds.

    Bn. 14th Aug., 1796. 2nd son of Gen. Cornelius Cuyler, who was
    created a Bart. in 1814; lt. and capt. same regt. 1817; lt.-col. h.
    p. 1826.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir James Kempt, K.C.B., W.

    Bn. in Edinburgh about 1764. Son of Gavin Kempt, of Batley Hall,
    Hants. Entd. army 1783. A.D.C. to Abercromby in Holland. Accompanied
    Sir Ralph to the Mediterranean and served as his A.D.C. and military
    sec. until that Gen.’s death. Served under Lord Hutchinson in Egypt
    in similar position. Commanded a brigade in the 3rd division in the
    Pa. Received the gold cross with three clasps; G.C.B. for Waterloo;
    Gov. Nova Scotia; Gov.-Gen. Canada; Master-Gen. of the Ordnance;
    Col.-in-Chf. 1st Foot, 7th Aug., 1846. D. in London 20th Dec., 1854,
    leaving £120,000 in personalty.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. the Hon. Charles Gore, 85th Foot.

    Bn. 1793. Began his career in 6th Regt. Foot. Exchanged to 43rd
    Regt. Joined this regt. in the Pa. 1811, and was one of the storming
    party of Fort San Francisco, at the investment of Ciudad Rodrigo.
    A.D.C. to Sir Andrew Barnard at Salamanca, and in a similar capacity
    to Sir J. Kempt at Vittoria and subsequent battles. Accompanied
    Kempt to Canada in 1814, and returned just in time to fight at
    Waterloo, where he had three horses shot under him. Son of Arthur
    Gore, 2nd Earl of Arran, by his 3rd wife, Eliz. Underwood. G.C.B.;
    K.H.; Gen. and col. 6th Foot; Lt.-Gov. Chelsea Hospital. M. 1824
    Sarah, dau. of Hon. James Fraser of Nova Scotia, and had issue. D.
    4th Sept., 1869.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. Charles Eeles, 95th Foot, K.

    Brother of Lt.-Col. Wm. Eeles, K.H., who d. in command of 1st Batt.
    Rifle Brigade in 1837.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

The Hon. Sir William Ponsonby, K.C.B., K.

    Lost his life at Waterloo from being badly mounted. Whilst leading a
    cavalry charge against the “Polish Lancers” his horse stuck in a
    heavy ploughed field and was unable to extricate itself. “He took a
    picture and watch out of his pocket and was just delivering them to
    his A.D.C. to give his wife when the lancers were on him.” Both
    Ponsonby and his companion were immediately killed by the Polish
    cavalry, who, later in the day, were almost annihilated by the Heavy
    Brigade which Ponsonby had commanded. He was 2nd son of Wm., 1st
    Baron Ponsonby, of Imokilly, co. Cork, by Hon. Louisa Molesworth,
    4th dau. of F.-M. Viscount Molesworth. M. 20th Jan., 1807, Hon.
    Georgiana Fitzroy, dau. of Charles, 1st Baron Southampton, and had a
    son, born posthumous, 6th Feb., 1816, who succeeded as 3rd Baron
    Ponsonby.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. B. Christie, 5th Dn. Gds.

    Braithwaite Christie was promoted capt. in 5th D.G. 3rd July, 1817,
    and in 1824 was senior capt. in the regt. He d. at Belmont 23rd
    Sept., 1825. He was 3rd son of Adl. Alexander Christie of Baberton
    (2nd son of Archibald Christie of Stenton), by Eliz., dau. of Adl.
    Richard Braithwaite.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Maj. D. Evans, 5th W.I. Regt.

    Afterwards the celebrated Sir De Lacy Evans of British Legion and
    Crimean fame. Bn. at Moig, Ireland, 1787. Educated at the Military
    Academy, Woolwich. Gained distinction in the Par. War by
    volunteering for storming parties. Served in the American War of
    1812. Fought at Bladensburg, where Gen. Ross gained fame for himself
    and his descendants. At Washington, with a very small force of
    infantry, De Lacy Evans captured the Congress House. Was engaged at
    Baltimore and New Orleans, and returned in time for Waterloo, where
    he had two horses shot under him. Commanded British Legion in Spain
    1835–7 and 2nd division in Crimea. G.C.B., and was decorated with
    various Spanish orders; was also a Grand Officer of the Legion of
    Honour; Col.-in-Chf. 21st Fusiliers 1853. D. 9th Jan., 1870. Bd. in
    Kensal Green Cemetery, M.I. See Appendix.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Maj. T. Reignolds, 2nd Dns., K.

    Doubtless was the officer mentioned above as being with Sir W.
    Ponsonby when he was killed, as there were none of that Gen.’s
    A.D.C.s killed at Waterloo. He left orphan children to whom a pens.
    was granted.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir John Byng, K.C.B.

    Youngest son of George Byng, of Wrotham Park, Middx. (grandson of
    George, 1st Viscount Torrington), by Anne, dau. of Wm. Connolly, of
    Castletown, Ireland. Twice received the thanks of Parliament for his
    eminent services in the Pa. and at Waterloo, and an augmentation to
    his arms for himself and his descendants by royal grant. G.C.B.;
    G.C.H.; K.M.T.; K.S.G.; P.C.; F.-M., Oct., 1855; Col.-in-Chf. 29th
    Foot; Governor of Londonderry and Culmore. M. 1st Miss Mackenzie,
    and had issue; m. 2ndly, 1809, Marianne, 2nd dau. of Sir Walter
    James Bart., and had issue. Created Baron Strafford in 1835, and
    Earl of Strafford in 1847. D. 3rd June, 1860.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. H. Dumaresq, 9th Foot, W.

    Fought in 13 battles during the Par. War. Also at the sieges of
    Burgos and Badajoz, and assaults on forts of Salamanca. On the two
    former occasions served as a volunteer with the Engineers, and on
    the latter was again a volunteer; being foremost in the assault of
    that redoubt, he received from the officer commanding at Vittoria
    convent the terms of his capitulation, which document he delivered
    to Lord Wellington. Was a lt.-col. after nine years’ service (so
    gazetted in June, 1817). Was shot through the lungs at Hougoumont,
    but, being at the time in charge of a message to Wellington, he went
    on to the Duke and delivered it. Ball never extracted. D. in New
    South Wales 5th March, 1838, age 46, whilst holding the post of
    manager of the Australian Agricultural Co. He was a native of
    Jersey. M. 19th Aug., 1828, Eliz. Sophia Danvers, and left issue.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. Wm. Stothert, 3rd Ft. Gds., K.

    In 1814 this officer was sev. wnded. in the attack on
    Bergen-op-Zoom. The only family bearing this name, that the Editor
    has been able to trace, came from Kirkcudbrightshire.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir Denis Pack, K.C.B., W.

    Only son of the Very Rev. Thos. Pack, Dean of Ossory, by Catherine,
    dau. and heiress of Denis Sullivan, of Berehaven, co. Cork. Five
    times received the thanks of Parliament for his military services.
    Was one of the most dashing leaders of a brigade in the Par. War.
    “He was scarred with wounds and covered with glory.” Commanded the
    71st Regt. at Buenos Ayres when that city was retaken by the
    Spaniards, and was sev. wnded. and taken prisoner. When he escaped
    from prison, Pack was appointed to the command of a provisional
    battalion stationed at Colonia. His fidgety and irascible temper
    somewhat tried those who had to serve under him. One morning there
    appeared written in chalk on the door of a barn the following
    distich:—

                  “The devil break the gaoler’s back
                  That let thee loose, sweet Denis Pack.”

    For his services at Waterloo he was made Col.-in-Chf. of the York
    Chasseurs. M. 10th July, 1816, Lady Eliz. Beresford, youngest dau.
    of George, 1st Marquis of Waterford, and had issue. His 2nd son was
    Lord Beresford’s heir, and assumed the surname of Beresford. Sir
    Denis d. 24th July, 1823.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Maj. E. L’Estrange, 71st Foot, K.

    Edmund L’Estrange was a hero in every sense of the word. He was
    eldest son of Capt. Anthony L’Estrange of the 88th Regt.—one of the
    Irish representatives of the ancient family of Le Strange, of
    Hunstanton, co. Norfolk. Was A.D.C. to Sir Denis Pack in the Par.
    War, and his especial gallantry, on several occasions, attracted the
    notice of Wellington. Made a brevet maj. at the early age of 26. His
    right leg was shattered by a round shot at Waterloo, and he died
    soon after suffering amputation. Had he lived, a great future was in
    store for him. A pension was granted to his mother whom he had
    supported.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Bt.-Maj. Chas. Smyth, 95th Foot, K.

    Bn. 8th Jan., 1786. Distinguished himself in the Par. War, and was
    promoted brevet maj. in 1815. D. from wounds received at Quatre
    Bras. 4th son of the Rt. Hon. John Smyth, of Heath Hall, near
    Wakefield, by Lady Georgiana Fitzroy, eldest dau. of 3rd Duke of
    Grafton.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Lord Edward Somerset, K.C.B.

    Commanded the 4th Lt. Dns. in the Par. War. In the first Cavalry
    charge at Waterloo, Lord Edward Somerset lost his cocked hat, and
    went to the charge bare-headed. On his return, whilst looking for
    his hat, a cannon-ball took off the flap of his coat and killed his
    horse. He donned a Life Guard’s helmet and wore it during the
    battle. Bn. in 1776. 4th son of Henry, 5th Duke of Beaufort. M.,
    1805, Louisa, youngest dau. of 2nd Visct. Courtenay. G.C.B., K.T.S.
    Col.-in-Chf. 4th Lt. Dns. 1836. D. 1st Sept., 1842, leaving issue.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. H. Somerset, 18th Hussars.

    Afterwards Lt.-Gen. Sir Henry Somerset, K.C.B. and K.H. Col.-in-Chf.
    25th Foot. Bn. 30th Dec., 1794. Eldest son of Lord Charles Somerset,
    by 4th dau. of Visct. Courtenay. M., 1st April, 1817, Frances, dau.
    of Adml. Sir H. Heathcote, and had issue. Served in the first Kaffir
    War, and was afterwards C.-in-C. at Bombay. D. 15th Feb., 1862,
    leaving issue.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir John Lambert, K.C.B.

    2nd son of Capt. Robert Lambert, R.N. (2nd son of Sir John Lambert,
    2nd Bart.), by Catherine, dau. of Edward Byndloss, of Jamaica.
    Succeeded to the command of the British troops before New Orleans,
    in Jan. 1815, on the deaths of Generals Pakenham and Gibbs, who
    nobly fell whilst heading an attack on the “Crescent City.” The
    disorganised state of the British troops, and the utter
    impracticability of forcing the American entrenchments, induced
    General Lambert to retreat, which he was able to do without meeting
    with any opposition, having captured Fort Bowyer. With their natural
    love of exaggeration, the Americans magnified both their victory and
    our defeat:—

                  “The English had ten thousand,
                    Jackson only one;
                  But what was that to Jackson
                    When him they turned their backs on?”

    By a forced march from Ostend, Lambert’s brigade arrived at Waterloo
    just as the battle was commencing. G.C.B. Col.-in-Chf. 10th Foot,
    1824. M., 19th Oct., 1816, a dau. of John Mount, of Brocklehurst, in
    the New Forest. D. at Thames Ditton, 14th Sept., 1847, leaving
    issue.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. T. Baynes, 39th Foot.

    Promoted capt. in 1824, and placed on h. p. 20th Nov., 1828. D. at
    Brussels, 27th May, 1847.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Maj. H.G.W. Smith, 95th Foot, W.

    Afterwards the renowned Sir Harry George Wakelyn Smith, Bart.,
    G.C.B. and Col.-in-Chf. Rifle Brigade. Bn. at Whittlesea, Isle of
    Ely; son of a local surgeon. Entered the 95th Rifles in 1805. Was
    present at the capture of Monte Video. Served at twelve general
    actions in the Pa. and was afterwards A.A.G. in America. Served at
    Bladensburg and the destruction of Washington. Sent home with
    despatches. Went out again under Sir E. Pakenham, and was present at
    the attack upon the enemy’s lines near New Orleans. Promoted brevet
    lt.-col. for his services at Waterloo. Commanded a division in the
    Kaffir War of 1834–5. In 1840 was A.-G. in India. K.C.B. for battle
    of Maharajpore. G.C.B. for the Sutlej Campaign. Created a baronet
    for his victory at Aliwal. C.-in-C. at Cape of Good Hope in Kaffir
    War of 1848. He m., in 1816, a young Spanish lady, Juana Maria de
    los Dolores de Leon, who had appealed to him for protection on the
    day after the assault on Badajoz in Apr. 1812. D. in London, without
    issue, 12th Oct., 1860, and was buried at Whittlesea. M.I., in St.
    Mary’s Church.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir Colquhoun Grant, K.C.B., W.

    “Descended from the Grants of Gartenbeg.” In order to show the
    antiquity of the great “Clan Grant,” one of the name asserted that
    the verse in the Old Testament, saying, “There were giants in the
    earth in those days” had been wrongly translated, and that it ought
    to read: “There were _Grants_ in those days.” This genealogical
    flight reminds one of the story of a negro servant, Deemers by name,
    who, hearing his Yankee master everlastingly talking of his
    ancestors, cut into the conversation one fine morning when waiting
    at table with the following: “Massa, an ancestor of mine is
    mentioned in de Bible; I heard de minister read out last Sunday a
    chapter about a coloured man—one nigger Deemers!”

    Colquhoun Grant commanded the 72nd Regt. in the expedition to the
    Cape of Good Hope, under Sir David Baird, in 1806, and on 8th Jan.
    was wounded in the action with the Batavian army. In Sir D. Baird’s
    despatch, announcing the victory of the British troops, occurs this
    passage: “Your lordship will perceive the name of Lt.-Col. Grant
    among the wounded; but the heroic spirit of this officer was not
    subdued by his misfortune, and he continued to lead his men to glory
    as long as an enemy was opposed to the 72nd Regt.” The following is
    an authentic anecdote:—

    Sir Colquhoun Grant, being in command of a regt. at Clonmel, he gave
    offence in some way to an honest shopkeeper, named Mulcahy, who
    struck him on the parade, in presence of his whole corps. The
    officers rushed forward to seize the delinquent, but Sir Colquhoun
    interposed, declaring that he had been the aggressor, and as the
    gentleman thought proper to resent his conduct in so gross a manner,
    it remained for him to seek the usual reparation. “Oh!” exclaimed
    Mulcahy, “if it’s for fighting you are, I’ll fight you; but it shall
    neither be with swords nor pistols, nor anything else but my two
    fists” (and fine big mutton fists they were, sure enough). “Well,
    then,” replied the gallant officer, “with all my heart. By insulting
    you, I have put myself on a level with you, and of course cannot
    refuse to meet you on your own terms. Come along, sir.” The men were
    dismissed; and Col. Grant, accompanied by his adversary and some
    mutual friends, repaired to the mess-room, where he very speedily
    closed up Mr. Mulcahy’s peepers, and sent him home perfectly
    satisfied. That was the proudest day of Mulcahy’s life, and many a
    time has he boasted of the black eye he got from a K.C.B., as if it
    were an honourable ordinary emblazoned upon his escutcheon. “Ever
    since that morning,” would he say, “let me meet Sir Colquhoun Grant,
    where I might, in town or country, among lords or ladies, dressed in
    plain clothes or dizened out in gold and scarlet, he would give me
    his hand and say,‘How are you, Billy?’”

    In Aug., 1808, Grant was appointed lt.-col. of the 15th Lt. Dns.,
    and served in the Pa. Had five horses shot under him at Waterloo.
    G.C.B., G.C.H. Col.-in-Chf. 15th Hussars, 1827. Lt.-Gen. Succeeded
    to a large property at Frampton, co. Dorset, 1833, M. Marcia, dau.
    of Rev. J. Richards, of Long Bredy, co. Dorset, and had an only
    surviving child, Marcia, who eloped with Richard Brinsley Sheridan
    in May 1835. Sir C. Grant d., 20th Dec., 1835.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. R. Mansfield, 15th Hussars, W.

    Eldest son of Francis Mansfield, of Castle Wray, by Margaret West,
    grand-dau. of John Leonard, of co. Fermanagh. Left the army soon
    after obtaining his troop in 15th Hussars. D. 12th Nov., 1854.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. W. Moray, 17th Lt. Dns., W.

    Representative and possessor of the estates of the ancient House of
    Abercairnie. 2nd son of Col. Charles Moray, by the elder dau. and
    heir of Sir Wm. Stirling, Bart., of Ardoch. Promoted brevet maj.
    19th June, 1817. Placed on h. p., 10th Nov., 1821. Succeeded his
    elder brother in 1840. Assumed the additional surname of Stirling.
    M. the Hon. Fanny Douglas, dau. of Archibald, Lord Douglas. D. s.
    p., 9th Feb., 1850.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. Jones, h. p.

    Capt. Charles Jones, of 15th Hussars, was placed on h. p. in 1814.
    He appears to have been brought back to f. p. after 1817 as capt. in
    the York Chasseurs, and to have been again placed on h. p., 29th
    March, 1821. In 1830 his name was still on h. p. list.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir James Lyon, K.C.B.

    It is to be recorded of this officer that he had served on board the
    fleet under Lord Howe, and was present at the glorious action of 1st
    June, 1794—his regt. being at that time employed as marines. Was
    with the reserve at Hal, and did not share in the great battle of
    18th June. G.C.H. Governor of Barbadoes, 1828. Col.-in-Chf., 24th
    Foot, 1829. D. at Brighton, 14th Oct., 1844.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. Jas. McGlashan, 2nd Lt. Batt. K.G.L.

    Promoted capt. in same regt., 22nd Aug., 1815. Exchanged with Capt.
    Richter, of 1st Ceylon Regt., 25th Dec., 1815. Left the army soon
    after 1817.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. Richter, 1st Ceylon Regt.

    George Richter was placed on h. p. from 2nd Lt. Batt. K.G.L., 24th
    Feb 1816. Was on the h. p. list in 1830. D. as bt. maj. 23rd May,
    1833.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Major-Gen. Peregrine Maitland.

    Son of Thos. Maitland, of Shrubs Hall, in the New Forest. Joined the
    1st Regt. of Foot Guards in 1792. Commanded the 1st Brigade of
    Guards at the battle of Nive. The example he set, both at Quatre
    Bras and Waterloo, had much to do with the victory then obtained
    over the French. When Napoleon’s “Old Guard” made that gigantic and
    final effort, on the evening of June 18th, to retrieve the fortunes
    of the day, it was Maitland’s brigade which checked their advance
    and drove them headlong down the bloody slope. “Now, Maitland, now’s
    your time!” said Wellington, as the leading column of the French
    Guards approached the crest of the slope where the British Guards
    were stationed—the front rank kneeling. How Maitland responded is
    told in the words of Col. J. H. Stanhope in his letter to the Duke
    of York:—“Were it possible for me to add anything to the reputation
    of Maitland by stating the gallantry he has shown, cheering on with
    his hat off, I could dwell long on the subject.” Made K.C.B., 22nd
    June, 1815. Received the Russian Order of St. Vladimir and the Dutch
    Order of Wilhelm. C.-in-C. at Madras, 1836. Gov. and C.-in-C. at
    Cape of Good Hope, 1843. Col.-in-Chf., 17th Foot same year. M.
    firstly, 1803, Hon. Louisa, 2nd dau. of Sir Edward and the Baroness
    Crofton. She d. 1805. He m. secondly, in 1815, Lady Sarah Lennox,
    2nd dau. of 4th Duke of Richmond. D., 30th May, 1854.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Ens. Lord Hay, 1st Ft. Gds., K.

    Killed at Quatre Bras. Had ridden and won a race at the Grammont
    Races on 13th June, and was dead on the 16th. Was acting as adjutant
    to Lord Saltoun. His horse, a fine thoroughbred, refused a fence,
    and tried to wheel round. As Lord Saltoun was passing down a path
    close by, a body fell across his horse’s neck and rolled off. It was
    poor Hay, who had been picked off by a French cavalry skirmisher,
    who was, in his turn, shot dead by a Grenadier. James, Lord Hay,
    eldest son of William, 16th Earl of Errol, by his 2nd wife—Alicia,
    youngest dau. of Samuel Eliot, of the Island of Antigua—was born 7th
    July, 1797. In _The History of the Grenadier Guards_ he is
    erroneously called “Lord James Hay.” The latter officer, also in the
    1st Guards, lived for many years afterwards.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. J. Gunthorpe, 1st Ft. Gds.

    Promoted capt. and lt.-col., 26th Dec., 1821. Retired from the army,
    1833. His elder brother, Lewis, of same regt., was killed in the
    campaign in Holland, 1799.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Major-Gen. G. Johnstone.

    George Johnstone was appointed adt. in the Royal Marines, 5th March,
    1776. Served at New York and Halifax, and was in several sea
    engagements in the Indian Ocean. In 1792 he received a company in
    the New South Wales Corps, and embarked for that colony, where he
    served several years. Being at Hal, with the Reserves, he was not
    present at Waterloo. In his obituary notice in the _Scots’
    Magazine_, he is described of “Riggheads.” He d. in Edinburgh, 19th
    Dec., 1825.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. C.G. Gray, 95th Foot.

    Charles George Gray served in the Pa., and was wounded at Badajoz.
    Promoted bt.-major 21st Jan., 1819. In 1830 was major on the
    unattached list, and on 27th May, 1836, became lt.-col. Retd. in
    1837.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. S. Holmes, 78th Foot.

    Served in the Pa. and led a forlorn hope at Burgos. Stephen Holmes
    was placed on h. p. 25th April, 1816. Brought back to f. p. as capt.
    90th Regt., 3rd Feb., 1820. R. h. p. with rank of major, 24th Dec.,
    1825. In 1838, as lt.-col., recd. the appointment of Dep. Inspector
    Gen. of the Irish Constabulary. K.H. D. in 1839.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Major-Gen. Frederick Adam, W.

    Bn. 1781. 4th son of the Rt. Hon. Wm. Adam, of Blair Adam, Lord
    Lieut. for co. Kinross, by 2nd dau. of 10th Lord Elphinstone.
    Received an ensign’s commission in 1795, but continued his education
    and studied “the art of war” at the Milit. Academy, Woolwich. Made
    lieut. in the 26th Foot, 1796, and capt., 1799. Served with the 27th
    Foot in Holland from July to October, 1799, and was present in
    several actions. Served four months in 9th Foot, as capt., and then
    exchanged to the Coldstream Guards. Served in Egypt, and was
    promoted major in 1803, and in 1805, at age of 24, purchased the
    command of 21st Foot. Served in Sicily, and at battle of Maida.
    Appointed A.D.C. to the Prince Regent in 1811. In 1813 obtained
    command of a brigade in the army, and was sent to Spain. His command
    lay on the eastern side of the Pa., where there was a great lack of
    good commanders. Adam maintained his reputation, despite several
    reverses. When the French stormed and took Ordal, 12th Sept., 1813,
    he had his left arm broken and his left hand shattered. Made
    maj.-gen. 1814. The rout of the Old Guard at Waterloo by General
    Adam’s Brigade was the turning-point of the battle, and ensured
    victory. G.C.B., G.C.M.G., P.C., Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 21st Foot.
    Gov. Ionian Islands. D. 17th Aug., 1853, very suddenly at Greenwich
    railway station. His widow d. 26th May, 1904.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. R.P. Campbell, 7th Foot.

    Robert Preston Campbell fired the last gun at Waterloo, and the gun
    was a French one! It was one of the guns captured by the 71st Regt.
    in the _sauve qui peut_ of the French, and was turned against their
    retreating masses by some men of the 71st under Lieut. Torriano and
    discharged by Campbell (Siborne, vol. II., p. 234). Was placed on h.
    p. 25th Feb., 1816, but given a company in the Ceylon Rifles, 27th
    March, 1823. D., as capt. in that regt., 1825.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. C. Yorke, 52nd Foot.

    Aftds. F.M. Sir Charles Yorke, G.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. Rifle Bde. Son
    of Col. Yorke (who had once held the appointment of Lieut. of the
    Tower), by Juliana, dau. of John Dodd. Placed on h. p. 25th Feb.,
    1816. Brought back to f. p. as capt. 52nd Regt. L.I., 2nd July,
    1818. Succeeded Sir W. Gomm as Constable of the Tower. D. in London,
    20th Nov., 1879, aged 90.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Maj. Thos. Hunter-Blair, 91st Foot, W.

    A most gallant and able officer. Served in the Pa.; was wounded and
    made prisoner at Talavera, and detained in France until the peace of
    1814. Made a bt.-lt.-col. for his services at Waterloo. He was
    brother to Sir David Hunter-Blair, 3rd Bart. of Dunskey, co.
    Wigtown, and m., 1820, Miss Eliza Norris. D. a maj.-gen. and C.B.,
    31st Aug., 1849, at Leamington.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir Colin Halkett, K.C.B., W.

    Bn. 7th Sept., 1774. Eldest son of Frederick Halkett, a maj.-gen. in
    the British Service, who had also served in the Dutch army, by
    Georgina, dau. and heir of George Seton. Raised the German Legion,
    and served with distinction in the Pa. Had four horses shot under
    him at Waterloo. G.C.B. and G.C.H. Col.-in-Chf. 31st Regt., 1838.
    Gov. of Jersey and aftds. C.-in-C. at Bombay. M. Letitia (Crickett),
    widow of Capt. Tyler, R.A., and had issue. He d., 24th Sept, 1856,
    being then Gov. of Chelsea Hospital.

                             AIDES-DE-CAMP.

Capt. H. Marschalk, 1st Lt. Batt., K.G.L., K.

    Henry von Marschalk was killed whilst gallantly assisting Baron
    Baring to defend La Haye Sainte, which was captured by the French
    after a noble resistance.

Capt. A. Home, 2nd Lt. Batt., K.G.L.

    Alexander Home was one of the many Scotchmen who had joined the
    German Legion. D., at Hanover, 12th Oct., 1821, as capt. in the
    Hanoverian Rifle Guards.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. W. Crofton, 54th Foot, K.

    Walter Crofton left a widow and four children. Pens. of £100 per
    ann. granted to Mrs. Harriet Crofton, the widow, whose maiden name
    was Wauchope. The late Rt. Hon. Sir Walter Frederick Crofton, born
    in 1815, was a son of the above gallant Irish officer.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                             MAJOR-GENERAL.

Sir Hussey Vivian, K.C.B.

    Richard Hussey Vivian, eldest son of John Vivian, of Truro,
    Cornwall, Warden of the Stannaries, by Betsey, only surviving child
    of the Rev. Richard Cranch; was born 28th July, 1775, and entered
    the army as ensign in the 20th Foot, in July, 1793. Served in
    Holland in the campaigns of 1795 and 1799. On 1st Dec., 1804, was
    appointed a lt.-col. in 7th Lt. Dns. Served with his regt. in the
    retreat from Corunna. In 1813 commanded the 7th Dns. in the Pa., and
    in Nov. of same year was appointed to the command of a cavalry
    brigade, and was present at the battle of the Nive. Was sev. wnded.
    in the advance upon Toulouse. In the dispatch on this occasion, Lord
    Wellington observes: “Col. Vivian had an opportunity of making a
    most gallant attack upon a superior body of the enemy’s cavalry,
    which they drove through the village of Croix D’Orade.” When the
    18th Hussars were approaching two squares of the Old Guard at
    Waterloo, Gen. Vivian rode up to the regt. with the brief address:
    “Eighteenth, you will follow me.” The 18th responded, in expressive
    language, that they were ready to follow the general _anywhere_. The
    charge was made on the cavalry and guns, and was eminently
    successful. G.C.B. and G.C.H. Was created a baronet 1828, and a
    baron in the peerage of England, 1841. Col.-in-Chf. 12th Dns.
    Master-Gen. of the Ordnance, 1835–41. Was twice married, and left
    issue by both wives. D., 20th Aug., 1842.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Capt. Edward Keane, 7th Hussars.

    Made a bt.-maj. for his services at Waterloo. 3rd son of Sir John
    Keane, 1st Bart., by Sarah, dau. of John Kelly. His elder brother,
    General Sir John Keane, was created a peer of England, as Baron
    Keane of Ghuznee, in Afghanistan, 1839. Was lt.-col. of 6th Dns.,
    1825–33. R. h. p. 29th March, 1833. Reappointed to the Gren. Guards,
    and retd., in 1838, as col. D., 2nd Nov., 1866. M., 17th Jan., 1818,
    Anna, 3rd dau. of Sir Wm. Fraser, Bart., of Ledechune, co.
    Inverness.

                          EXTRA AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Lt. C.A. Fitzroy, R.H. Gds.

    Aftds. Lt.-Col. Sir Charles Augustus Fitz-roy, K.C.B. and K.C.H.,
    Capt. Gen. and Gov. of New South Wales. Eldest son of Lord Charles
    Fitz-roy, by Frances, dau. of Edward Miller Mundy, of Shipley, co.
    Derby. Bn. 10th June, 1796. Placed on h. p. as lt.-col. in 1825. M.,
    1st, 11th March, 1820, Lady Mary Lennox, eldest dau. of 4th Duke of
    Richmond, and had issue. He d., 16th Feb., 1858.

                           MAJOR OF BRIGADE.

Capt. Thos. Noel Harris, h. p., W.

    Son of Rev. Hamlyn Harris, rector of Whitehall, co. Rutland. Served
    in the Pa. Went to Germany in 1813, and served with the Prussian
    army until the surrender of Paris in 1814. Was at Leipsic and all
    the battles with Blucher in 1814. Sent to London by lt.-gen. Sir
    Charles Stewart 30th March, 1814, with despatches announcing the
    taking of Paris by the Allied Sovereigns. Recd. the Prussian Order
    of Merit, and the Russian Orders of St. Anne and St. Vladimir, for
    his services with the Allied Army. Lost his right arm at Waterloo,
    and was otherwise severely wounded. R. h. p. 1830, as col. K.C.H.
    Was chief magistrate at Gibraltar for some years, and a groom of His
    Majesty’s Privy Chamber. Was married three times. His first wife was
    Mary Thomson (_née_ White), widow of Robert Thomson, of Camphill,
    co. Renfrew. D., at Updown, Eastry, 23rd March, 1860. An interesting
    memoir of Sir T.N. Harris was compiled by C.B. Harris, Esq.,
    grandson of the above veteran.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                           ADJUTANT-GENERAL.

Maj.-Gen. Sir Edward Barnes, K.C.B., W.

    Known at Waterloo as “our fire eating adjutant-general.” His family
    appears to have been of Irish extraction. His father was a brother
    of the Robert Barnes whose two daughters and co-heirs married into
    the good old family of Johnston, of Kilmore, co. Armagh. In 1794 we
    find Edwd. Barnes maj. in 99th Foot. As lt.-col. of 46th Foot, he
    comded. a bde. at the capture of Martinique and Guadaloupe. Served
    on the staff in Spain and Portugal, and comded. a bde. at the
    battles of Vittoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive and Orthes. His forward
    gallantry, on 2nd August, 1813, on the Heights of Eschalar, when,
    with a small force, he attacked a large part of the French army, in
    a strong position, occasioned a distinguished officer to say:
    “Barnes set at the French as if every man had been a bull-dog and
    himself the best bred of all.” In 1819 was on the staff in Ceylon,
    and in 1824 was appointed Gov. of that island. Held this appointment
    until 1831, and so endeared himself to the natives that his
    departure was universally lamented, and a monument was erected in
    his honour. Was C.-in-C. in India from 1831 to May, 1833, with the
    local rank of general. M.P. for Sudbury. G.C.B. and Col.-in-Chf.
    78th Regt. It is worthy of note that the present Army and Navy Club
    owed its existence to the joint exertions of Sir Edward Barnes and
    Adml. Bowles, who may be termed the founders of this club. Sir
    Edward m., in 1824, Maria, eldest dau of Walter Fawkes, of Farnley
    Hall, Otley, and had issue. D. in London, 19th March, 1838.

                             AIDE-DE-CAMP.

Maj. Andrew Hamilton, 4th W.I. Regt.

    Made a bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. M. 1816, Anne, eldest dau. of Wm.
    Ord, of Fanham, Newminster Abbey, and Whitfield, co. Northumberland,
    and had issue. Served as A.D.C. to Sir Edward Barnes in Ceylon, and
    d. 1821.

                        DEPUTY ADJUTANT-GENERAL.

Col. Sir John Elley, K.C.B., R.H. Gds., W.

    This distinguished general entered the army as a private soldier and
    rose by his own merits. He commanded the rear guard of the cavalry
    at Talavera. Was employed on the staff from 1807 to 1819, when he
    resumed the command of his old regt.—the Horse Guards. K.C.B.;
    K.C.H.; K.M.T., &c. Lt.-Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 7th Hussars. He
    represented Windsor in Sir Robert Peel’s Govt. D. 23rd Jan., 1839,
    unm., at Chalderton Lodge, near Amesbury. Left large bequests to
    charities; also money to provide plate for the 7th Hussars and 17th
    Lancers.

                      ASSISTANT ADJUTANTS-GENERAL.

Lt.-Col. J. Waters, Unattached, W.

    Afterwards Lt.-Gen. Sir John Waters, K.C.B. In the Par. War he was
    attached to the Portuguese army and was taken prisoner. When
    Wellington heard of this officer’s capture, he quietly remarked,
    “Col. Waters will not remain long in the hands of the enemy.” Being
    a reckless and dare-devil rider Waters made so sure of his speedy
    escape that he mockingly told his captors they would not have him on
    their hands for long. Such proved the case, for having managed to
    get his spurs sharpened, he literally “rode away” from his pursuers
    one fine morning, and they saw him no more. D. 21st Nov., 1842. His
    heir was his brother Edmond Thomas Waters, of Tyvree and Stormy, co.
    Glamorgan, who d. 1848, leaving issue.

Lt.-Col. Sir George H. Berkeley, K.C.B., 35th Foot, W.

    Eldest son of Adml. Sir George Berkeley. Served in the Pa. Was for a
    short time Surveyor-Gen. of the Ordnance, and M.P. for Devonport. D.
    a maj.-gen. and col. of the 35th Foot, 25th Sept., 1857.

Lt.-Col. Sir Guy Campbell, Bt., 6th Foot.

    Eldest son of Lt.-Gen. Colin Campbell, lt.-gov. of Gibraltar, by
    Mary, eldest dau. and co-heir of Col. Guy Johnson. Entered the 6th
    Foot, of which Gen. Colin Campbell was col., at an early age; and
    for his distinguished conduct in the Pa., when serving as maj. of
    the 6th Foot, was created a baronet in May, 1815: C.B. and gold
    medal for the Pyrenees. M., 1st, the eldest dau. and co-heir of
    Montagu Burgoyne, of Marks Hall, and had issue. M., 2ndly, in 1820,
    Pamela, eldest dau. of the late Lord Edward Fitz-gerald, and had
    issue. Maj.-gen. in the army. D. at Kingstown, Ireland, 25th Jan.,
    1849.

Lt.-Col. Sir Noel Hill, K.C.B., 1st Ft. Gds.

    Afterwards lt.-col. of the 13th Lt. Dns., and commandant of the
    Cavalry Depôt. Bn. 24th Feb., 1784. 7th son of Sir John Hill, Bart.,
    and brother of Lord Hill. Served with distinction in the Pa., and
    commanded the 1st Portuguese Regiment, which he soon brought into a
    state of efficiency. In 1814 was transferred to a company in the 1st
    Foot Guards. Made K.C.B. and K.T.S., and after Waterloo was
    nominated a Knight of the Bavarian Order of Maximilian Joseph.
    Appointed D.A.G. in Canada, 1827. Succeeded Sir John Brown in the
    command of the cavalry depôt at Maidstone, and d. there, 8th Jan.,
    1832. Bd. with military honours at Maidstone. By his wife (4th dau.
    of 1st Baron Teignmouth), Sir Noel left several children.

Lt.-Col. D. Barclay, 1st Ft. Gds.

    Col. Delancey Barclay, C.B., was for some years A.D.C. to the King
    and to the Duke of York. He d. at his house at Tillingbourne, near
    Dorking, 29th March, 1826.

Lt.-Col. H. Rooke, 3rd Ft. Gds.

    Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Sir Henry Willoughby Rooke, C.B., and K.C.H.,
    of Martinsherne, Berks, and afterwards of Pilston House, co.
    Monmouth. Bn. 2nd August, 1782. Younger son of Col. Charles Rooke
    (who raised a regiment called the “Windsor Volunteers,” and was
    allowed by George III. to reside in the “Stone Tower” of Windsor
    Castle, where he d., 1827) by Elizabeth, dau. of Ambrose Dawson, of
    Langcliffe and Bolton Hall, co. York, by Mary, sister of Sir
    Willoughby Aston, Bart. The Rookes have been in the army for six
    successive generations: and that distinguished sailor, Adm. Sir
    George Rooke, who took Gibraltar in 1704, also belonged to this
    family. Sir H.W. Rooke m., in 1804, his first cousin, Selina Rooke
    (dau. and heir of Henry Rooke), and had issue. He d. 2nd May, 1869.

Lt.-Col. E. Currie, 90th Foot, K.

    Edward Currie, junior maj. of the 90th Foot, and bt. lt.-col., was a
    scion of the Annandale family of that name who resided at Dalebank.
    He was the tenth of a family who had sacrificed their home in their
    country’s service. Received his first commission when only thirteen,
    from the Duke of York, in consequence of the meritorious services of
    his father in the army. Fought under Abercromby in Egypt, and was
    A.D.C. to Lord Hill in the Pa. Received the thanks of the C.-in-C.
    for his bravery at Talavera, Almarez, and Aroyo de Molinos.

Maj. A. Wylly, 7th Foot.

    Afterwards Lt.-Col. Alexander Campbell Wylly, C.B., of the 95th
    Regt. Served in Spain and Portugal as A.D.C. to Sir Edward Pakenham;
    also in the American campaign in similar capacity. Sent home after
    Pakenham’s death with despatches from Sir John Lambert, in which he
    (Wylly) was very honourably named. D. in Malta, 10th Nov., 1827.

Maj. G. Evatt, 55th Foot.

    Col. George Evatt began his military career as a private in a foot
    regt. His gallantry and ability, shown in many engagements, procured
    him a commission, and he became capt. and bt.-major in the 55th
    Regt. On 25th June, 1816, he was appointed commandant of the Royal
    Military Asylum, Southampton, and d. there, 29th Oct., 1840.

Maj. W. Darling, h. p.

    Wm. Lindsay Darling served at the reduction of Guadaloupe in 1810,
    and during the latter part of the Par. War was on the staff. Was
    A.A.G. to Sir C. Colville’s division in June, 1815, and served at
    the storming of Cambray. Attained the rank of gen. and was appointed
    Col.-in-Chf. 98th Regt. in 1854. D. 7th Jan., 1864.

Maj. F. Breymann, 2nd Lt. Batt., K.G.L.

    Frederick Leopold Breymann served in the Pa., and was wounded both
    at Talavera and Burgos. Placed on h. p. as maj. in Feb., 1816. Made
    C.B. for Waterloo. D. at Tesperhude, near Lauenburg, Denmark, 24th
    Jan., 1821.

                  DEPUTY-ASSISTANT ADJUTANTS-GENERAL.

Capt. the Hon. E.S. Erskine, 60th Foot, W.

    Esme Stuart Erskine was sev. wnded. and taken prisoner on 17th June,
    1815. He was brought before Napoleon, who asked him many questions,
    and showed a perfect knowledge of the strength of the British army.
    The conversation being ended, Erskine was put in charge of a guard,
    and a surgeon sent to attend to his wounded arm, which had to be
    amputated. Bn. 1789. 4th son of Baron Erskine, Lord Chancellor, by
    Frances, dau. of Daniel Moore, M.P. Was promoted bt.-maj. for
    Waterloo, and transferred, in 1816, to 2nd Ceylon Regt. and made bt.
    lt.-col. same year. M., 1809, Eliza, dau. of Lt.-Col. Smith, and had
    issue. D. 26th August, 1817.

Capt. Lord Charles Fitzroy, 1st Ft. Gds.

    2nd son of 4th Duke of Grafton by Lady Charlotte Waldegrave. Bn.
    28th Feb., 1791. Served in the Pa. R. h. p. as maj. and bt. lt.-col.
    27th Foot, 1821. M.P. Bury St. Edmunds. Vice-Chamberlain of the
    Household. M. 25th Oct., 1825, Lady Anne Cavendish, 2nd dau. of 1st
    Earl of Burlington, and had issue. D. at Hampton, 17th June, 1865.

Capt. C.A.F. Bentinck, 2nd Ft. Gds.

    Made bt.-maj. for Waterloo. 2nd son of John Charles Bentinck, a
    count of the Roman Empire, by Lady Jemima de Ginkel, dau. of the
    Earl of Athlone. Bn. 4th March, 1792. Served in Pa., and under Lord
    Lynedoch in Flanders, as adjt. of his regt. Attained rank of
    lt.-gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 12th Foot in 1857. M. 30th Jan., 1846,
    Countess Caroline, eldest dau. of Count of Waldeck-Pyrmont, and had
    issue. D. 28th Oct., 1864.

Capt. George Black, 54th Foot.

    D. as capt. in same regt. in 1825.

Capt. H.S. Blanckley, 23rd Foot.

    Henry Stanyford Blanckley was promoted brevet-maj. 21st June, 1817.
    Exchanged to the 13th Lt. Dns., and d. 1820.

Capt. Hon. Wm. Curzon, 69th Foot, K.

    Third son of Nathaniel, 2nd Baron Scarsdale, by his 2nd wife
    (Felicité de Wattines). He met his fate at Waterloo with almost
    “military glee.” In falling from his horse, he called out gaily to
    Lord March, who had been galloping by his side, “Good bye, dear
    March.”

Lt. Jas. Henry Hamilton, 46th Foot, W.

    Promoted captain 26th March, 1823, and transferred to 45th Regiment.
    D. 3rd Jan. 1827.

Lt. John Harford, 7th Rl. Veteran Batt.

    Probably rose from the ranks. His name is not in the 1812 _Army
    List_. His regt. was reduced in 1816, and he was placed on ret. f.
    p., which denoted distinguished service. In the _Army List_ for
    1824, and succeeding years, his name is spelt “Hurford.” D. 1839.

Lt. E. Gerstlacher, 3rd Hussars, K.G.L.

    Eberhard Gerstlacher joined the K.G.L. in March, 1813. Served in
    North Germany, 1813–14. Made brevet-capt. for Waterloo. Living at
    Carlsruhe in 1837.

Lt. Jas. Rooke, h. p.

    Only son of Gen. James Rooke, Col.-in-Chf. 38th Regt., who was M.P.
    for co. Monmouth in five Parliaments, by Eliz. Brown. Lieut. Rooke
    was attached to the Prince of Orange’s staff at Waterloo, as an
    extra A.D.C. For his services on this occasion was appointed, 11th
    Aug., 1815, a lieut. in the Staff Corps of Cavalry. In 1817 he
    joined the Venezuelan Independent Army, and was given the rank of
    col. by Gen. Bolivar, who commanded the “Patriots.” D. of a wound
    received in action in 1819. Was twice married, and left issue by his
    1st wife.

                         DEPUTY JUDGE ADVOCATE.

Lt.-Col. Stephen Arthur Goodman, h. p.

    Junior maj. 48th Regt., 26th Dec., 1813. Placed on h. p. with brevet
    rank of lt.-col, in 1814. D. in British Guiana 2nd Jan., 1844,
    whilst holding the post of Vendue-Master of Demerara and Esequibo.

                     DEPUTY QUARTERMASTER-GENERAL.

Col. Sir Wm. Howe De Lancey, K.C.B., K.

    The De Lanceys were descended from a wealthy Huguenot family, who
    went from Caen, in Normandy, to America, after the revocation of the
    Edict of Nantes. In the short space of sixty years this family
    produced three celebrated soldiers, viz., Gen. Oliver De Lancey, a
    leading American loyalist, who fought on the British side during the
    War of Independence, and, settling in England, d. at Beverley, 1785.
    In another generation, an Oliver De Lancey distinguished himself as
    a Christine leader in the Spanish war, and was killed at the siege
    of San Sebastian in 1837. The third distinguished soldier of this
    family was the above Wm. Howe De Lancey, who was only son of S. De
    Lancey, Gov. of Tobago, by Cornelia his wife, who d. in 1817. His
    early career was one of renown, and in 1799 we find him maj. of the
    45th Regt., at the age of 21. On 4th April, 1815, he was married, in
    Scotland, to the beautiful Magdalen Hall, dau. of Sir James Hall,
    Bart., of Dunglass, by Lady Helen Douglas, dau. of 4th Earl of
    Selkirk. The return of Napoleon from Elba once more called De Lancey
    to the seat of war. Leaving his fair young wife, he proceeded, in
    May, to Brussels, whither he was followed, the first week in June,
    by his bride. At Waterloo, when riding by Wellington’s side, the
    wind of a cannon ball knocked him off his horse. This, it was
    afterwards found, had separated the ribs from the back-bone, and
    caused a fatal injury. Wellington caused De Lancey to be removed to
    a hut in a blanket. For some days hopes were entertained of his
    recovery, and he was devotedly nursed by his sorrow-stricken wife,
    whose perilous drive to the battle-field, and her experiences, were
    lately given in the _Illustrated Naval and Military Magazine_, from
    an old MS. narrative written by herself. After lingering ten days,
    the hero died.

                   “Fair lady’s love, and splendid fame,
                     De Lancey did enthral.
                   His loyal heart alike they claim,
                     They sigh to see him fall.”

                   ASSISTANT QUARTERMASTERS-GENERAL.

Col. Hon. Alex. Abercromby, 2nd Ft. Gds., W.

    Bn. 4th March, 1784. 4th son of Sir Ralph Abercromby, of Tullibody,
    who fell at Aboukir, by Mary Anne, dau. of John Menzies, of
    Ferntoun, Perthshire, who was created a baroness in 1801. As
    Lieut.-Col. of the 28th Foot, commanded a bde. in the Pa., and
    received the gold cross. K.T.S. Made C.B. for Waterloo. M.P. for
    Clackmannanshire, 1817–18. D. 27th Aug., 1853.

Col. F.E. Hervey, 14th Lt. Dns.

    Afterwards Col. Sir Felton Elwell Hervey-Bathurst, Bart. He was
    eldest son of Felton Lionel Hervey, by Selina, only dau. and heir of
    Sir John Elwell, Bart. After Waterloo was appointed A.D.C. to
    Wellington, which post he held during the British occupation in
    France. The following anecdote is from _Reminiscences of Wellington
    and Anecdotes of his Staff_, by Lord Wm. Lennox:—“Felton Hervey, of
    the 14th, who had lost an arm when in pursuit of the enemy flying
    from Oporto, always mounted himself and his orderly upon English
    hunters, so as to make his escape should he at any time be
    unexpectedly surrounded. Upon one occasion, when reconnoitring,
    Hervey rode up, by mistake, to a small detachment of French cavalry.
    Fortunately for him, the men were dismounted, and busily employed in
    cooking their rations; but no sooner was the colonel discovered, and
    his rank recognized, than the order to mount was given. Hervey and
    his orderly, finding the odds greatly against them, immediately
    started off at a tremendous pace to reach our lines. The French
    dragoons were quickly in their saddles, for the prize was worth
    gaining, and amidst wild shouts and loud halloes, gave chase to
    their flying foes. The noise attracted the attention of some of the
    enemy’s lancers, who, being posted nearer the English forces, were
    enabled to cut off the retreat of the fugitives. The clattering of
    the horses’ hoofs, who had thus joined in the pursuit, sounded like
    a death-knell to the two gallant soldiers. ‘Your only chance,
    colonel,’ said the faithful orderly, ‘is to make for that ravine.’
    Hervey followed the suggestion; the ravine was narrow, with only
    room for one horse to enter. No sooner had he gained it than, on
    looking round, a terrible sight presented itself. The devoted
    soldier, knowing that the life of his commanding officer could alone
    be saved by the sacrifice of his own, had placed himself across the
    narrow opening, and was literally pierced and cut to pieces. The
    delay thus occasioned enabled Hervey to pursue his flight. Gaining
    the open, he charged a stiff fence, and was soon out of sight of his
    pursuers.” He m., 1817, Louisa Catherine, 3rd dau. of Richard Caton,
    of Maryland, U.S.A.; was created a baronet, with remainder to his
    brother Frederick, 3rd Oct., 1818, and d. s. p. 24th Sept., 1819.

Lt.-Col. Robt. Torrens, 1st W.I. Regt.

    Afterwards Lt.-Col. of 38th Regt. and Adjt.-Gen. in India. C.B.
    Belonged to the Londonderry family of this name, and was a near
    relative of Sir Henry Torrens, K.C.B., the Adjt.-Gen. In 1836 Col.
    Torrens was appointed a Commissioner by Parliament, for carrying out
    their scheme for the colonisation of South Australia.

Lt.-Col. Sir Charles Broke, K.C.B. (Permanent).

    2nd son of Philip Broke, of Nacton, Suffolk. Served in the
    expeditions to Hanover and South America; also in the Pa. K.C.B. in
    Jan., 1815. Decorated with the Russian Order of St. Vladimir and the
    Dutch Order of Wilhelm, for his gallantry at Waterloo. In 1822 took
    the surname of Vere, in addition to that of Broke. A.D.C. to King
    Wm. IV., and K.C.H.; M.P. for East Suffolk. His elder brother was
    created a bart. in 1813, in consideration of the gallant victory he
    had achieved 1st June, 1813, as capt. of the “Shannon” ship of war,
    over the American frigate “Chesapeake.” Sir C. Broke-Vere d. a
    maj.-gen. 1st April, 1843.

Lt.-Col. Sir Jeremiah Dickson, K.C.B. (Permanent).

    Joined the 2nd Dn. Gds., as cornet, in 1798. Served in the Pa., and
    was A.Q.M.G. to the army in Spain, and received the gold cross and
    one clasp. Promoted col. 27th May, 1825; appointed Q.M.G. in India,
    12th July, 1827, maj.-gen. 1837, and Col.-in-Chf. 61st Regt., 1844.
    M. 15th March, 1818, Jemima, youngest dau. of Thos. Langford Brooke,
    of Mere Hall, co. Chester. Sir Jeremiah’s parentage is unknown, but
    from his Scripture name we may conclude that “Job Dickson,” ens.
    67th Regt., in 1811, was a near relative. Sir Jeremiah d. in March,
    1848.

Lt.-Col. Lord Greenock (Permanent).

    Charles Murray, Lord Greenock succeeded his father, in 1843, as 2nd
    Earl Cathcart, G.C.B., Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 1st D.G. Received the
    gold medal for Barrosa. Gov. Edinburgh Castle, Comr. of the Forces
    and Gov.-Gen. in North America. Bn. 1783; d. at St. Leonard’s 16th
    July, 1859, having m., 30th Sept., 1818, in France, Henrietta, 2nd
    dau. of Thos. Mather, and left issue.

Lt.-Col. John George Woodford, 1st Ft. Gds.

    Bn. at Chatham, 28th Feb., 1785. Younger son of Col. John Woodford,
    by his 2nd wife (Susan, dau. of Cosmo, Duke of Gordon) and widow of
    9th Earl of Westmoreland. D.A.Q.M.G. at Corunna, and with Sir J.
    Moore when the latter was wounded. Wounded same day, and horse shot.
    Was attached to Gen. Sir C. Colville’s division, but was sent, on
    the evening of 17th June, by his gen. to Wellington, to ask him if
    the British troops at Hal should join the main army. Only reached
    Waterloo a few hours before the battle commenced. Acted as extra
    A.D.C. to Wellington at Waterloo. C.B. and Col. Maj.-Gen. in 1837.
    K.C.B. and K.C.H. D. 22nd March, 1879.

Lt.-Col. C. Grant, 11th Foot.

    Colquhoun Grant joined the 11th Foot in 1795, and attained the rank
    of Lt. Col. of 54th Regt. in 1821. C.B. for Waterloo. Son of Duncan
    Grant, of Lingeston, N.B. D. at Aix-la-Chapelle in the spring of
    1829.

Lt.-Col. Sir Wm. M. Gomm, K.C.B., 2nd Ft. Gds.

    Afterwards F.-M. Sir Wm. Maynard Gomm, G.C.B., Constable of the
    Tower and Col.-in-Chf. 13th Regt. L.I.; also D.C.L. and LL.D. This
    veteran soldier and philanthropist was son of Lieut.-Col. Wm. Gomm,
    who had served in America in the 46th Regt. The family is
    undoubtedly of French origin. As far back as 1685 we find Sir
    Bernard de Gomme appointed Master Surveyor of the Ordnance. Wm. M.
    Gomm entered the army, as ensign, in 1794, and at the age of 14
    carried the colours of the 9th Foot—the Holy Boys—into action in
    Holland. Served in the Pa., and received the gold cross and one
    clasp. The charger he rode at Waterloo, by name “George,” survived
    until 1841, aged 33, and was buried under a stone seat in the garden
    at Stoke Park, near Windsor. The veteran charger’s veteran master
    held the high post of C.-in-C. in India, and received a F.-M.’s
    baton in Jan., 1868. He d. at Brighton, 15th March, 1875, full of
    years and good works. By his wife Eliz. (eldest dau. of Lord Robert
    Kerr), whom he m. in 1830, he had no issue.

Lt.-Col. Sir Henry Hollis Bradford, K.C.B., 1st Ft. Gds., W.

    Bn. 25th June, 1781. 3rd and youngest son of Thos. Bradford, of
    Woodlands, near Doncaster and Ashdown Pk., co. Sussex, by Eliz.,
    dau. of Wm. Otter, of Welham, co. Notts; served in the Pa., Knt. of
    the Dutch Order of Wilhelm, and of the Russian Order of St.
    Vladimir. D. at La Vacherie, near Lillière, France, 7th Dec., 1816,
    of wounds recd. at Waterloo. Bur. at Storrington, Sussex.

Lt.-Col. Sir George Scovell, K.C.B., h. p.

    Aftds. G.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 4th Lt. Dns., and Gov. Rl. Milit.
    College, Sandhurst. Served in the Pa., and was present at Corunna as
    D.A.Q.M.G. Recd. the gold cross and one clasp; also the silver war
    medal with eight clasps, and 4th class of St. Vladimir of Russia. D.
    at Henley Park, Guildford, 17th Jan., 1861.

Lt.-Col. D. Kelly, 73rd Foot.

    Dawson Kelly joined the 47th Regt. as ens. in 1800. Became major of
    the 73rd in 1811. Towards the close of the battle of Waterloo a
    sergeant of his regt. came and told him that all the officers of the
    73rd were killed or wounded. Although serving on the staff, Kelly
    immediately returned to take over the command. C.B. and bt.-lt.-col.
    On h. p. 15th Jan., 1818. Bt.-col. 1837. D. same year at Dungannon,
    Ireland. He was 5th son of Thos. Kelly, of Dawson’s Grove, co.
    Armagh, by his wife, Jane Waring. M.I. in Armagh Cathedral.
    Communicated by Lt.-Col. G.H. Johnston, late 15th Foot.

Maj. W. Campbell, 23rd Foot.

    Was A.D.C. to Gen. Craufurd in the Pa. D. a C.B. and maj.-gen. 3rd
    June, 1852.

Maj. Hon. George Lionel Dawson, 1st Dn. Gds., W.

    3rd son of John, 2nd Visct., and 1st Earl of Portarlington, by Lady
    Caroline Stuart, dau. of 3rd Earl of Bute. Bn. 28th Oct. 1788.
    Promoted bt.-lt.-col. 4th Dec., 1815. Placed on h. p. 17th Aug.,
    1820. C.B. Assumed the additional surname of Damer 14th March, 1829.
    M., 20th Aug., 1825, Mary, dau. of Lord Hugh Seymour, and had issue.
    D., 14th April, 1856.

Maj. Chas. Beckwith, 95th Foot, W.

    Son of Capt. John Beckwith, 23rd Lt. Dns., and nephew of Sir George
    and Sir T.S. Beckwith. Bn. at Halifax, N.S., 2nd Oct., 1789. His
    mother was a sister of Judge Haliburton (Sam Slick). Brigade-maj. to
    the celebrated Light Division in the Pa. Lost his left leg at
    Waterloo. Was a frequent visitor at Apsley House. Being one day left
    alone in the Duke’s library his attention was called to Gilly’s
    _Waldensee_, which book graphically described the neglected state of
    the Waldensee inhabitants. His interest was touched, and soon after
    he took up his abode among those “primitive Christians of the Alps.”
    Beckwith did much for the good of the people, by whom he was greatly
    beloved. He d. as maj.-gen. at Torre, 19th July, 1862. See _Memoir
    of General Beckwith, C.B._, by M. Meille, translated, London, 1873.
    Also Foster’s _Yorkshire Pedigrees_.

Capt. Jas. Shaw, 43rd Foot.

    Aftds. Sir James Shaw-Kennedy, K.C.B. Bn. 1788. Educated at the
    Military College at Marlow. Joined the 43rd L.I. as ens., 1805.
    Served with this regt. at Copenhagen, and proceeded to the Pa. in
    1808. Served at Corunna, and in 1809 was adjt. Was A.D.C. to Gen.
    Robert Craufurd during 1809 and 1810. Present at siege of Ciudad
    Rodrigo. “Stood with Gen. Craufurd when, in the assault of that fort
    and place, he placed himself on the crest of the glacis, where he
    fell mortally wounded.” Served at the siege and storming of Badajoz,
    at Salamanca, and other actions. “On 18th June, 1815, he was
    allowed, in presence of Wellington, to form the 3rd Division (to
    which he was attached), in a new and unusual order of battle, to
    meet the formidable masses of cavalry seen forming in its front, and
    in this formation the division resisted, successfully, repeated
    attacks of Napoleon’s cavalry.” Commanded at Calais during the three
    years of the Army of Occupation. Organised the constabulary force of
    Ireland. Bt. maj. for Waterloo. M., 1820, Mary, dau. of David
    Kennedy, and assumed his wife’s name. D. a lt.-gen. and Col.-in-Chf.
    47th Regt., 30th May, 1865.

Capt. J. Jessop, 44th Foot, W.

    Served as A.D.C. to Gen. Dunlop in the Pa. The late Gen. Sir George
    L’Estrange thus speaks of John Jessop in his _Recollections_
    (published in 1873):—“A splendid officer, a perfect gentleman,
    particularly handsome, and a capital good fellow.” Made C.B. for
    Waterloo. Placed on h. p. as bt.-maj., 44th Regt., 1821. D. at
    Butterley Hall, Derbyshire, in Sept., 1869, aged 90.

                DEPUTY-ASSISTANT QUARTERMASTERS-GENERAL.

Capt. E.T. Fitzgerald, 25th Foot, W.

    Edward Thos. Fitzgerald, K.H., 2nd son of Charles Fitzgerald, of
    Turlough Park, Castlebar, was bn. 22nd Dec., 1784. Placed on h. p.
    as bt. maj., 1818. M., 20th Nov., 1811, Emma, dau. of Edmond Green,
    of Medham, in the Isle of Wight, and had issue. D., at Castlebar,
    1845, as lt.-col. h. p.

Capt. Richard Brunton, 60th Foot.

    The name of Brunton is to be found in the Lowlands of Scotland. The
    above officer, who bore this name, served in the Pa., and obtained
    his company in the 60th in 1813. Exchanged to the 13th Lt. Dns.
    1819. Maj. in 1826, and lt.-col. of same regt. 1830. M. 30th June,
    1829, Eliz., eldest dau. of Rev. Josiah Thomas, Archdeacon of Bath
    (by Susanna Harington), and widow of Major Wallace, of the Madras
    Cavalry, who was shot on parade in India by a sepoy of his regt.
    Col. Brunton d. at Bath, 1846, leaving issue by his wife, who
    re-married Edward Downe, of Abbeyside, Dungarvan.

Capt. Thos. Wright, Rl. Staff Corps, W.

    Promoted maj., 25th June, 1830. Placed on h. p. 5th Nov. same year.
    Alive in 1846.

Capt. H.G. MacLeod, 35th Foot, W.

    Aftds. Sir Henry George MacLeod, K.H. Col. h. p. 1838. Was knighted
    by William IV., on being appointed Lt.-Gov. of St. Christopher’s.
    Had previously served in Canada as A.D.C. to the Duke of Richmond.
    D. at his residence, near Windsor, 20th Aug., 1847. He was 4th son
    of Gen. Sir John MacLeod, G.C.H., R.A., and had served six years in
    the R.A.

Capt. J.J. Mitchell, 25th Foot, W.

    This officer was for some years capt. in the 1st Royals. None of the
    Army Lists give his Christian names—only the enigmatical initials
    “J.J.”

    He was placed on the Irish Half Pay List, in 1816, as capt. in the
    25th Foot, and his name disappeared altogether from the Army List
    soon after that date.

Capt. W.G. Moore, 1st Ft. Gds.

    Aftds. Lt.-Gen. Sir Wm. George Moore, K.C.B. Col.-in-Chf. 60th
    Rifles. Eldest son of Francis Moore, Under-Sec. of War, by Frances,
    Countess of Eglinton (dau. of Sir Wm. Twysden, Bart.). This Francis
    Moore was youngest brother of the famous Sir John Moore “of Corunna
    celebrity.” Bn. 1795. Educated at Harrow. Served as A.D.C. to Sir
    John Hope at siege of Bayonne, and was severely wounded and taken
    prisoner while attempting to assist his general when dismounted and
    wounded in the sortie of 14th April, 1814. D. at Petersham, 23rd
    Oct., 1862.

Capt. Geo. Hillier, 74th Foot.

    Aftds. lt.-col. of the 62nd Regt. Served in Canada as A.D.C. to Sir
    P. Maitland, and, subsequently, as D.Q.M.G. in Jamaica. Of Devizes,
    Wilts. M. before 1820, and left, with other issue, the present
    Lt.-Col. G.E. Hillier. D. in Bengal, 15th June, 1840.

Capt. W.G. Cameron, 1st Ft. Gds.

    Son of Lt.-Gen. Wm. Neville Cameron, H.E.I.C.S., by Charlotte, dau.
    of Sir Wm. Gordon, 7th Bart. of Embo, co. Sutherland. Capt. Wm.
    Gordon Cameron lost his right arm at Waterloo and had other severe
    wounds. K.H., made bt. lt.-col., 7th July, 1825, and placed on h. p.
    the following day. D. at Christchurch, Hants, 26th May, 1856.

Capt. F. Read, Rl. Staff Corps.

    Francis Read d. a capt. in the same regt., 4th June, 1829. He
    appears to have been a relative of Lt.-Col. Wm. Read, who d. at
    Madras, 21st Aug., 1827, whilst holding the appointment of D.Q.M.G.
    Another of the same family (Constantine) was a Lieut. in Rl. Staff
    Corps, 1830.

Lt. P.T. de Barrailler, 33rd Foot.

    Peter Toussaint de Barrailler was, as his name implies, of Gallic
    origin. The irony of fate decreed that he should use his sword
    against the Gallic army in 1815. His name disappeared from the Army
    List a few years after Waterloo.

Lt. Basil Jackson, Rl. Staff Corps.

    The following memoir of this distinguished veteran appeared in the
    _Illustrated London News_ of 9th Nov., 1889:—“A gallant military
    veteran, who has died at the great age of ninety-four, was reckoned
    one of the four surviving officers of the British Army present at
    the battle of Waterloo. Colonel Basil Jackson, born at Glasgow on
    June 27, 1795, was son of Major Basil Jackson; he entered the
    Military College in 1808, and, having received his commission as
    ensign, did not join a Line regiment, but was transferred to the
    Royal Staff Corps, where he learned the duties of the
    Quartermaster-General’s Department and engineering. In that branch
    of the Army he was employed in Holland and Belgium, in 1814 and
    1815, and in the Waterloo campaign did good service in clearing the
    roads, and on the Duke of Wellington’s Staff. He accompanied the
    army to Paris, and was afterwards selected to go to St. Helena with
    Napoleon. In that island he remained till about a year and a half
    before Napoleon’s death. At a later period he was employed in Nova
    Scotia and in Canada, taking part in the construction of the Rideau
    Canal. He held the Professorship of Military Surveying in the East
    India Company’s Military College at Addiscombe during twenty years.
    After retiring from the army he lived at Hillsborough, near Ross, in
    Herefordshire.” M. 28th March, 1828, the dau. of Col. Muttlebury,
    C.B.

Lt. A. Brauns, Rl. Staff Corps.

    Probably a son of the Col. John Brauns, of the German Legion, who
    was killed at the battle of Talavera. The above officer bore the
    names of “Augustus Christ. Gotleib.” Was placed on h. p. as lieut.,
    in 1819. Living 1846.

                      COMMANDANT AT HEAD-QUARTERS.

Col. Sir Colin Campbell, K.C.B., 2nd Ft. Gds.

    5th son of John Campbell, of Melfort, by Colina, dau. of John
    Campbell, of Auchalader. In 1792 he ran away from Perth Academy, and
    entered himself on the books of a ship bound for the West Indies. He
    was met in the fruit market at Kingston, Jamaica, by his brother
    Patrick (aftds. an admiral), a lieut. on board a man-of-war, who
    brought him home. In 1793 became a midshipman on board an East
    Indiaman. Two years later we find him serving as a lieut. in the 3rd
    Batt. Breadalbane Fencibles, and in 1799 he was appointed ens. in a
    West India Regt. Exchanged to the Ross-shire Buffs, and as capt.,
    served under Sir A. Wellesley at the storming of Ahmednuggur, where
    his distinguished gallantry won him a brevet majority. At Assaye he
    had two horses shot under him, and was severely wounded. He
    accompanied Sir A. Wellesley to the Peninsula, and was for a
    considerable time on the staff of the army. For his services in
    Spain he obtained the gold cross with six clasps, and in Jan., 1815,
    was made K.C.B. He was a splendid soldier, but a bad French scholar.
    “When he wished his dinner to be arranged on the table, he used, as
    it were, to address the dishes, ‘_Bif-teck venez içi! Petits pâtés
    allez là!_’” (anecdote by Wellington). Was Governor of Ceylon from
    1840–7. During his residence there he frequently heard from his
    great chief, Wellington, his attached friend. “We are both growing
    old,” wrote the Duke to Campbell; “God knows if we shall ever meet
    again. Happen what may, I shall never forget our first meeting under
    the walls of Ahmednuggur.” Sir Colin returned to England in June,
    1847, and d. on the 13th of same month, in London, aged seventy-one,
    and was buried in St. James’s Church, Piccadilly.

                      BRITISH AND HANOVERIAN ARMY
                                   AT
                               WATERLOO,

     _As formed in Divisions and Brigades on the 18th June, 1815._

                             --------------

                                CAVALRY.

         Commanded by Lieut.-Gen. the Earl of UXBRIDGE, G.C.B.

  _1st Brigade._—Commanded by Major-Gen. Lord EDWARD SOMERSET, K.C.B.
   1st Life Guards                Lieut.-Col. Ferrior.

   2nd         ”                  Lieut.-Col. the Hon. E.P. Lygon.

   Royal Horse Guards (Blue)      Lieut.-Col. Sir Robert Hill.

   1st Dragoon Guards             Lieut.-Col. Fuller (Col.).

         _2nd Brigade._—Major Gen. Sir WILLIAM PONSONBY, K.C.B.
   1st, or Royal Dragoons         Lieut.-Col. A.B. Clifton.

   2nd (or Royal N.B.) Dragoons   Lieut.-Col. J.I. Hamilton.

   6th, or Inniskilling Dragoons  Lieut.-Col. J. Muter (Col.).

                _3rd Brigade._—Major-Gen. W.B. DORNBERG.
   23rd Light Dragoons            Lieut.-Col. the Earl of
                                  Portarlington (Col.).

   1st        ”        K.G.L.     Lieut.-Col. J. Bulow.

   2nd        ”        ”          Lieut.-Col. C. de Jonquiera.

        _4th Brigade._—Major-Gen. Sir JOHN O. VANDELEUR, K.C.B.
   11th Light Dragoons            Lieut.-Col. J.W. Sleigh.

   12th        ”                  Lieut.-Col. the Hon. F.C. Ponsonby
                                  (Col.).

   16th        ”                  Lieut.-Col. J. Hay.

         _5th Brigade._—Major-Gen. Sir COLQUHOUN GRANT, K.C.B.
   7th Hussars                    Col. Sir Edward Kerrison.

   15th        ”                  Lieut.-Col. L.C. Dalrymple.

   2nd        ”        K.G.L.     Lieut.-Col. Linsingen.


          _6th Brigade._—Major-Gen. Sir HUSSEY VIVIAN, K.C.B.
   10th Royal Hussars             Lieut.-Col. Quentin (Col.).

   18th Hussars                   Lieut.-Col. the Hon. H. Murray.

   1st        ”        K.G.L.     Lieut.-Col. A. Wissell.

             _7th Brigade._—Col. Sir F. ARENSCHILDT, K.C.B.
   13th Light Dragoons            Lieut.-Col. P. Doherty.

   3rd Hussars, K.G.L.            Lieut.-Col. Meyer.

                          Col. BARON ESTORFF.

   Prince Regent’s Hussars        Lieut.-Col. Count Kielmansegge.

   Bremen and Verden Hussars      Col. Busche.

                        BRITISH HORSE ARTILLERY.

                                 { Major Bull’s (Howitzers).
                                 { Lieut.-Col. Webber Smith’s.
                                 { Lieut.-Col. Sir Robert Gardiner’s.
  Batteries                      { Capt. Whinyates’s (with rockets).
                                 { Capt. Mercer’s.
                                 { Major Ramsay’s.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                               INFANTRY.

                           _First Division._
                        Major-Gen. GEORGE COOKE.

                 _1st Brigade._—Maj.-Gen. P. MAITLAND.
  1st Foot Guards, 2nd Batt.     Major H. Askew (Col.).

     ”          ”    3rd    ”    Major Hon. Wm. Stewart.

                 _2nd Brigade._—Major-Gen. Sir J. BYNG.
  Coldstream Guards, 2nd Batt.   Major A.G. Woodford (Col.).

  3rd Regt. Foot Guards, 2nd     Major F. Hepburn (Col.).
  Batt.

                               ARTILLERY.
                           Lieut.-Col. ADYE.
  Batteries                      { Capt. Sandham’s Foot Battery.

                                 { Major Kuhlman’s Horse   ”
                                 (K.G.L.)


                           _Second Division._
                   Lieut.-Gen. Sir H. CLINTON, G.C.B.

                   _3rd Brigade._—Major-Gen. F. ADAM.
  62nd Foot, 1st Batt.           Lieut.-Col. Sir J. Colborne, K.C.B.
  71st     ”     ”               Lieut.-Col. T. Reynell.
  95th     ”  2nd Rifles         Major J. Ross (Lieut.-Col.).
  95th     ”  3rd     ”          Major A.G. Norcott (Lieut.-Col.).

                  _1st Brigade, K.G.L._—Col. DU PLAT.
  1st Line Batt., K.G.L.         Major W. Robertson.
  2nd     ”     ”                Major G. Muller.
  3rd     ”     ”                Lieut.-Col. F. de Wissell.
  4th     ”     ”                Major F. Reb.

                _3rd Hanoverian Brigade._—Col. HALKETT.
  Mil^a Batt. Bremervorde.      Lieut.-Col. Schulenberg.
  Duke of York’s, 2nd Batt.      Major Count Munster.
       ”        3rd  ”           Major Baron Hunefeld.
  Mil^a Batt., Salzgitter       Major Hammerstein.


                               ARTILLERY.
                           Lieut.-Col. GOLD.
  Batteries                      { Capt. Bolton’s Foot Battery
                                 (British).

                                 { Major A. Sympher’s Horse ditto
                                 (K.G.L.).


                           _Third Division._
                        Lieut.-Gen. Baron ALTEN.

          _5th Brigade._—Major-Gen. Sir COLIN HALKETT, K.C.B.
  30th Foot, 2nd Batt.           Major W. Bailey (Lieut.-Col.).
  33rd   ”                       Lieut.-Col. W.K. Elphinstone.
  69th   ”    2nd Batt.          Lieut.-Col. C. Morice (Col.).
  73rd   ”      ”                Lieut.-Col. W.G. Harris (Col.).

               _2nd Brigade, K.G.L._—Col. Baron OMPTEDA.
  1st Light Batt., K.G.L.        Lieut.-Col. L. Bussche.
  2nd   ”   ”    ”               Major G. Baring.
  5th Line   ”    ”              Lieut.-Col. W.B. Linsingen.
  8th   ”   ”    ”               Major Schroeder (Lieut.-Col.).

        _1st Hanoverian Brigade._—Major-Gen. Count KIELMANSEGGE.
  Duke of York’s 1st Batt.       Major Bulow.
  Field Batt. Grubenhagen        Lieut.-Col. Wurmb.
       ”     Bremen              Lieut.-Col. Langrehr.
       ”     Luneburg            Lieut.-Col. Kleucke.
       ”     Verden              Major De Senkopp.

                               ARTILLERY.
                        Lieut.-Col. WILLIAMSON.
  Foot Batteries                 { Major Lloyd’s (British).
                                 { Capt. A. Cleves’s (K.G.L.).


                           _Fourth Division._
             Lieut.-Gen. Hon. Sir CHARLES COLVILLE, K.C.B.

                     _4th Brigade._—Col. MITCHELL.
  14th Foot, 3rd Batt.           Major F.S. Tidy (Lieut.-Col.).

  23rd   ”    1st   ”            Lieut.-Col. Sir Henry W. Ellis,
                                 K.C.B.

  51st   ”                       Lieut.-Col. H. Mitchell (Col.).

                  _6th Brigade._—Major-Gen. JOHNSTONE.
  35th Foot, 2nd Batt.           Major C. MʻAlister.

  54th   ”                       Lieut.-Col. J., Earl Waldegrave.

  59th   ”   2nd Batt.           Lieut.-Col. H. Austin.

  91st   ”   1st   ”             Lieut.-Col. Sir W. Douglas, K.C.B.
                                 (Col.).

               _6th Hanoverian Brigade._—Major-Gen. LYON.
  Field Batt. Calenberg

      ”     Lanenberg            Lieut.-Col. Benort.

  Mil^a Batt. Hoya              Lieut.-Col. Grote.

     ”     Nieuberg

     ”     Bentheim              Major Croupp.

                               ARTILLERY.
                          Lieut.-Col. HAWKER.

  Foot Batteries                 { Major Brome’s (British).
                                 { Capt. von Rettberg’s (Hanoverian).


                           _Fifth Division._
                 Lieut.-Gen. Sir THOMAS PICTON, G.C.B.

           _8th Brigade._—Major-Gen. Sir JAMES KEMPT, K.C.B.
  28th Foot, 1st Batt.           Sir C. Belson (Col.).

  32nd   ”     ”                 Major J. Hicks (Lieut.-Col.).

  79th   ”     ”                 Lieut.-Col. N. Douglas.

  95th   ”     ”                 Lieut.-Col. Sir A.F. Barnard, K.C.B.
                                 (Col.).

            _9th Brigade._—Major-Gen. Sir DENIS PACK, K.C.B.
  1st Foot, 3rd Batt.            Major C. Campbell.

  42nd   ”    1st   ”            Lieut.-Col. Sir Robert Macara, K.C.B.

  44th   ”    2nd   ”            Lieut.-Col. J.M. Hamerton.

  92nd   ”    1st   ”            Lieut.-Col. J. Cameron (Col.).

                 _5th Hanoverian Brigade._—Col. VINCKE.
  Mil^a Batt. Hameln            Lieut.-Col. Kleucke.

      ”    Hildesheim            Major Rheden.

      ”    Peina                 Major Westphalen.

      ”    Giffhorn              Major Hammerstein.

                               ARTILLERY.

                              Major HEISE.
  Foot Batteries                 { Major Rogers’s (British).
                                 { Capt. Braun’s (Hanoverian).


                           _Sixth Division._

                 _10th Brigade._—Major-Gen. J. LAMBERT.
  4th Foot, 1st Batt.            Lieut.-Col. F. Brooke.
  27th  ”   1st   ”              Capt. John Hare (Major).
  40th  ”   1st   ”              Major A. Heyland.

                  _4th Hanoverian Brigade._—Col. BEST.
  Mil^a Batt. Luneburg          Lieut.-Col. de Ramdohr.
     ”        Verden             Major Decken.
     ”        Osterode           Major Baron Reden.
     ”        Minden             Major De Schmidt.

                               ARTILLERY.
                         Lieut.-Col. BRUCKMANN.
  Foot Batteries                    { Major Unett’s (British).
                                    { Capt. Sinclair’s (British).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           REGIMENTAL LISTS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                            1st LIFE GUARDS.

                            (_2 Squadrons._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

       MAJOR AND LIEUT.-COLONEL.          Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Samuel Ferrior, K.            22 June, 1809 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [2] John Whale, W.                13 Nov.  1809 │

   [3] Montague Lind, K.             22 June, 1810 │

   [4] Edward Kelly, W.               2 Aug.  1810 │13 Sept. 1805

   [5] John Berger                   20 May,  1813 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [6] George Randall                15 Apr.  1811 │

   [7] William Mayne                 26 Sept. 1811 │

              CORNETS AND                          │
            SUB-LIEUTENANTS.                       │

   [8] William Stewart               23 Feb.  1813 │
       Richardson, W.                              │

   [9] Samuel Cox, W.                 1 June, 1814 │

  [10] George Story                   3 Apr.  1815 │4 Aug. 1814

            QUARTERMASTERS.                        │

  [11] [Wm.] Dobson, W.                            │

       —— Towers, K.                               │

       —— Slingsby, K.                             │

          ASSISTANT SURGEONS.                      │

  [12] Richard Gough                 22 Sept. 1812 │

  [13] John Haddy James              27 Oct.  1812 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [14] Francis Dalton                20 May,  1813 │

              _Scarlet._   _Facings blue._   _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Is said to have led his regt. to the charge no less than eleven times,
  “And most of the charges were not made till after his head had been
  laid open by the cut of a sabre and his body was pierced with a
  lance.”

Footnote 2:

  Exchanged to 16th Dgns. as maj. (commission dated 18th June, 1815).
  Quitted the service before 1st March, 1817.

Footnote 3:

  Only son of Edward George Lind, of Stratford Place.

Footnote 4:

  Bn. at Portarlington, Queen’s County, 1771. At Waterloo he encountered
  and killed the col. of the 1st Regt. of French Cuirassiers, stripped
  him of his epaulettes, and carried them off as a trophy. Made
  brevet-maj. for Waterloo and Knight of St. Anne of Russia. Exchanged
  into 23rd Light Dgns. and served as A.D.C. to Gen. Lord Combermere at
  the siege of Bhurtpore. D. at Mullye, 6th Aug., 1828, as col. on
  staff. His widow d. 22nd Nov., 1860.

Footnote 5:

  Quitted the service 14th Dec., 1815.

Footnote 6:

  Promoted capt. 18th June, 1815. H. p. 13th Oct., 1825. Living in 1847.

Footnote 7:

  Promoted capt. 14th Dec., 1815. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 8:

  Promoted lieut. 5th June, 1815. Lieut. in the 55th Foot, 24th Oct.,
  1822. Capt. 24th Dec., 1825. H. p. same date.

Footnote 9:

  Afterwards Capt. Samuel Fortnam Cox, of Sandford Park, Oxfordshire.
  M., 1820, Mary Emily, dau. of Sir Robert Sheffield, Bart. R. h. p.
  1829. D. 22nd Nov., 1849.

Footnote 10:

  This officer had been taken prisoner during the preceding war, and
  been kept a prisoner for seven years at Verdun, in France. In the
  first charge made by the Life Guards at Waterloo, Lt. Story was in the
  act of raising his sword to cut down a French soldier, when the latter
  suddenly threw down his firelock and thus accosted him: “Monsieur, ne
  me tuez pas; je vous connois à Verdun; sauvez-moi la vie en grâce!”
  Story immediately recognised the speaker, and not only spared the
  French soldier’s life, but likewise that of his comrade—also from
  Verdun—and sent them as prisoners to the rear. In May, 1815, Story
  obtained permission from the Prince Regent to accept and wear the
  Russian Order of St. Vladimir of the 4th class. Retired about 1825,
  and d. at Maidenhead 20th Feb., 1828.

Footnote 11:

  Retd. on f. p. in 1828. D. in Dec., 1849.

Footnote 12:

  Retd. on h. p. 25th Dec., 1818. Living in 1830.

Footnote 13:

  Serving in 1816. Out of the regt. in 1817.

Footnote 14:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. in 1818.


                            2ND LIFE GUARDS.

                            (_2 Squadrons._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

       MAJOR AND LIEUT.-COLONEL.          Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Hon. Edward P. Lygon          27 Apr.  1815 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [2] William Boyce                 30 Apr.  1812 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [3] Richard Fitzgerald, K.        18 May,  1812 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

   [4] Hon. Henry Edw. Irby          22 Sept. 1812 │7 Aug. 1806

   [5] James P.M. Kenyon             23 Sept. 1812 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [6] Richard Meares                23 Sept. 1802 │10 Mar. 1808

   [7] William Elliott               27 Nov.  1802 │

   [8] Samuel Waymouth, W.           28 Mar.  1813 │

   [9] Chum. (_sic_) Barton          30 Jan.  1814 │

              CORNETS AND                          │
            SUB-LIEUTENANTS.                       │

  [10] Abraham Kenyon                24 June, 1813 │

  [11] Thomas Marten                 22 Nov.  1813 │

  [12] Alexander McInnes             16 June, 1814 │

  [13] Josiah Clues, Adjt.           12 Apr.  1815 │

            QUARTERMASTERS.                        │

       —— Bradley, K.                              │

       —— Beamond, K.                              │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [14] Samuel Broughton              22 Sept. 1812 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [15] Thomas Drinkwater             22 Sept. 1812 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [16] Jeremiah Field                24 Apr.  1813 │

              _Scarlet._   _Facings blue._   _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  4th son of Edward Lygon, of Worcester (who was created Baron and Earl
  Beauchamp), by Catherine, only dau. of James Dennis. For his forward
  gallantry at Waterloo was made C.B. and a K. St. V. of Russia. Was
  aftds. Inspector-gen. of cavalry. Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 13th Lt. Dgns.
  D. 11th Nov., 1860.

Footnote 2:

  Placed on h. p. 24th April, 1817.

Footnote 3:

  4th and only surviving son of — Fitzgerald, of the County Clare. Was
  for ten years detained in France with others of his family. Returned
  to England 1812, and purchased a troop in the 2nd Life Guards. Served
  in the Pa. Shot whilst gallantly leading his squadron against the
  enemy. Buried at Waterloo. M.I. in church there. His widow brought out
  a coffin to remove his remains to England; but it proved too short,
  and the body was re-interred. His will, dated at Paris, 30th Nov.,
  1810, was proved by his sister, Catherine, 3rd Aug., 1815. His widow
  (Georgina Isabella Sinclair) resigned her pension in favour of her
  husband’s three sisters.

Footnote 4:

  Son of 2nd Baron Boston. Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. Was taken prisoner as
  his horse fell in returning from the charge, but escaped soon
  afterwards. Retd. as lt.-col., and died at Calais, 1821.

Footnote 5:

  Placed on h. p. 10th Oct., 1816. M., Sept., 1817, Julia, only dau. of
  Gen. Rainsford, and had issue. His name does not appear in the Kenyon
  pedigree given in Foster’s _Lancashire Families_. D. at Brandon, 20th
  Jan., 1830, aged 45.

Footnote 6:

  Placed on h. p. as capt. 24th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 7:

  Promoted capt. 14th April, 1818. Appointed capt. in the 17th Foot 20th
  Jan., 1821. Serving in 1824. Out of said regt. before 1830.

Footnote 8:

  Severely wounded and taken prisoner in a charge against the French
  cuirassiers. Lieut. in 88th Foot, 13th Oct., 1825; h. p. in Dec.,
  1825. Capt. in 30th Foot, 8th Feb., 1839. Retd. in 1741 as lt.-col.
  unattached. D. as col. 26th Dec., 1863.

Footnote 9:

  Chambré Brabazon Barton. 2nd son of Thos. Barton of Grove, M.P. for
  Fethard before the Union. Capt. 1818. Lt.-col. h. p. 1825. D. 1834.

Footnote 10:

  Younger brother to J.P. Kenyon. On h. p. 2nd D.G., 1817. Lieut. 2nd
  W.I. Regt., 13th Dec., 1833.

Footnote 11:

  Bn. at Winchilsea, 29th Dec., 1797. Had exceptionally high interest in
  early life. Cornet in the regt. 1813. Lt.-col. Rl. Dns. in 1835.
  Aftds. Maj.-Gen. and Col.-in-Ch. 6th Dns. K.H. Resided at Beverley. M.
  Miss Ellison, and d. s. p. 22nd Nov., 1868.

Footnote 12:

  Son of Thos. McInnes of Edinburgh, architect, by Jane Nicholson,
  sister to Lt.-Gen. Robt. Nicholson, E.I.C.S., who distinguished
  himself at the siege of Baroach in the E. Indies. Cornet McInnes, who
  had served at Vittoria, assumed the name and arms of Nicholson by Rl.
  Licence in 1821. He m. Cecilia Innes, eldest dau. and co-heir of Peter
  Innes of Fraserfield, in Shetland. She d. in 1842. In the _Gentleman’s
  Magazine_ for 1862 occurs the following notice:—

  “Feb. 9th.—In the Charterhouse, aged 82, Alexander Nicholson, Esq.,
  formerly Captain 2nd Life Guards, late of East Court, Charlton King’s,
  near Cheltenham, and of Ufford, Suffolk. Descended from an old family
  long settled at Loan End, near Norham, co. Durham.”

Footnote 13:

  Placed on h. p. as lt., 83rd Foot, 25th Jan., 1817. Living in 1830.

Footnote 14:

  Grandson of the Rev. Thos. Broughton, rector of St. Mary Redcliffe,
  Bristol. Succeeded Mr. Moore (elder bro. to Sir John Moore) as
  surgeon, F.R.S. D. after having his leg amputated 20th Aug., 1837.

Footnote 15:

  Out of the regt. in 1818.

Footnote 16:

  Placed on h. p. 25th Dec., 1818. Living in 1846.


                    ROYAL REGIMENT OF HORSE GUARDS.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                COLONEL.                  Regiment.│Army.

       _Arthur, Duke of               1 Jan.  1813 │F.-M., 21 June,
       WELLINGTON, K.G._                           │1813

            LIEUT.-COLONELS.                       │

       _Sir John Elley, K.C.B._,      6 Mar.  1806 │Col., 7 Mar. 1813
       W.                                          │

   [1] Sir Robt. Chambre Hill,       13 May,  1813 │1 Jan. 1812
       Knt., W.                                    │

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Robert Christopher Packe,     13 May,  1813 │
       K.                                          │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] John Thoyts                   22 Aug.  1805 │

   [4] William Robert Clayton        27 Apr.  1809 │

       _Clement Hill_, W.             4 Apr.  1811 │Lt.-Col., 30 Dec.
                                                   │1813

   [5] William Tyrwhitt Drake        29 Aug.  1811 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [6] John B. Riddlesden             4 Apr.  1811 │

   [7] William Cunliffe Shawe, W.    26 Dec.  1811 │

   [8] Everard William Bouverie,     15 Oct.  1812 │
       W.                                          │

       _Charles Augustus Fitzroy_    16 Oct.  1812 │

   [9] Henry Ellis Boates            28 Jan.  1813 │

  [10] Tathwell Baker Tathwell        9 Sept. 1813 │

  [11] George Smith                  18 Nov.  1813 │

  [12] Hon. George John Watson       24 Mar.  1814 │

                CORNETS.                           │

  [13] John Kirkby Picard             2 Sept. 1813 │

  [14] James Arnold                   1 Sept. 1814 │

            QUARTERMASTERS.                        │

  [15] Thomas Varley, W.             20 Mar.  1806 │

  [16] Peter Watmough                22 Feb.  1809 │

  [17] Thomas Hardy                  13 Feb.  1812 │

  [18] Jonas Varley, W.              18 May,  1813 │

  [19] Thomas Troy                    5 Aug.  1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [20] David Slow                    18 July, 1805 │23 Aug. 1799

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [21] John Seddall (_sic_)          10 Oct.  1812 │

              _Blue._   _Facings scarlet._    _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  4th son of Sir John Hill, Bart., and brother to Lord Hill. C.B. for
  Waterloo. Col., 1st Jan., 1819. Of Prees Hall, Salop. M., 5th Feb.,
  1801, Eliza, dau. of Henry Lumley, and had issue. D. 5th March, 1860.

Footnote 2:

  2nd son of Charles Packe, of Prestwold, co. Leicester. M.I. in St.
  George’s Chapel, Windsor.

Footnote 3:

  3rd son of John Thoyts, of Sulhamstead, Berks, by Mary, dau. of Thos.
  Burfoot, Treasurer of Christ’s Hospital. Bn. 2nd Nov., 1771.
  Matriculated at B.N.C., Oxford, 23rd March, 1789. Cornet R.H. Gds.,
  14th Feb., 1800. Served in the Pa. His horse was shot under him at
  Waterloo, and he was taken prisoner. Detained at Charleroi for some
  days by the French rearguard. Promoted maj., 18th June, 1815, and bt.
  lt.-col. same date. Retd. 1820. D. May, 1849. Bd. at Kensal Green.

Footnote 4:

  Eldest son of Sir W. Clayton, Bart., by Mary, dau. of Sir Wm. East,
  Bart. Succeeded as 5th Bart., in 1834. M., in 1817, Alice, dau. and
  co-heir of Col. O’Donel, son of Sir Neil O’Donel, Bart., and had
  issue. Served in the Pa. Attained rank of maj.-gen. 1858. D. 1866.

Footnote 5:

  2nd son of Robert Tyrwhitt Drake, of Shardeloes, Bucks. Lt.-col. 22nd
  June, 1820. M., 22nd Aug., 1832, Emma, dau. of Joseph Halsey, and had
  issue. D. 21st Dec., 1848.

Footnote 6:

  Served in the Pa., and was present at Vittoria and Toulouse. Attained
  rank of col. h. p., 23rd Nov., 1841. Living 1874.

Footnote 7:

  Eldest son of Joseph Cunliffe Shawe. Capt. same regt., 1816. M. ——
  Pattenson, of Selwood, Bath, and had issue.

Footnote 8:

  Aftds. Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 15th Hussars. Of Delapré Abbey,
  Northampton. Son of Edward Bouverie. Bn. 13th Oct., 1789. M., 3rd
  April, 1816, Charlotte, dau. of Col. Hugh O’Donel. D. s. p. 18th Nov.,
  1871.

Footnote 9:

  Of Rose Hill, Denbigh. Killed out hunting, 8th Dec., 1838. Lt.-col. h.
  p. 1828.

Footnote 10:

  Was taken prisoner at Waterloo, but effected his escape two days
  after. It is on record that he captured a French eagle, which was
  retaken by his captors. See _Stamford Mercury_, 4th Aug., 1815.

Footnote 11:

  Aftds. maj. and bt.-lt.-col. same regt. Living 1846.

Footnote 12:

  Aftds. 4th Baron Sondes, of Lees Court, Kent. Bn. 20th Jan., 1794.
  Quitted the service 1816. M., 24th July, 1823, Eleanor, 5th dau. of
  Sir Edward Knatchbull, Bart., and had issue. Assumed the surname of
  Milles, D. 17th Dec., 1874.

Footnote 13:

  Quitted the service as lieut. R.H.G. in 1821.

Footnote 14:

  Reduced with his tp. in 1818.

Footnote 15:

  Placed on h. p. 12th Dec., 1822. Appointed a Military Knight of
  Windsor. D. at Windsor 25th March, 1841, aged 69.

Footnote 16:

  Retd. on f. p. before 1830 and d. 1841.

Footnote 17:

  Placed on h. p. 25th Aug., 1822. D. in 1855.

Footnote 18:

  Serving in 1824. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 19:

  Retd. f. p. 1829. Living in 1846.

Footnote 20:

  Serving in 1824. Out of the regt. in Jan., 1826.

Footnote 21:

  _Siddall._ D. at Windsor 2nd Oct., 1856, aged 69. “He served 52 years
  in the Royal Horse Guards, and was the last surviving Waterloo officer
  of the regiment.”—_Naval and Military Gazette._


                1st (or the KING’S) REGIMENT OF DRAGOON
                                GUARDS.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.
   [1] William Fuller, K.            22 Aug.  1805 │Col., 4 June, 1813
               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [2] Henry Graham, K.              12 June, 1799 │Maj., 4 June, 1811
   [3] Michael Turner, W.             4 July, 1805 │
   [4] James Frank Naylor, W.        15 May,  1806 │
   [5] William Elton                 11 May,  1809 │
   [6] John Dorset Bringhurst, K.    24 Oct.  1811 │Maj., 12 Apr. 1814
   [7] John Paget Sweeny, W.          9 Jan.  1812 │
   [8] Robert Wallace                20 Oct.  1814 │
   [9] Thomas N. Quicke               8 Dec.  1814 │
       _Hon. George L. Dawson_        6 Apr.  1815 │Maj., 10 Mar. 1814
  [10] George Battersby, K.           2 Sept. 1813 │
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
  [11] James Leatham                 12 June, 1806 │
  [12] William Stirling              19 Mar.  1812 │
  [13] Ralph Babington               18 June, 1812 │
  [14] Francis Brooke, K.            31 Dec.  1812 │
  [15] Robert Toovey Hawley          30 Sept. 1813 │
  [16] Thos. Coventry Brander        30 Mar.  1814 │
  [17] Thos. Shelver, Adjt., K.      31 Mar.  1814 │
  [18] Edward Hamill                 17 Nov.  1814 │
  [19] Wm. d’Arcy Irvine, W.         15 Feb.  1815 │
  [20] Jos. Edward Greaves           16 Feb.  1815 │
  [21] John N. Hibbert               30 Mar.  1815 │
  [22] George Quicke                  3 May,  1815 │
  [23] Thos. Falkiner Middleton       4 May,  1815 │
                CORNETS.                           │
  [24] Hon. H.B. Bernard, K.         15 June, 1814 │
  [25] Wm. Warburton Huntley         16 June, 1814 │
             QUARTERMASTER.                        │
  [26] John Brown                    15 June, 1815 │
                SURGEON.                           │
  [27] John Going                    17 Dec.  1801 │
          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │
  [28] William MʻAuley               16 Aug.  1810 │8 Feb. 1810
  [29] Robert Pearson                13 May,  1813 │
              _Scarlet._   _Facings blue._   _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  In his will, dated 14th March, 1813, and proved in London, 21st Aug.,
  1815, he mentions his brothers Joseph, Richard, and George. The
  first-named was left sole executor and residuary legatee.

Footnote 2:

  Pens. of £100 per ann. granted to his widow, Maria Graham.

Footnote 3:

  Promoted maj. 7th Sept., 1815. Out of the regt. in 1818.

Footnote 4:

  Retd. as bt.-maj. in 1820. D. in 1854.

Footnote 5:

  Lt.-col. h. p. 5th Nov., 1825. 2nd son of the Rev. Sir Abraham Elton,
  Bart. Bn. 6th Jan., 1785. D. 15th Nov., 1848.

Footnote 6:

  Of Woodstone, co. Huntingdon. Administration of his personalty and
  effects was granted, on 22nd Nov., 1815, to his widow, Frances Maria
  Bringhurst. M.I. at Waterloo.

Footnote 7:

  Promoted maj. 28th Aug., 1823. On h. p. 1825.

Footnote 8:

  Resided in York, and was a well-known figure in York society. Bn. 1st
  Nov., 1789. 6th son of John Wallace, of Sedcop House, Kent, who was
  uncle of the Rt. Hon. Thos. Wallace (created Baron Wallace, 1828).
  When charging with his regt. at Waterloo, a French trumpeter was
  passed lying on the ground. Few of the regt. forbore to have a slash
  at their fallen enemy, as they galloped past; but Robert Wallace was
  merciful. “I did not slash at him,” said the kind-hearted old colonel,
  in narrating the incident, “but the trumpeter slashed at me!” Promoted
  maj. in same regt. 1828. K.H. M. Henrietta Ellis (sister to Thos.
  Ellis, M.P. for Dublin), and had issue. D., as col., 25th March, 1863.

Footnote 9:

  4th son of John Quicke, of Newton St. Cyres, by Emily, dau. of Alex.
  Cumming. M., 1823, Sophia, dau. of John Evered. On h. p. 1827. D.
  1830.

Footnote 10:

  Bn. 20th April, 1788. Youngest son of John Battersby, of the Westmeath
  family. Fell in the last cavalry charge.

Footnote 11:

  Promoted capt. 19th July, 1815. Placed on h. p. 28th April, 1825.
  Living in 1860 as a lt.-col., retd.

Footnote 12:

  Promoted capt. same regt. 20th July, 1815. Placed on h. p. 12th Feb.,
  1818. Bn. 1789. Son of Wm. Stirling, of Keir and Cawder, by his 2nd
  wife (Jean, dau. of Sir John Stuart, Bart.). Was twice married. The
  only issue of the first marriage was the late Wm. Stuart Stirling
  Crawford, who married the D.-Duchess of Montrose.

Footnote 13:

  A cadet of the ancient Leicestershire family of this name. Promoted
  capt. 6th Sept., 1815.

Footnote 14:

  Bn. 1794. Eldest son of Sir H. Brooke, of Colebrooke, Bart.

Footnote 15:

  Promoted capt. 30th Dec., 1826. On h. p. 1828. See pedigree of this
  family in the _Genealogist_, Vol. I.

Footnote 16:

  Capt., 15th Lt. Dns., 1st June, 1839. Retd. on h. p. in 1840. D. at
  Somerford Grange, near Christchurch, 12th Nov., 1861.

Footnote 17:

  Had been appointed adjt., Feb., 1812.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 19th Dec., 1822. Exchanged to 66th Foot 19th June, 1823. Capt.
  h. p. 28th June, 1827.

Footnote 19:

  Of Castle Irvine, Irvinestown, Fermanagh. He adopted the surname of
  D’Arcy. Retired from the army 2nd Jan., 1817. M., 1817, Maria, dau. of
  Sir Henry Brooke, of Colebrooke, Bart., and had issue. D. 23rd June,
  1857.

Footnote 20:

  Of Thornhill and Woodlands, co. York. 2nd son of George Bustard
  Greaves, by Ellen, dau. and heir of Joseph Clay, of Bridge House, co.
  York. Assumed the name of Elmsall in 1817. Capt. 1820. On h. p. 1821.
  M., 19th Feb., 1824, Hannah, youngest dau. of Adam Lawson, of
  Cramlington, and had issue. D. 5th July, 1851, as a maj., retd. list.

Footnote 21:

  Of Chalfont Park, co. Bucks. 3rd son of Robert Hibbert, of Birtles
  Hall, co. Chester, by Letitia, dau. of John Nembhard, of Jamaica. M.,
  6th Aug., 1833, Jane, eldest dau. of Sir Robert Alexander, Bart. D.,
  3rd Jan., 1886.

Footnote 22:

  Younger brother to the above Capt. Quicke. D. at Southsea 18th Sept.,
  1838.

Footnote 23:

  Placed on h. p. in 1816.

Footnote 24:

  Bn. 5th Dec., 1797. 5th son of 1st Viscount Bandon, by the only dau.
  of Richard, 2nd Earl of Shannon.

Footnote 25:

  Capt. 3rd D.G., 16th March, 1832.

Footnote 26:

  H. p. 30th March, 1838. D. 21st Feb., 1851.

Footnote 27:

  Left the regt. in March, 1817.

Footnote 28:

  Left the regt. in 1816.

Footnote 29:

  Appointed surgeon to 87th Foot, 13th Aug., 1830. Placed on h. p. in
  1847.


                  1st (or ROYAL) REGIMENT OF DRAGOONS.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Arthur Benjamin Clifton       22 Nov.  1810 │25 July, 1810

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Philip Dorville               17 Oct.  1811 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Charles Edward Radclyffe,      1 Dec.  1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814
       W.                                          │

   [4] Alex. Kennedy Clark, W.       13 Dec.  1810 │

   [5] Paul Phipps                   25 July, 1811 │

   [6] Edward Chas. Windsor, K.      18 June, 1812 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

       Charles Foster, K.            18 Nov.  1807 │

   [7] Henry Robert Carden           13 Apr.  1809 │

   [8] George Gunning, W.             7 Dec.  1809 │2 Sept. 1807

   [9] Townshend Richard Kelly,      25 Oct.  1810 │
       W.                                          │

  [10] Sigismund Trafford            25 July, 1811 │

  [11] Samuel Windowe, W.            21 Nov.  1811 │

  [12] Cornthwaite Ommaney, W.       17 Apr.  1815 │13 Aug. 1812

  [13] Charles Blois, W.             18 Apr.  1815 │2 Sept. 1813

  [14] Stephen Goodenough, W.        19 Apr.  1815 │6 Jan. 1814

                CORNETS.                           │

  [15] Richard Magniac, K.            2 Sept. 1813 │

  [16] William Sturges               30 Dec.  1813 │

  [17] Charles Butler Stevenson      24 Mar.  1814 │

  [18] Hon. John Massey              31 Mar.  1814 │

  [19] John C. Sykes, K.             19 Jan.  1815 │

       T. —— Shipley, Adjt., K.      19 Jan.  1815 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [20] William Waddell                8 July, 1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [21] George Steed                  17 Jan.  1811 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [22] Thomas Prosser                 9 Dec.  1813 │29 Aug. 1811

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [23] Wm. Ryding                     2 June, 1804 │2 May, 1800

              _Scarlet._   _Facings blue._   _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  3rd son of Sir Gervase Clifton, Bart., of Clifton, Notts,
  representative of a very ancient family. Served throughout the Par.
  War, and received the gold medal and one clasp for Fuentes d’Onor and
  Vittoria. On the death of Sir Wm. Ponsonby at Waterloo, the command of
  the 2nd Cavalry Brigade devolved upon Col. Clifton. G.C.B., K.C.H.,
  K.S.A., gen. in the army and Col.-in-Chf. 1st Dgns. D. 7th March,
  1869, unm.

Footnote 2:

  The name of Dorville has only been known in England for a little over
  a century; but it is that of a well-known Norman family which
  flourished for six hundred years in France prior to its exodus from
  France to North Germany, for religious causes, early in the 17th
  century. From Germany the “d’Orvilles” migrated to Holland, where the
  family left its mark in the person of the learned James Philip
  Dorville, professor of history and languages to a Dutch university,
  and likewise a Sicilian explorer, whose valuable book on Sicily (with
  rare illustrations), written in the purest Latin, is treasured, with
  other Dorville books, in the Bodleian Library. The professor’s son,
  John Dorville, quitted Holland and settled in England. He bought the
  Ravenscourt Estate at Fulham. M. Anne Gibson (grand-daughter of Edmund
  Gibson, Bishop of London), and had three sons, the two younger of whom
  were Philip and Thomas, both of whom entered the army and did good
  service in the Par. War—the former being for some time on Lord
  Anglesey’s staff, and the latter in the 1st Foot Guards. At Waterloo
  Col. Dorville commanded the two squadrons of the 1st Dgns. “which
  rushed into the second column of the enemy, consisting of about 4,000
  men, and after a desperate fight returned with a French eagle.” In
  this gallant charge Col. Dorville had the scabbard of his sword shot
  away, and a bullet passed through the breast of his coat. Had three
  horses shot under him. On the death of Sir Wm. Ponsonby the command of
  the “Union Brigade” devolved on Col. Muter, of the 6th Dgns., who,
  being soon after wounded, was replaced by Col. Clifton, and Col.
  Dorville succeeded to the command of the 1st Dgns. Made C.B. for
  Waterloo. Retd. on h. p. 8th March, 1827. M. Miss Dewar, of Clapham,
  and left at his death, 10th Nov., 1847, three daughters, who
  bequeathed the High Croft Estate at Malvern to their cousin, Admiral
  Dorville, the late possessor, the last male representative of an
  ancient family, on every page of whose eventful career in the navy the
  word “Hero” is plainly visible.

Footnote 3:

  “A most scientific and dexterous swordsman.” Did good work in the
  famous charge of his regt. at Waterloo. A musket ball lodged in his
  knee, which could never be extracted, and helped to shorten his life.
  Made bt.-lt.-col. for Waterloo. H. p. list 1820. Appointed maj. of
  brigade to the Inspector-Gen. of Cavalry in Great Britain. D. 24th
  Feb., 1827.

Footnote 4:

  Aftds. Lt.-Gen. Sir Alexander Clark-Kennedy, of Knockgray, co.
  Kirkcudbright, A.D.C. to the Queen, K.C.B., and K.H. Served in the Pa.
  It was this officer, and not Corporal Stiles, who _personally_
  captured the French eagle of the 105th Regt. at Waterloo, after a
  desperate fight, in which he was severely wounded, and handed it over
  to Corporal Stiles (of whom see memoir in Part III.), to convey it to
  the rear. Bn. 1782. Son of John Clark, of Nunland, by Anne, dau. and
  co-heir of Alex. Kennedy, of Knockgray. M., 21st Dec., 1816, Harriet,
  dau. and co-heir of John Randall and had issue. D. in Jan., 1864.

Footnote 5:

  3rd son of Thos. Phipps, of Leighton House, Wilts, by Penelope, dau.
  of Lewis Clutterbuck, of Widcombe House, Bath. Bn. 18th Jan., 1789.
  Served in the Pa. Aftds. lt.-col., h. p. 1829, and K.H. M. Mrs.
  Kingston (_née_ Saunders), widow of Benjamin Kingston, and had issue.
  D. 22nd Nov., 1858.

Footnote 6:

  Son of Edward Windsor, of Shrewsbury. A pen. of £50 per ann. was
  granted to his mother, Dorothy Windsor, she having expended all her
  fortune in buying her son’s commission.

Footnote 7:

  Bn. 8th Feb., 1789. 2nd son of Col. Sir John Carden, 1st Bart. of
  Templemore, co Tipperary, who raised and commanded the 30th Regt. of
  Lt. Dgns., which regt. was reduced at the Peace of Amiens. Succeeded
  his brother as 3rd Bart. in 1822. M., 10th March, 1818, Louisa, only
  child of Frederick Thomson, of Dublin, and had issue. Was placed on h.
  p. as Capt. 1st Dgns. in 1816. D. in March, 1847.

Footnote 8:

  Eldest son of George Gunning, of Frindsbury, J.P. and D.L. for Kent.
  Ensign 17th Foot, 1804. Served in the Pa., and commanded the Grenadier
  Company of the 9th Foot at battle of Vimiera. Exchanged to 1st Dgns.
  1809. Commanded his troop at Waterloo in the famous charge, where he
  was sev. wnded. He always claimed that he gave the order to Corporal
  Stiles to seize the eagle of the 105th French regt. from the officer
  who held it. (See Part III.) H. p. 1822. D. at Brighton, 5th Jan.,
  1849.

Footnote 9:

  Capt. h. p. 19th Jan., 1826. D. 5th April, 1854.

Footnote 10:

  Eldest son of Sigismund Trafford, of Wroxham Hall, Norfolk. Half-pay
  in 1816. Capt., h. p. in 1842. D. 14th Feb., 1852, at his residence,
  Rue de Lille, Paris.

Footnote 11:

  _Wyndowe._ Capt. 11th July, 1822. Serving in 1825. Out of the regt.
  before 1830.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 24th Lt. Dgns., 24th Dec., 1818. Half-pay same date. D. at
  Chichester 14th Sept., 1833.

Footnote 13:

  Capt. 25th Sept., 1823. Major 27th Oct., 1829. Retd. 1st Sept., 1830.
  Was subsequently Lt.-Col. East Suffolk Militia. Eldest son of Sir
  Chas. Blois, 6th Bart. of Grundisburgh Hall, Suffolk. Succeeded as 7th
  Bart. in 1850. D. unm. in 1855.

Footnote 14:

  Capt. 20th July, 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 15:

  Returned as “missing” in the _London Gazette_ but was never again
  heard of. His gallantry at Waterloo is referred to in the _Gentleman’s
  Magazine_, 1815.

Footnote 16:

  Lieut. 20th July, 1815. Exchanged to the Scots Greys 14th Sept., 1815.
  Capt. 4th April, 1822. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 17:

  Left the regt. in 1816.

Footnote 18:

  In 1822 was appointed to a troop in the Cape Corps. Placed on h. p.
  1826. Lt.-col., retd. 1841. 3rd son of Hugh, 3rd Baron Massey. M.,
  12th April, 1828, Eliz., youngest dau. of Edward Homewood, and had
  issue. D. in Dublin 7th March, 1848.

Footnote 19:

  Grandson of Joseph Sykes of West Ella, Hull, brother of the Rev. Sir
  Mark Sykes, 1st Bart.

Footnote 20:

  Retd. f. p. 1828. Living in 1846.

Footnote 21:

  Retd. h. p. Sept, 1825. Living in 1846.

Footnote 22:

  Retd. on h. p. 18th Jan., 1816. Living in 1825.

Footnote 23:

  Serving in 1830.


                2ND (OR ROYAL NORTH BRITISH) REGIMENT OF
                               DRAGOONS.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] James Inglis Hamilton, K.     16 June, 1807 │Col., 4 June, 1814

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Isaac Blake Clarke, W.        16 June, 1807 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

   [3] Thomas Pate Hankin, W.         4 Apr.  1808 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [4] Edward Cheney                  3 May,  1800 │Maj., 1 Jan. 1812

   [5] James Poole, W.               25 May,  1803 │Maj., 4 June, 1813

   [6] Robert Vernor, W.             23 Nov.  1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

       _Thomas Reignolds_, K.        25 Dec.  1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [7] Charles Levyns Barnard, K.     2 Feb.  1815 │

   [8] Thomas Charles Fenton          6 Feb.  1815 │

   [9] Edward Payne                   5 Apr.  1815 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] Henry McMillan, Adjt.         10 Apr.  1805 │

  [11] John Mills, W.                 5 May,  1808 │

  [12] Francis Stupart, W.           14 Dec.  1809 │

  [13] Geo. Home Falconar            21 Nov.  1811 │

  [14] James Wemyss                  15 Sept. 1814 │19 Nov. 1812

  [15] James Carruthers, K.           9 Feb.  1815 │

  [16] Archibald J. Hamilton, W.     16 Mar.  1815 │11 June, 1812

  [17] Thos. Trotter, K.             16 Mar.  1815 │

  [18] James Gape                     3 May,  1815 │

  [19] Charles Wyndham, W.            4 May,  1815 │

  [20] Jas. Reg. Torin Graham         8 June, 1815 │

                CORNETS.                           │

  [21] Edward Westby, K.             12 May,  1814 │17 Feb. 1814

  [22] F.C. Kinchant, K.             18 Jan.  1815 │

  [23] Lemuel Shuldham, K.           19 Jan.  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [24] William Dawson                13 Oct.  1814 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [25] John Lennox                    3 June, 1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [26] Robert Dann, M.D.              4 Aug.  1814 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [27] James Alexander                9 Jan.  1812 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [28] John Trigg                    17 Dec.  1807 │23 Dec. 1797

              _Scarlet._   _Facings blue._   _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Second son of Sergt.-Major Wm. Anderson of the 21st Fusiliers. Born in
  camp at Tayantroga, America, 4th July, 1777, and bapt. 28th Aug. same
  year. On the return of the 21st to Scotland the sergt.-major was
  discharged with a pension and settled at his native city, Glasgow.
  Gen. James Inglis Hamilton, the colonel of the 21st, who was a
  Lanarkshire man, being on a visit to Glasgow some years later,
  happened to meet his former sergt.-major and gave him money for
  educational purposes. Later on he took little James Anderson to his
  family seat at Murdestoun and introduced him to his maiden sister Miss
  Christina Hamilton. The general and his sister educated James Anderson
  and his brothers at Glasgow Grammar School. Through his patron’s army
  interest James Anderson was appointed Cornet in the Scots Greys at the
  age of fifteen under the name of James Inglis Hamilton. (_Old
  Reminiscences of Glasgow_, Vol. I.) Lieut. 4th Oct. 1793. Capt. 15th
  April, 1794. Major 17th Feb., 1803. Lt.-Col. 16th June, 1807. Bt.-Col.
  4th June, 1814. Col. Hamilton had both arms cut off in the charge at
  Waterloo, and he snatched the reins with his mouth (Col. Clerke’s
  letter to the Misses Anderson). Hamilton’s body was found on the
  field—shot through the heart in addition to other wounds, and rifled.
  His trusty sword was gone, but the scabbard and silken sash remained.
  These relics were transmitted to Lieut. Jno. Anderson, the colonel’s
  brother, who d. at Glasgow 3rd Dec., 1816, from wounds recd. at
  Salamanca. The Treasury remitted £200 to the Misses Anderson in Dec.,
  1829; and the Waterloo Fund gave a pension to Col. Hamilton’s widow
  (_née_ Clerke), who was an English lady.

Footnote 2:

  Promoted lt.-col. of the regt. 20th July, 1815. C.B. Retd. 11th Oct.,
  1821. D. at St. Peter’s, Isle of Thanet, 7th Jan., 1850, aged 76.

Footnote 3:

  Knighted by the Prince Regent in 1816. Lt.-Col. of the regt. 11th
  Oct., 1821. D. at the cavalry barracks, Norwich, 20th Oct., 1825, aged
  59. By his wife Sarah, dau. of John Reade, he had no issue, she having
  d. with her child in her first confinement.

Footnote 4:

  Commanded the regt. for the last three hours of the battle, and in
  twenty minutes’ time had five horses killed under him. C.B. Col.
  Eldest son of Robert Cheney, of Meynell Langley, co. Derby, by his
  second marriage with Bridget Leacroft. D. at Gaddesby, co. Leicester,
  3rd March, 1847, leaving issue by his marriage with Elizabeth Ayre.

Footnote 5:

  Taken prisoner at Waterloo. Quitted the service in consequence of
  mental derangement, 17th Feb., 1817, with the bt. rank of lt.-col.

Footnote 6:

  This officer’s name is erroneously spelt “Vernon” in the Army Lists.
  Left the service in 1817, and afterwards resided at Musselburgh.

Footnote 7:

  2nd son of Henry Barnard, of Cave Castle, co. York, whose family had
  long been settled in Yorkshire, by Sarah Eliz., eldest dau. and
  co-heir of Roger Gee, of Bishop Burton, in the same county. Formerly
  served in the 38th Foot, and was placed on h. p. 1st Dgn. Gds. 1814.

Footnote 8:

  Brought into the regt. from h. p. 4th Lt. Dgns. Quitted the service
  1819. M., 1817, Harriet, dau. of George Rooke. Resided at Chepstow. D.
  5th Feb., 1841.

Footnote 9:

  Quitted the service a few months after Waterloo.

Footnote 10:

  Promoted capt. 18th July, 1815. Placed on h. p. 19th Sept., 1816.
  Living in 1842.

Footnote 11:

  Promoted capt. 19th July, 1815.

Footnote 12:

  Promoted capt. 20th July, and placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 13:

  There is some doubt as to whether this officer was actually present at
  Waterloo, as in a contemporary list of officers of the Scots Greys who
  served at this battle, in the handwriting of Lieut. J.R.T. Graham of
  this regt., Lieut. Falconar is noted as being “on baggage guard at
  Brussels.” It is noticeable, however, that Falconar’s name appears in
  the original “Waterloo Muster-roll” of the regt. given in Part II.;
  and it may be that he re-joined the Greys before the close of the
  battle. Placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816. D. at Woodcot, co.
  Haddington, 15th Sept., 1820.

Footnote 14:

  Promoted capt. 10th Oct., 1816, and Maj. 10th June, 1826. H. p. 1827.
  It fell to his lot to command his troop in the final charge at
  Waterloo, and, though severely wounded in the arm, led his men into
  the midst of the conflict. Afterwards held the appointment of High
  Constable of Durham, and d. at Durham 1st Oct., 1847.

Footnote 15:

  A scion of the ancient family of Carruthers, in Annandale. The late
  head of this family, who d. 1878, was formerly an officer in the Scots
  Greys.

Footnote 16:

  Son and heir of Gen. John Hamilton, of Dalzell, by Anne, dau. of R.
  Mathews. Bn. 28th Oct., 1793. Served in the Pa. Was twice md., and by
  2nd wife was father of John Glencairn Hamilton, created a baron 15th
  Aug. 1886. D. 11th Jan., 1834.

Footnote 17:

  Bn. 1795. Son of Lt.-Gen. Alex. Trotter, of Morton Hall, Midlothian.
  Killed by a French officer with whom he was fighting.

Footnote 18:

  Son of Rev. James Gape, of St. Albans, who was grandson maternally of
  1st Viscount Grimston. Promoted capt. 19th June, 1817.

Footnote 19:

  Afterwards lt.-col. of the regt. Appointed keeper of the Crown jewels
  in the Tower of London. D. there 15th Feb., 1872, aged 77.

Footnote 20:

  Son of James Graham, Esq., of Barrock Lodge and Rickerby, Cumberland.
  Appointed cornet in the Scots Greys, 20th Jan., 1814, when 15 years of
  age. He took part in the battle during the whole day, and late at
  night commanded the party sent back to the field to succour the
  wounded and bury the dead. M. Eliz. Jane, dau. of James Saurin, D.D.,
  Lord Bishop of Dromore, and had issue. Promoted capt. 16th March,
  1820; h. p. 1821; major in 1837. D. in Kensington, 20th Jan., 1865.
  Bd. in Brompton Cemetery. The reredos in Stanwix Church, Cumberland,
  was erected in memory of Major Graham. It is an interesting historical
  fact that the Graham family received and sheltered Prince Charles
  Edward at Barrock, after his defeat at Penrith, in Dec., 1745, for a
  night. The old chair in which the Prince slept, and the remains of his
  plaid (which plaid he gave Mrs. Graham when he thanked her on leaving
  in the morning), are now in the possession of Miss Graham, to whom the
  Editor is indebted for the above details of her father and ancestors.
  It is said that the Prince fought at Culloden in someone else’s
  plaid—having given away his own.

Footnote 21:

  3rd son of Wm. Westby, of Thornhill, co. Dublin.

Footnote 22:

  Son of Rev. Francis Kinchant, of Easton, co. Hereford.

Footnote 23:

  Got separated from his troop when charging. He was a cadet of the
  Shuldhams, of Moigh House, co. Longford, and a cousin of Capt. J.A.
  Schreiber, of 11th Lt. Dgns., who met and spoke to him just before the
  battle commenced. Was bd. on the field by men of his own regt. under
  Lieut. Graham.

Footnote 24:

  Out of the regt. in 1829.

Footnote 25:

  Left the regt. 7th Dec., 1826.

Footnote 26:

  Left the regt. 27th Feb., 1817.

Footnote 27:

  Placed on h. p. from 28th Foot 1st March, 1821.

Footnote 28:

  Left the regt. in May, 1826.


              6TH (OR INNISKILLING) REGIMENT OF DRAGOONS.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Joseph Muter, W.               4 June, 1813 │Col., 4 June, 1814

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] Fiennes S. Miller, W.         25 May,  1809 │Lt. -Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Henry Madox                   19 Dec.  1805 │

   [4] Wm. Frederick Browne, W.       7 May,  1807 │2 Apr. 1807

   [5] Thomas Mackay                  3 Dec.  1807 │

   [6] Wm. Frederick Hadden          28 Jan.  1808 │14 Jan. 1808

   [7] Edward Holbech                25 May,  1809 │

   [8] Hon. Sholto Douglas           23 Aug.  1810 │24 May, 1810

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [9] Theophilus Biddulph           22 May,  1806 │

  [10] Augustus Saltern Willett      27 Aug.  1807 │

  [11] John Linton                   25 Jan.  1809 │

  [12] Henry Wm. Petre               26 Jan.  1809 │

  [13] Alexander Hassard, W.         23 Apr.  1812 │

  [14] Samuel Black                   8 July, 1813 │

  [15] Richard Down                  31 Mar.  1814 │

  [16] Paul Ruffo, W.                 3 May,  1815 │

                CORNETS.                           │

       Michael Clusky, Adjt., K.      9 Jan.  1812 │

  [17] John Delancy Allingham         7 Oct.  1813 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [18] Wm. Armstrong                 18 Oct.  1813 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [19] James Kerr                     9 Dec.  1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [20] John Bolton                   14 Sept. 1791 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [21] Wm. Henry Ricketts            16 Mar.  1809 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [22] Richard Vincent               25 Nov.  1797 │

            _Scarlet._   _Facings yellow._   _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Son of Col. Muter. Took the surname of Straton in lieu of that of
  Muter, about 1816, on succeeding to the property of his aunt, Miss
  Straton, at Kirkside, near Montrose, N.B. On the death of Sir Wm.
  Ponsonby, at Waterloo, the command of the “Union Brigade” devolved on
  this officer. C.B. and K.C.H. Col.-in-Chf. 6th Dgns.; F.R.S.,
  Edinburgh; lt.-gen. D. 23rd Oct., 1840. Left about £70,000 to
  Edinburgh University.

Footnote 2:

  Eldest son of Fiennes S. Miller, of Radway Grange, Kineton, by
  Henrietta, 2nd dau. of Capt. Joseph Meade, R.N. Sev. wnded. at
  Waterloo while commanding the regt. C.B. Retd. before 1824. M., 23rd
  May, 1819, Georgina Sibella, 5th dau. of Rev. Philip Story, and had
  issue. D. Sept., 1862.

Footnote 3:

  Commanded his regt. the last few hours of the battle. Made bt.-maj.
  for Waterloo. Promoted lt.-col. 1825. K.H. Attained rank of col. on
  retd. list 1838. M. Miss Williams. D. at Bath 18th March, 1863, aged
  81.

Footnote 4:

  Quitted the service in 1819.

Footnote 5:

  Bt.-maj. 19th July, 1821. Serving in 1825. Out of the regt. before
  1830.

Footnote 6:

  Senior capt. of his regt. 1821. Not in the Army List for 1822.

Footnote 7:

  4th son of Wm. Holbech, of Farnborough Hall, Banbury. Bn. 1785. Placed
  on h. p. 11th April, 1822. D. at Alveston 24th June, 1847.

Footnote 8:

  Eldest son (by his 2nd wife) of Archibald, Lord Douglas (extinct). Bn.
  1785; d. 1821.

Footnote 9:

  Promoted capt. 14th Sept., 1815. Placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816.
  Living 1860.

Footnote 10:

  Afterwards lt.-col. North Devon Militia. Great-grandson of John
  Cleveland, M.P. for Barnstaple for seven Parliaments. Assumed the
  surname of Cleveland, in lieu of that of Willett, in 1817. M., in
  1830, eldest dau. of John Chichester, of Arlington Court, Devon, and
  had issue. D. 5th July, 1849.

Footnote 11:

  Was maj. of his regt. from 1825 to 1830, when he was placed on h. p.
  as lt.-col. Living 1846.

Footnote 12:

  Son of the Hon. George Petre, by Maria, dau. of Philip Howard, of
  Corby. Placed on h. p. 1819. M., 17th Jan., 1818, Eliz., eldest dau.
  of Edmond Glynn, of Glynn, co. Cornwall. D., 26th Nov., 1852, leaving
  issue by a 2nd marriage.

Footnote 13:

  4th son of Jason Hassard, of Gardenhill and Toam. Promoted capt. 17th
  June, 1819. Quitted the service before 1830. M., 1836, his cousin
  Eliz., dau. of Capt. Jason Hassard, and had issue. D. Sept., 1845.

Footnote 14:

  Younger son of Col. Black, H.E.I.C.S., by Margaret, eldest dau. of
  Maj. Jerome Noble. Joined the 6th Dgns., as cornet, in 1810. Placed on
  h. p. as capt. 1826. D., with the rank of maj., 2nd Nov., 1853.

Footnote 15:

  Placed on h. p. as capt. 1826. Living 1855.

Footnote 16:

  An Italian. Returned as “missing” in Siborne’s Waterloo List. Lieut.
  4th D.G. 15th Feb., 1816. Was afterwards Neapolitan Minister to
  England. His title was Prince Castelcicala, and at the last Waterloo
  banquet, June 18, 1852, he sat on Wellington’s right hand. Lord
  Albemarle tells us, in his autobiography, that the Duke proposed
  Prince Castelcicala’s health, but stumbled over the name, which was
  happily supplied by Lord Sandys, who, as Lord Arthur Hill, had been
  senior A.D.C. to the veteran F.M. at Waterloo.

Footnote 17:

  Lieut. 24th Lt. Dns. 25th Sept., 1817. Half-pay 15th Oct., 1820.
  Appointed barrack-master at Boyle in 1841. D. in 1843.

Footnote 18:

  Serving with the regt. in 1830.

Footnote 19:

  Serving with the regt. in 1824.

Footnote 20:

  Surgeon to the 7th West India Regt. 19th Feb., 1824. Half-pay same
  date. Living in 1846.

Footnote 21:

  Surgeon to 35th Foot 7th Sept., 1815. H. p. 25th June, 1817.

Footnote 22:

  H. p. 3rd Jan., 1828. Living in 1830.


               7TH (OR THE QUEEN’S OWN) REGIMENT OF LIGHT
                          DRAGOONS (HUSSARS).

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                COLONEL.                  Regiment.│Army.

       _Henry, Earl of Uxbridge_,    16 May,  1801 │Lt.-Gen., 25 Apr.
       W.                                          │1808

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.                        │

   [1] Sir Edward Kerrison, Kt.       4 Apr.  1805 │Col., 4 June, 1813

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] Edward Hodge, K.               7 May,  1812 │

       _Wm. Thornhill_, W.            8 Apr.  1813 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Wm. Verner, W.                21 July, 1808 │

   [4] Thos. Wm. Robbins, W.         25 May,  1809 │

       _Edward Keane_                15 June, 1809 │1 Dec. 1806

   [5] Peter Augustus Heyliger,       2 Aug.  1810 │9 Mar. 1809
       W.                                          │

       _Thomas Wildman_, W.          18 Feb.  1813 │

       _James John Fraser_, W.       17 June, 1813 │

   [6] James D. Elphinstone          25 Sept. 1814 │23 Dec. 1813

   [7] Edward Wildman, W.            23 Feb.  1815 │7 Dec. 1814

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [8] Arthur Myers, Adjt., K.       24 May,  1810 │

   [9] Standish O’Grady               6 Aug.  1812 │

  [10] Wm. Shirley                    7 Jan.  1813 │19  Nov.  1812

  [11] Wm. Grenfell                  11 Mar.  1813 │

  [12] Robert Douglas, W.            17 June, 1813 │

  [13] Robert Uniacke                15 July, 1813 │

  [14] John Robert Gordon, W.        15 Sept. 1813 │

  [15] John Daniel                   21 Oct.  1813 │

  [16] Edward James Peters, W.       10 Nov.  1813 │

  [17] John Wildman                  11 Nov.  1813 │

  [18] Frederick Beattie, W.         16 Apr.  1815 │

  [19] Stephen Rice                  17 Apr.  1815 │

  [20] Frederick Towers              18 Apr.  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [21] Thomas Felton                 16 Apr.  1815 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [22] John Greenwood                25 Aug.  1809 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [23] David Irwin                   22 July, 1795 │

          ASSISTANT SURGEONS.                      │

  [24] Robert Alex. Chermside        16 Aug.  1810 │

  [25] James Moffat                  24 Oct.  1811 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [26] Richard Dorville              13 Dec.  1810 │

               _Blue._  _Facings white._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Only son of Matthias Kerrison, of Breccles Hall, Norfolk. Bn. 1774.
  Distinguished himself in the Pa., and on the return of the 7th Light
  Dgns. to England, its officers presented Col. Kerrison with a piece of
  plate worth 200 guineas, in estimation of his conduct in Spain.
  Created a baronet in 1821, at the recommendation of Wellington. Was
  M.P. for Eye from 1824 to 1852. M. Mary, eldest dau. of Alex. Ellice,
  of Pittencrief, co. Fife, and had issue. K.C.B. and K.C.H.
  Col.-in-Chf. 14th Dgns. D. 9th March, 1853.

Footnote 2:

  Killed in the cavalry action at Genappe, 17th June, 1815. Pens. of
  £100 per ann. to his widow, who was younger dau. of Sir Edmund Bacon,
  Premier Bart. M.I. at Waterloo.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards Sir Wm. Verner, Bart. Bn. 23rd Feb., 1782. Youngest son of
  James Verner, of Church Hill, co. Armagh, by Jane, dau. of Rev. Henry
  Clarke. Served in the Pa., and was present at Corunna. Promoted maj.
  for his distinguished gallantry at Waterloo. Retd. in 1826 as lt.-col.
  K.C.H. He was a staunch supporter of the Orange cause, and the Editor
  has heard his late father say that when quartered at Charlemont, in
  the north of Ireland, he partook of Sir William’s princely hospitality
  at banquets, where the toasts were all to the honour and glory of the
  Orange cause, and the wine-glasses had stalks without bottoms, so as
  to ensure the toasts being fully honoured. Sir Wm. was once struck off
  the Commission of the Peace, by Lord Normanby, for giving the toast of
  “The Battle of the Diamond” at a public dinner in Ireland. D. 20th
  Jan., 1871.

Footnote 4:

  Placed on h. p. as lt.-col. 1821. Living 1842.

Footnote 5:

  Distinguished himself in charging with his troop the advanced French
  picquets on the morning of June 17th. Quitted the service 30th March,
  1820.

Footnote 6:

  4th son of Wm. Elphinstone, an East India director, by Eliz., eldest
  dau. of Wm. Fullerton, of Carstairs, co. Lanark. Bn. 1788. Lt.-Col.
  3rd Foot Guards, 1823; h. p. 1828. Was twice m., and after his 2nd
  marriage with the only child of Sir Edward Buller, Bart., assumed the
  name of Buller before that of Drummond. D. 8th March, 1857, leaving
  issue by 2nd wife.

Footnote 7:

  Younger brother of Col. Thos. Wildman (see under Staff). Afterwards
  commanded 6th Dgn. Gds. K.H. M., 1818, Antonia, dau. of Lt.-Gen. Sir
  Hildebrand Oakes, G.C.B., and had issue. D. in Dec., 1846.

Footnote 8:

  M.I. at Waterloo.

Footnote 9:

  Afterwards Col. Viscount Guillamore, A.D.C. to the Queen. Bn. 26th
  Dec. 1792. Son of Standish O’Grady, 1st Viscount, by Katherine Waller.
  M., 16th Oct., 1828, Gertrude Paget, niece of the Marquis of Anglesey.
  D. 22nd July, 1848, leaving issue.

Footnote 10:

  Capt. 12th Sept., 1816. Major 17th June, 1824. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 11:

  Capt., 21st Lt. Dns., 24th Dec., 1818. H. p. 26th Oct., 1820. Living
  in 1846.

Footnote 12:

  Quitted the service in 1822.

Footnote 13:

  H. p. 24th July, 1817. Living in 1824.

Footnote 14:

  Son of J. Gordon, of Wincombe, Wilts. Promoted capt. 12th Dec., 1816.
  D. at Plymouth, 20th Sept., 1824.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. 5th June, 1824. Exchanged to 66th Foot, 8th June, 1826. D. at
  Bellevue, Meath, 1840.

Footnote 16:

  Serving in 1817. Out of regt. before 1824.

Footnote 17:

  Brother to Edward Wildman. Attained rank of col., h. p. list, 1854.
  M., 1824, Lady Margaret Charteris, dau. of 7th Earl of Wemyss. D. in
  1878.

Footnote 18:

  H. p., 3rd April, 1817. Living in 1824.

Footnote 19:

  Left the regt. in 1816. Lt., Newfoundland Vet. Cy., 30th Sept., 1824.
  Serving in 1830.

Footnote 20:

  Capt., 18th July, 1820. H. p. 4th Sept., 1821. Major, 29th Aug., 1826.
  Lt.-Col., 23rd Nov., 1841. Living in 1846.

Footnote 21:

  Serving with the regt. in 1830.

Footnote 22:

  Retd. f. p. 1819. Living in 1830.

Footnote 23:

  D. in 1816.

Footnote 24:

  Surgeon on h. p. list in 1815. Living in 1824.

Footnote 25:

  Serving with the regt. in 1824. Attained rank of surgeon of 1st class,
  23rd Jan., 1843. H. p. in 1849. D. at Devonport, 6th March, 1856.

Footnote 26:

  H. p. 17th Dec., 1829.


               10TH (OR THE PRINCE OF WALES’S OWN ROYAL)
                 REGIMENT OF LIGHT DRAGOONS (HUSSARS).

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONELS.              Regiment.│Army.
   [1] George Quentin, W.            13 Oct.  1808 │Col., 4 June, 1814
   [2] Lord Robert Manners           12 Nov.  1814 │2 May, 1811
                 MAJOR.                            │
   [3] Hon. Frederick Howard, K.      9 May,  1811 │
               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [4] Thos. Wm. Taylor              12 Nov.  1814 │Maj., 7 July, 1814
   [5] H.C. Stapylton                12 Nov.  1814 │3 Nov. 1808
   [6] John Grey, W.                 12 Nov.  1814 │6 Apr. 1809
       _John Gurwood_                12 Nov.  1814 │6 Feb. 1812
   [7] Charles Wood                  12 Nov.  1814 │Maj., 16 Mar. 1815
   [8] Henry Floyd                   12 Nov.  1814 │2 Dec. 1813
   [9] Arthur Shakespear             12 Nov.  1814 │27 Jan. 1814
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
  [10] John Whitehill Parsons        12 Nov.  1814 │3 Dec. 1805
  [11] Wm. Slayter Smith             12 Nov.  1814 │17 Nov. 1808
  [12] Robert Arnold                 12 Nov.  1814 │13 May, 1812
  [13] Wm. Cartwright                12 Nov.  1814 │6 Jan. 1814
  [14] Samuel Hardman, Adjt.         15 Dec.  1814 │9 Dec. 1813
  [15] George Orlando Gunning        26 Dec.  1814 │8 Apr. 1813
  [16] J.C. Wallington               27 Dec.  1814 │
  [17] Ellis Hodgson                 28 Dec.  1814 │
  [18] Wm. C. Hamilton               29 Dec.  1814 │
  [19] Anthony Bacon, W.              9 Feb.  1815 │11 Mar. 1813
  [20] W.H. Bingham Lindsey          15 June, 1815 │
               PAYMASTER.                          │
  [21] James Tallon                  15 Dec.  1813 │
           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │
  [22] George Samuel Jenks           22 Oct.  1812 │
          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │
       Henry C. Sannerman            29 Mar.  1810 │7 Dec. 1809
              _Blue._  _Facings scarlet._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Eldest son of George Quentin, of Göttingen. Served five years in the
  Garde du Corps of Hanover. Joined the 10th Hussars as a cornet in
  1793. Served with Sir John Moore in the Pa. C.B.; K.C.H.; A.D.C. to
  George IV., and Crown Equerry to Her Majesty. M., 1811, the dau. of
  James Lawrell, of Eastwick Park and Frimley, Surrey, and had issue. D.
  in London 7th Dec., 1851, aged 92.

Footnote 2:

  3rd son of Charles, 4th Duke of Rutland, by Lady Mary Somerset, dau.
  of 4th Duke of Beaufort. Bn. 14th Dec., 1781. Afterwards Maj.-Gen.,
  C.B., and Col.-in-Chf. 3rd Dgns. D. 15th Nov., 1835.

Footnote 3:

  3rd son of Frederick, 5th Earl of Carlisle, by Lady Margaret
  Granville-Leveson, dau. of 1st Marquis of Stafford. Killed whilst
  gallantly leading the last charge. Bur. at Waterloo. M.I. Afterwards
  brought home and bur. at Streatham, 3rd Aug., 1815. Left issue by his
  marriage with Frances, only dau. of Wm. H. Lambton, of Lambton Hall,
  Durham, two sons. In 1879 Maj. Howard’s remains were removed from
  Streatham, and re-interred in the family mausoleum at Castle Howard,
  Yorkshire.

Footnote 4:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. T.W. Taylor, Lt.-Gov. R.M.C., Sandhurst, and
  Col.-in-Chf. 17th Lancers. Served in the expedition to Java in 1811.
  Made brevet lt.-col. for Waterloo. D. at Haccombe, co. Devon, 8th
  Jan., 1854, aged 71.

Footnote 5:

  Henry Richard Chetwynd-Stapylton, eldest son of the Hon. Granville
  Chetwynd (youngest son of 4th Viscount Chetwynd), by Martha, dau. and
  heir of Henry Stapylton, of Wighill. Bn. 1789. Afterwards maj. of his
  regt. Retired 1822. M., 23rd Dec., 1820, Margaret, dau. of George
  Hammond, and had issue. D. 4th April, 1859.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. of the Scots Greys. D. at Sidmouth, 21st Dec.,
  1843.

Footnote 7:

  6th son of Thos. Wood, of Littleton, by Mary, only dau. and heir of
  Sir Edward Williams, 5th bart., of Eltham. Placed on h. p. 5th April,
  1821.

Footnote 8:

  Eldest son of Gen. Sir John Floyd, Bart. Bn. 2nd Sept., 1793. Served
  in the Pa. Succeeded as 2nd bart., 1818. M., 1821, Mary, eldest dau.
  of Wm. Murray, of Jamaica, and had issue. D. 4th March, 1868.

Footnote 9:

  Son of John Shakespear, by Mary Drummond. A.D.C. to Lord Combermere.
  M. Sophia, dau. of Thos. S.D. Bucknall, and had issue. Placed on h. p.
  Oct., 1818. D. 1845.

Footnote 10:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. Sir J.W. Parsons, K.C.M.G., the British Resident
  at Zante. Made lt.-col. 1841. D. at the Palace, Corfu, 1848, aged 68.

Footnote 11:

  Quitted the service about 1818. M., 30th April, 1818, Sarah, 3rd dau.
  of John Bockett, of Southcote Lodge, Berks. Adjt. to Yorkshire
  Yeomanry in 1822.

Footnote 12:

  Afterwards lt.-col. 16th Lt. Dgns. D. unm. 20th Aug., 1839.

Footnote 13:

  2nd son of Ralph Cartwright, of Aynhoe (M.P. for Northampton), by the
  Hon. Emma Maude, dau. of 1st Viscount Hawarden. Served in the Pa. with
  the 61st. Regt. (medal and 5 clasps). Maj., unattached, 1825;
  lt.-gen., 1863. M., 6th Aug., 1822, Mary Anne, dau. and heir of Henry
  Jones, of Bloomsbury Square, London, and had issue. Living 1865.

Footnote 14:

  H. p. 6th June, 1816. D. 25th Nov., 1855.

Footnote 15:

  Bn. 18th Dec., 1796. 2nd son of Sir George Wm. Gunning, Bart., by
  Eliz., dau. of Henry, 1st Lord Bradford.

Footnote 16:

  John Clement Wallington became maj. in this regt. 1833. 2nd son of the
  Rev. Charles Wallington, by Frances, dau. of Hamlyn Harris, of
  Daventry. M. Alice, dau. of Wm. Charles Monk Mason. D. about 1865.

Footnote 17:

  Capt. 23rd Nov., 1820. H. p. 25th Oct., 1821.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 21st. Nov., 1822. Only son of Wm. Hamilton, of Craighlaw, M.D.
  Promoted capt. in 1822. J.P. and D.L. for co. Wigtown. M. in 1825,
  Anne, dau. of Rev. A. Stewart, of Kirkcowan, and had issue. Took Holy
  Orders and resided many years in Guernsey. A correspondent writes
  under date of 22nd Feb., 1893:—“Mr. Hamilton, who was an officer in
  the 10th Hussars at Waterloo, was a great favourite with all of us
  boys at Elizabeth College, and always on the 18th June the old chap
  came sailing down the Grange with the Waterloo medal on his clerical
  coat, just about our play hour, and we used to drag him into the
  playground, and cheer him till we made him cry and we were hoarse. He
  was living in 1867 and for some years afterwards.”

Footnote 19:

  Afterwards Gen. Anthony Bacon, K.T.S. Served in the Pa. Was badly
  wnded. in the last charge, led by the gallant Maj. Howard, and lay all
  night on the field of battle. Appointed Capt. 13th Lt. Dgns., 1818;
  Maj. 17th Dgns., 1825. Served in the Portuguese Army 1832–3, and was
  Col. Commandant of their Cavalry. M. Lady Charlotte Harley, 2nd dau.
  of 5th Earl of Oxford. D. 2nd July, 1864.

Footnote 20:

  3rd son of Thos. Lindsey of Hollymount, co. Mayo, by Lady Margaret
  Bingham, dau. of 1st Earl of Lucan. D. in India in 1822.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 22:

  Serving in 1830.


                    11TH REGIMENT OF LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] James Wallace Sleigh          14 Dec.  1809 │

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Archibald Money               14 Dec.  1809 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] James Bouchier                20 Jan.  1803 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [4] Benjamin Lutyens               4 Aug.  1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

       _Michael Childers_            14 June, 1805 │Maj., 25 Aug. 1814

   [5] James Alfred Schreiber, W.    19 Nov.  1812 │

   [6] John Jenkins                  22 Dec.  1814 │

   [7] Thomas Binney                 26 Jan.  1815 │

   [8] James Duberly                 30 Mar.  1815 │21 Oct. 1813

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [9] George Sicker, Adjt.          20 Feb.  1805 │

  [10] Frederick Wood, W.            14 June, 1805 │

  [11] Wm. Smith                     21 Apr.  1808 │

  [12] Richard Coles                 29 June, 1811 │

  [13] Benjamin Leigh Lye            30 June, 1811 │

  [14] Edward Phelips, K.             3 July, 1811 │

  [15] James Richard Rotton           9 Jan.  1812 │

  [16] James S. Moore, W.            13 Oct.  1814 │7 Apr. 1813

  [17] Robert Milligan, W.           22 Dec.  1814 │

  [18] Wm. H. Stewart                30 Mar.  1815 │

  [19] Benfield Des Vœux             30 Mar.  1815 │

                CORNETS.                           │

  [20] Barton Parker Browne           8 Apr.  1813 │

  [21] Humphrey Orme                  5 Aug.  1813 │

  [22] George Schreiber              23 Dec.  1813 │

  [23] Henry R. Bullock              30 Dec.  1813 │

  [24] Philip Haughton James         29 Dec.  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [25] Daniel Lutyens                19 Oct.  1804 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [26] John Hall                     29 Sept. 1814 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [27] James O’Malley                11 Mar.  1813 │11 July, 1811

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [28] Henry Steele                  28 Apr.  1814 │25 June, 1812

                _Blue._  _Facings buff._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir J.W. Sleigh, K.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 9th Lancers. Was
  educated at Winchester. Cornet, 1795. Served in the campaign in
  Holland same year. With his regt. at Salamanca. Towards the close of
  Waterloo Day commanded the 4th Brigade. C.B. and K.M.B. Commanded the
  cavalry at siege of Bhurtpore. Was afterwards Military Sec. to Lord
  Wm. Bentinck. D. at Hanworth House, Middlesex, 5th Feb., 1865.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards Lt.-Gen. Money, C.B. and K.C. Col.-in-Chf. 2nd Dgns. At the
  close of Waterloo Day he commanded the regt. D. at Crown Point,
  Trowse, Norfolk, 1858.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards Lt. Gen. James Claud Bouchier, K.C. Had served in Egypt and
  in the Pa. Brevet lt.-col. for Waterloo. Col.-in-Chf. 3rd Dgn. Gds. D.
  12th Feb., 1859, at Buxton Vicarage, Norfolk.

Footnote 4:

  Major Lutyens served under Abercromby in Egypt, and lived to be one of
  the last survivors of that campaign. He d. at The Terrace, Kensington,
  23rd Dec., 1863.

Footnote 5:

  4th son of Wm. Schreiber, by Mary, dau. and co-heir of James Sewell,
  of Alton Hall, co. Suffolk. Bn. at Wickham Market 21st Nov., 1789.
  Educated at Dalham Grammar School, Essex. Joined the 11th Lt. Dgns.
  about 1806, and was promoted lt. 1808. Served in the Pa. Was badly
  wnded. at Waterloo by a round shot, which broke his charger’s back at
  same time. Placed on h. p. from 6th Dgn. Gds, with rank of Maj., 23rd
  June, 1825. M. Mary, dau. of Thos. Ware, of Woodfort, co. Cork, and
  had, with other male issue, a son, Brymer, now a maj.-gen. (retired)
  Royal Artillery, who communicated above information. J.A. Schreiber d.
  as a lt.-col., h. p., 1840.

Footnote 6:

  Born at Scotbury, co. Devon, 6th Jan., 1789. Raised men for a
  cornetcy, and entered the army as cornet in 11th Lt. Dgns. 29th Jan.,
  1807. Served in the Pa. In 1826 commanded two squadrons at Bhurtpore.
  M., 11th Nov., 1819, at Cawnpore, Stephena Isabella Patten, and had
  issue. D. as maj., 31st Oct., 1840.

Footnote 7:

  D. a capt. in this regt., at Berhampore, 26th Nov., 1821.

Footnote 8:

  Placed on h. p. from same regt., 12th Aug., 1819. Son of Sir James
  Duberly, Knt., of Gaynes Hall, co. Huntingdon, by his 1st wife,
  Rebecca Howard. Served in the Pa. M., 21st Sept., 1837, the 3rd dau.
  of the Hon. Wm. Grey, and had issue. D. 3rd March, 1864.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 30th July, 1818. Appointed a Knight of Windsor. D. 17th Jan.,
  1848.

Footnote 10:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817. Living in 1846.

Footnote 11:

  Promoted capt. same regt. 30th Oct., 1817. 2nd son of Ferdinando
  Smith, of Halesowen Grange, co. Worcester, by Eliz., dau. of Humphrey
  Lyttelton. Bn. 24th June, 1785. D. unmarried in India, 4th May, 1824.

Footnote 12:

  H. p. 24th July, 1817. Living in 1836.

Footnote 13:

  H. p. in 1817. Adjt. N. Somerset Y.C. in 1821. The Lyes are a
  Wiltshire family, and have served their country on many notable
  occasions. At Inkermann a son of Capt. Richard Leigh Lye, and a nephew
  of the above, met a soldier’s death.

Footnote 14:

  Son of Rev. Charles Phelips (4th son of Edward Phelips, of Montacute,
  co. Somerset), by Mary, dau. of Thos. Blackmore, of Briggins Park,
  Herts.

Footnote 15:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. J.R. Rotton, J.P. for Sussex. D. at Chichester,
  13th Feb., 1855.

Footnote 16:

  James Stewart-Moore, of Ballydivity, co. Antrim, J.P. and D.L.; High
  Sheriff 1849. Eldest son of J. Stewart-Moore, by Margaret, dau. of
  Ven. Wm. Sturrock, Archdeacon of Armagh. Served in the Pa. and in
  India. Pierced in three places at Genappe by a Polish lancer. Bn.
  1793. M., 1845, Frances Richardson, and had issue. Retired on h. p. as
  capt., 25th Dec., 1819. D. 1870.

Footnote 17:

  Promoted capt. 24th April, 1816. Exchanged to 2nd Life Gds. 10th Oct.,
  1816. Quitted the service in 1822.

Footnote 18:

  This officer’s second name is omitted in the Army Lists. He appears to
  be the Wm. Henry Stewart who is described in Burke’s _Peerage and
  Baronetage_ as “Major 19th Lancers.” 2nd son of Sir James Stewart,
  Bart., M.P. for Donegal in 1802. D., unmarried, 6th June, 1820, aged
  27.

Footnote 19:

  Afterwards Capt. 3rd Foot Gds. Retd. as lt.-col. h. p. 1829. 4th son
  of Sir Charles des Vœux, 1st Bart., by Mary Anne, dau. of Dean
  Champagne. M., firstly, 1833, Georgina, dau. of Richard Streatfield,
  and had issue. D. 30th Nov., 1864.

Footnote 20:

  Subsequently served in India, and was at the capture of Bhurtpore.
  Commissions dated: cornet, April 8th, 1813; lt., June 22nd, 1815;
  capt., May 5th, 1824; maj., June 28, 1838. Lt.-col., retd., 1851. D.
  16th June, 1889.

Footnote 21:

  The last of an ancient family. Son and heir of Walden Orme. Quitted
  the service as Capt. 6th Dgns., 1829. D. at Hale, near Stamford, 6th
  Oct., 1860.

Footnote 22:

  6th son of Wm. Schreiber and Mary his wife. Twin brother of Rev. Thos.
  Schreiber, Rector of Bradwell, in Essex. Bn. at Wickham Market 19th
  Oct., 1794. Educated at Dalham Grammar School. Had his horse shot
  under him at Waterloo. Afterwards A.D.C. to Sir John Cameron.
  Exchanged to 18th Lt. Dgns., and was placed on h. p., as capt., 1821.
  M. Anne, dau. of — Hume of Colchester. Lt.-col. h. p. 1851. Resided
  latterly at Cheltenham, where the Editor had the pleasure of knowing
  him in 1867.

Footnote 23:

  4th son of Jonathan Watson (who assumed, in 1810, the surname of
  Bullock), of Faulkbourn Hall, Witham, Essex. Appointed capt. in 1st
  Life Gds. 26th Dec., 1821. Maj. h. p. 23rd July, 1831. M., 1825,
  Charlotte, 2nd dau. of John Hall, of Weston Colville, Cambridgeshire,
  and had issue. D. at Bury St. Edmunds, 9th July, 1855.

Footnote 24:

  Quitted the service in 1818.

Footnote 25:

  Afterwards in 3rd Dgn. Gds. D. at Broxbourne 6th June, 1841.

Footnote 26:

  H. p. 1819 from 6th West India Regt.

Footnote 27:

  6th son of George O’Malley, of Gornsay, Castlebar, co. Mayo, by Eliz.
  Clarke. D. at Cawnpore, 11th Sept., 1821. See notes to 44th Foot for
  account of his brother George.

Footnote 28:

  D. at Meerut in 1825.


      12TH (OR THE PRINCE OF WALES’S) REGIMENT OF LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                            [12TH LANCERS.]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Hon. F.C. Ponsonby, W.        11 June, 1811 │Col., 4 June, 1814

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] James Paul Bridger            10 Dec.  1811 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Samson Stawell                29 Jan.  1806 │28 Feb. 1805

   [4] George F. Erskine             19 May,  1808 │

   [5] Edwin W.T. Sandys, W.         30 Mar.  1809 │19 Aug. 1808

   [6] Houston Wallace               10 Jan.  1811 │11 Jan. 1810

   [7] Alexander Barton              17 Jan.  1811 │

   [8] Henry Andrews                  9 July, 1812 │

   [9] Alexander Charles Craufurd       9     June,│1814
            (Volr.)                                │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] Wm. Heydon                    13 June, 1805 │

  [11] James Chatterton               6 June, 1811 │

  [12] John Vandeleur                10 July, 1811 │

  [13] Wm. Hay                       11 July, 1811 │

  [14] Wm. H. Dowbiggen, W.          31 Dec.  1811 │8 Aug. 1811

  [15] Albert Goldsmid               20 Feb.  1812 │

  [16] Abraham Lane                  30 Mar.  1815 │15 Oct. 1812

       Lindsey James Bertie, K.      30 Mar.  1815 │7 May, 1812

  [17] John Henry Slade               6 Apr.  1815 │

  [18] Thomas Reed                    2 May,  1815 │

  [19] John Griffiths (_sic_)         4 May,  1815 │
       Adjt.                                       │

                CORNET.                            │

  [20] John Elliott(_sic_)           28 Apr.  1814 │
       Lockhart, K.                                │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [21] Wm. [Loftus] Otway            14 Feb.  1811 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [22] Richard Sidley                10 June, 1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [23] Benjamin Robinson             15 Oct.  1803 │2 Feb. 1795

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [24] John G. Smith                 28 Oct.  1813 │11 Mar. 1813

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [25] James Castley                 17 Aug.  1809 │18 June, 1807

               _Blue._  _Facings yellow._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Aftds. Maj.-Gen. Sir Frederick Cavendish Ponsonby, K.C.B. and K.M.T.,
  Gov. of Malta. 2nd son of Frederick, 3rd Earl of Bessborough, by Lady
  Henrietta, 2nd dau. of 1st Earl Spencer. Bn. 6th July, 1783. Cornet
  10th Lt. Dgns. 1800. Maj. 23rd Lt. Dgns. 1807. At head of this regt.
  distinguished himself at Talavera, in 1809. Lt.-col. of the regt.
  1810. At Barossa, with a squadron of German dragoons, he charged the
  French cavalry covering the retreat, overthrew them, and took two
  guns. Lt.-Col. 12th Lt. Dgns. 1811. Again signally distinguished
  himself at the battles of Salamanca and Vittoria. His experiences at
  Waterloo were almost unique, as when lying grievously wnded. on the
  field, after a most gallant charge, in the French lines, a lancer who
  was passing by and saw Ponsonby move, exclaimed: “_Tu n’est pas mort,
  coquin_,” and struck his lance through the English officer’s back. “My
  head dropped” (wrote Ponsonby in his subsequent narrative of his
  experiences), “the blood gushed into my mouth, a difficulty of
  breathing came on, and I thought all was over.” But the bitterness of
  death was not yet past. Soon after, a tirailleur came up and roughly
  searched him all over, robbing Ponsonby of what money he had about
  him. He was hardly quit of this scoundrel before another appeared with
  the same intent. At last a good Samaritan appeared in the shape of a
  French officer, who administered brandy to the apparently dying
  Englishman, and then passed on “to pursue the retreating British”!
  What followed is best given in Ponsonby’s own words: “Presently
  another tirailleur appeared, who came and knelt and fired over me,
  loading and firing many times, and conversing with great gaiety all
  the while. At last he ran off.” The evening came, and with it the
  Prussians. “Two squadrons of Prussian cavalry, both of them two deep,
  passed over me in full trot, lifting me from the ground and tumbling
  me about cruelly. A German soldier, bent on plunder, came and pulled
  me about roughly before he left me.” An English private next appeared,
  and on Ponsonby telling him who he was, the soldier picked up a sword
  and stood sentry over him. Next morning Ponsonby was removed in a cart
  to a farmhouse, and laid in a bed from which poor Sir A. Gordon had
  just been carried out dead. Col. Ponsonby had received seven wounds; a
  surgeon slept in his room, and he was saved by continual bleeding—120
  ounces in two days, besides the great loss of blood on the
  field.—_Narrative._ M., 1825, Emily, youngest dau. of 3rd Earl
  Bathurst, and had issue. D. 11th Jan., 1837.

Footnote 2:

  Bt.-lt. col. for Waterloo, and C.B. Retd. in 1821. M., 1831, Jane, 4th
  dau. of John Copeland. D. 17th May, 1841.

Footnote 3:

  Appears to have been a son of Sampson Stawell, of Kilbrittain, co.
  Cork. Lt.-col. of same regt. 1827. Present with his regt. at Queen
  Victoria’s coronation, and received a special gold medal. D. 21st Aug.
  1849.

Footnote 4:

  George Francis Erskine. Was 2nd son of Hon. Hy. Erskine (2nd son of
  5th Earl of Buchan), the eminent Scotch advocate. Maj. same regt. 24th
  Oct., 1821. Retd. as lt.-col.

Footnote 5:

  Had served with distinction in the Pa. D. of his wounds soon after
  Waterloo. There have been generations of the name of Edwin Sandys, and
  this “Edwin W—— T—— Sandys” may have been a cadet of the noble house
  of Sandys, now extinct.

Footnote 6:

  Quitted the service in 1822.

Footnote 7:

  Promoted bt.-maj. 21st Jan., 1819, for distinguished conduct in the
  field while on service in the Pa. In 1826 a body of British troops was
  sent to Lisbon to aid the Portuguese Govt. Four troops of the 12th
  Lancers (so styled since 1817), commanded by Maj. Barton, embarked at
  Portsmouth in December for Portugal, where they remained for two
  years. Living in 1830.

Footnote 8:

  Retd. on h. p. as maj. 25th Jan., 1828. Restored to full pay as Maj.
  3rd Lt. Dgns. D. in Bengal, 1838.

Footnote 9:

  A volunteer from the 2nd Ceylon Regt. Was transferred to 12th Lancers
  as capt. 26th Oct., 1820, and received a bt. majority in Aug., 1821.
  His Waterloo medal was for long in the Seaforth collection. Only son
  of Sir James Craufurd, Bart., of Kilbirney, co. Stirling. M., 1818,
  Barbara, 4th dau. of 7th Earl of Coventry, and d. s. p. 1838.

Footnote 10:

  This unfortunate officer was twenty years a lieut. in this regt.
  Promoted capt. 2nd June, 1825, and placed on h. p. 22nd Dec. same
  year. Living 1830.

Footnote 11:

  2nd son of Sir Jas. Chatterton, Bart., by Rebecca, dau. of Abraham
  Lane, of Cork. Bn. 1792. Saw much service in the Pa. Aftds. held high
  commands. K.C.B. and K.H. M., 1825, Annetta, dau. of James Atkinson,
  of York. Succeeded to the baronetcy in 1855. On the occasion of the
  Queen’s coronation, commanded the 4th Dgn. Gds., and received a
  special gold medal. At the Duke of Wellington’s funeral carried the
  “Great Banner,” by Her Majesty’s request, “in consideration of his
  long, faithful, and distinguished services.” Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 5th
  Lancers, 1858. D. s. p. in London, Jan. 1868.

Footnote 12:

  Aftds. commanded the 10th Hussars, and received a special gold medal
  at the Queen’s coronation. Elder son of John Ormsby Vandeleur, of
  Maddenstown, co. Kildare, by Frances Pakenham, dau. of Thos., 1st Lord
  Longford.

Footnote 13:

  Served with 52nd L.I. in the Pa. Quitted the service before 1824, with
  rank of capt. Aftds. C.B. and Second Commissioner Metropolitan Police,
  1839. D. 29th Aug., 1855.

Footnote 14:

  Served in the Pa. with the 52nd L.I. Placed on h. p. as lieut., 1821.
  Living 1846. M. Lady Georgiana Maule, and had issue.

Footnote 15:

  Served in the Pa. Aftds. maj.-gen., retd. list. D. in London 6th Jan.,
  1861.

Footnote 16:

  Cousin to Sir James Chatterton, being grandson of Abraham Lane, of
  Cork. Capt. same regt. 6th Nov., 1823. Maj. 76th Foot, 1826. Lt.-col.
  unatt., 1830.

Footnote 17:

  Eldest son of Gen. Sir John Slade, Bart., of Maunsell House, co.
  Somerset, by Anna, dau. of James Dawson. Maj. h. p. 1827. Predeceased
  his father. D. a lt.-col. h. p. 30th Aug., 1843, at Barnes. He had m.,
  1st Feb., 1837, Frances McVeagh. She m., secondly, Adm. J.A. Paynter.

Footnote 18:

  Aftds. Gen. Sir Thos. Reed, K.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 44th Foot. Served in
  India, and commanded a brigade of the Army of the Sutlej. Received the
  thanks of the Gov.-gen. in India for his valuable services during the
  mutiny. D. 1883.

Footnote 19:

  _Griffith._ Had been appointed adjt. 29th July, 1813. Adjt. to 5th
  D.G. 10th Apr., 1823. Lieut. 28th Foot 15th Oct., 1829. Capt. 1st
  W.I.R. 28th June, 1839. Ret. f. p. before 1846. D. 15th Nov., 1859.

Footnote 20:

  Eldest son of Wm. _Eliott_, of Borthwickbrae, M.P. for co. Selkirk for
  twenty-four years, by Marianne, only child of Allan Lockhart, of
  Cleghorn, after which marriage W. Eliott assumed the additional
  surname of Lockhart.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. as paymaster 1st W.I.R. 6th July, 1820. Living in 1830.

Footnote 22:

  D. in Oct., 1823.

Footnote 23:

  H. p. 30th June, 1825. Living in 1846.

Footnote 24:

  Serving in 1817.

Footnote 25:

  Serving in 1830.


                    13TH REGIMENT OF LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                            [13TH HUSSARS.]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Patrick Doherty                4 June, 1813 │Col., 4 June, 1814

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Shapland Boyse, W.             4 June, 1813 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Brook Lawrence                 3 Feb.  1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [4] Joseph Doherty, W.            19 Mar.  1807 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [5] James Macalester              25 June, 1807 │12 Apr. 1814

   [6] Mansell Bowers                 8 Mar.  1810 │1 Mar. 1810

   [7] James Gubbins, K.              7 Feb.  1811 │18 May, 1809

   [8] Charles Gregorie              20 June, 1811 │4 Aug. 1808

   [9] Frederick Goulburn            18 Apr.  1815 │12 July, 1810

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] John Irving Moss               7 Mar.  1805 │

  [11] George Doherty, W.            18 Sept. 1806 │

  [12] John H. Drought                8 Sept. 1808 │

  [13] Charles Robert Bowers, W.     18 Oct.  1810 │

  [14] Allan T. Maclean              11 July, 1811 │

       John Geale, K.                25 July, 1811 │

  [15] Robert Nisbett                26 Dec.  1811 │

  [16] Wm. Turner                    16 Apr.  1815 │6 Feb. 1812

  [17] James Mill                    17 Apr.  1815 │7 Nov. 1811

  [18] George Hussey Packe, W.       21 Apr.  1815 │6 Jan. 1814

  [19] Henry Acton                    4 May,  1815 │

  [20] John Wallace                  17 May,  1815 │

  [21] Jacob Æ. Irving, W.           18 May,  1815 │

       Geo. Lloyd Hodges             19 Jan.  1815 │7 Jan. 1808

  [22] Geo. Pym, K.                                │

                CORNET.                            │

  [23] Joseph Wakefield              26 May,  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [24] Alexander Strange             11 Apr.  1811 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [25] Wm. Minchin                   10 Sept. 1812 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [26] Thos. Galbraith Logan          9 Sept. 1813 │24 Dec. 1812

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [27] Abraham Armstrong             18 May,  1809 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [28] John Constant                  3 Mar.  1814 │

                 _Blue._  _Facings buff._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Col. Patrick Doherty belonged to a good old Irish family which has
  done good service to its country, both in the army and on the judicial
  bench. In the two great wars in which Great Britain played a leading
  part during the 19th century, the 13th Regt. of Lt. Dgns. (Hussars)
  has been commanded by a Doherty; and three generations of this family
  have been closely associated with this same regt. In 1796 Patrick
  Doherty embarked for the West Indies with his regt. on active service.
  It is on record that no less than twenty-two officers of the 13th Lt.
  Dgns. fell victims to “Yellow Jack” when serving in St. Domingo; and
  the skeleton of the regt., with two or three surviving officers,
  returned to England. This fatality brought rapid promotion to Doherty,
  and in 1813 he succeeded to the command of the 13th. For his services
  in the Pa. he was made bt.-col. The editor of the _Military Calendar_
  states that on Waterloo Day Col. Doherty was lying ill at Brussels,
  suffering from a most severe attack of West Indian fever and ague; but
  as it is probable that he took part in the operations of the 16th or
  17th June, it does not debar him from being added to the roll of
  Waterloo officers. He undoubtedly received the medal for Waterloo, as
  well as the C.B. in 1816. Col. Doherty was subsequently made K.C.H.
  Quitted the service in Dec., 1818, and d. at Bath, 20th Jan., 1837. He
  was uncle to John Doherty, of Dublin, who held the high post of Chief
  Justice of Ireland, and dying, in 1850, left, with other male issue,
  the present Maj. H. Doherty, of the Artillery Militia, who formerly
  commanded a troop in the 3rd Hussars.

Footnote 2:

  Made C.B. for Waterloo. Served in the Pa. 2nd son of Samuel Boyse, of
  Barrow, New Ross, co. Wexford, by Dorothea, dau. of Shapland Carew, of
  Castleboro, same county. D., unm., 1833.

Footnote 3:

  There were three of this family in the regt. in 1815. Brook Lawrence
  served thirty-eight years in this regt., and was made bt.-lt.-col. for
  Waterloo. He d. at Brompton 11th Aug., 1823, aged 59.

Footnote 4:

  Son of Col. P. Doherty. Promoted maj. in this regt. 8th Dec., 1818. D.
  at Bangalore 12th June, 1819.

Footnote 5:

  Served in the Pa. and in India. In the last charge made by his regt.
  at Waterloo was wounded in the ankle, which troubled him ever
  afterwards. Quitted the service in 1823. D. at Kames House, Millport,
  17th Sept., 1852. The Clan Alester of Kintyre and the Isles is one of
  the oldest in Scotland.

Footnote 6:

  Promoted maj. in same regt. 5th June, 1823. M. Eleanor, eldest dau. of
  Lt.-Gen. Sir Thos. Dallas, and had issue. D. 1831.

Footnote 7:

  Fell by a cannon ball when charging with his regt. at Waterloo. “The
  moment of his death was that of victory.” See flattering notice in the
  _Gentleman’s Magazine_ for 1815, II., p. 275.

Footnote 8:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. in 1818.

Footnote 9:

  Youngest son of Munbee Goulburn, of Portland Place, by the Hon.
  Susanna Chetwynd, eldest dau. of Wm. 4th Visct. Chetwynd. Appointed
  maj. in 104th regt. 15th Feb., 1816. Placed on h. p. 25th July, 1817.
  D. in 1837.

Footnote 10:

  Promoted capt. 31st Aug., 1815. Placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816.
  Capt. 48th Foot 26th Feb., 1828.

Footnote 11:

  Son of Col. P. Doherty. Served in the Pa. “Was severely wounded in the
  head at Waterloo, and was struck by a ball which was stopped and
  flattened by the interposition of his watch. He had taken out his
  watch to remark the time, when the regt. was ordered to advance; and
  not being able to return it, he put it into the breast of his jacket,
  and thus providentially his life was saved.” (Anecdote by T. Carter.)
  K.H. Attained the rank of maj., and d. at Dublin in Dec., 1835.

Footnote 12:

  Eldest son of John Armstrong Drought, of Lettybrook, King’s County, by
  Letitia Head, of Ashley Park, Tipperary. Bn. 20th Aug., 1790. Served
  throughout the Par. War. Placed on h. p. 1816. M., 20th July, 1853,
  Frances Spunner, and had issue. D. 29th April, 1876.

Footnote 13:

  Brother to the above Capt. Bowers. Attained rank of lt.-gen. Living
  1869.

Footnote 14:

  2nd son of Archibald Maclean, of Pennycross and Carsaig, co. Argyll,
  by Alicia, dau. of Hector Maclean, of Torens, in same county. Served
  in the Pa. Bn. 1793. Attained the rank of lt.-gen. M., 1843, Agnes,
  dau. of Wm. Furlong, of Welshot, co. Lanark. Lt.-col. h. p. 1843.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. h. p. 20th Dns. 19th Nov., 1818. Living in 1846.

Footnote 16:

  Capt. 78th Foot 3rd Nov., 1819. H. p. 27th June, 1822. Living in 1846.

Footnote 17:

  Promoted capt. 24th March, 1816. Placed on h. p. 25th May, 1816.

Footnote 18:

  2nd son of Charles J. Packe, of Prestwold Hall, Loughborough, by
  Penelope, eldest dau. of Richard Dugdale. Capt. 21st Dgns. 27th June,
  1816. M., 1st Sept., 1824, Mary Anne, eldest dau. of John Heathcote,
  of Connington Castle, co. Huntingdon, and had issue. M.P. for South
  Lincolnshire 1859 to 1868. D. 2nd July, 1874.

Footnote 19:

  2nd son of Joseph Edward Acton, a lt.-gen. in the Neapolitan service
  and Gov. of Gaeta, by Eleanora, Countess Berg de Trips, of Dusseldorf.
  Exchanged to 12th Lt. Dgns. as lieut. 14th Nov., 1816. On h. p. 1817.
  M. Charlotte, only dau. of Dr. Clogston, of Bombay, and had issue.

Footnote 20:

  Placed on h. p. 25th July, 1816. Living in 1830.

Footnote 21:

  Belonged, apparently, to the Dumfriesshire family (of Bonshaw Tower).
  Aftds. lt.-col. on retd. list. His second name was Æmilius, which came
  into the family by the marriage of Wm. Irving to Æmilia, dau. of
  Andrew Lord Rollo. H. p. 1818. D. at Niagara 7th Oct., 1856.

Footnote 22:

  4th son of Francis Pym, of the Hasells, Beds., M.P., for Beds.

Footnote 23:

  Aftds. exchanged, as lieut., into the 19th Lt. Dgns. M., 1836, Anne,
  eldest dau. of George Wakefield. D. at Kamptee, Madras, 17th May,
  1840, then Lt.-Col. of the 39th Foot.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 62nd Foot, 1831. D.,in Nov. 1840, a military Knight of Windsor.

Footnote 25:

  Qr.-Mr. 53rd Foot 7th Sept., 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 26:

  Surgeon 5th D.G. 25th Nov., 1818. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 27:

  Surgeon 7th March, 1816. Surgeon 87th Foot 24th April, 1826. H. p.
  1830. Living in 1846.

Footnote 28:

  Vet. Surgeon to 5th D.G. 30th March, 1826. H. p. in 1843. Living in
  1846.


                 15TH (OR THE KING’S) REGIMENT OF LIGHT
                          DRAGOONS (HUSSARS).

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONELS.              Regiment.│Army.

       _Sir Colquhoun Grant_,        25 Aug.  1808 │Maj.-Gen., 4 June,
       K.C.B.                                      │1814

   [1] Leighton C. Dalrymple, W.     16 Dec.  1813 │

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Edwin Griffith, K.             5 Nov.  1812 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Joseph Thackwell, W.           9 Apr.  1807 │

   [4] Skinner Hancox                11 May,  1809 │

   [5] John Whiteford, W.            24 July, 1809 │

   [6] Philip Wodehouse              26 Dec.  1809 │14 June, 1811

   [7] Fred. Charles Philips         16 Apr.  1812 │

   [8] Wm. Booth                     17 Sept. 1812 │

   [9] John Carr                     20 Apr.  1815 │3 Oct. 1809

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] Edward Barrett                28 June, 1810 │

       _Ralph Mansfield_, W.         16 Aug.  1810 │

  [11] Isaac Sherwood, K.            13 Sept. 1810 │

  [12] Wm. Bellairs                   7 May,  1812 │

  [13] Henry Lane                     3 Sept. 1812 │

  [14] Wm. Byam, W.                  17 Sept. 1812 │

  [15] Edward Byam, W.                9 Apr.  1813 │

  [16] George A.F. Dawkins, W.        3 June, 1813 │

  [17] Henry Dixon                   25 Aug.  1813 │

  [18] John James Douglas            26 Aug.  1813 │

  [19] Wm. Stewart                    6 Jan.  1814 │

  [20] John Pennington               13 Jan.  1814 │

  [21] Henry Buckley, K.             25 Aug.  1814 │

                CORNET.                            │

  [22] Joseph Griffith, Adjt.         4 Aug.  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [23] James Coppin Cocksedge        27 May,  1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [24] Thomas Cartan                  9 Sept. 1813 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [25] Samuel Jeyes                  28 Nov.  1811 │

  [26] Wm. Gibney                    28 Oct.  1813 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [27] Conrad Dalwig                 29 Apr.  1813 │

              _Blue._  _Facings scarlet._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Lt.-Col. Cathcart Dalrymple was 2nd son of Gen. Sir Hew Dalrymple,
  Bart., by Frances, youngest dau. and co-heir of Gen. Leighton. Made
  C.B. for Waterloo. D. unm. 1820.

Footnote 2:

  M.I. at Waterloo. The following touching verses to the memory of this
  gallant officer were published soon after his death:—

                “Weep not; he died as heroes die,
                  The death permitted to the brave;
                Mourn not; he lies where soldiers lie,
                  And valour envies such a grave.

                “His was the love of bold emprise,
                  Of soldier’s hardships, soldier’s fame!
                And his the wish by arms to rise,
                  And gain a proud, a deathless name.”

Footnote 3:

  Bn. 1st Feb., 1781. 4th son of John Thackwell, of Moreton Court, co.
  Worcester, and a direct descendant of Rev. Thos. Thackwell, rector of
  Waterperry, co. Oxford, in 1607. Served in Ireland during the
  rebellion. Joined the 15th Lt. Dgns. as a cornet in 1800, and served
  32 years in that regt., during twelve of which he held the command.
  During the Par. war he boldly attacked and forced back at Granada 200
  French dgns. with 50 men of his regt., making several prisoners, for
  which he was recommended for a bt. majority. At Waterloo, when
  charging with his regt., Thackwell was wounded in the fore-arm of his
  left arm, “but he instantly seized the bridle with his right hand, in
  which was his sword, and still dashed on at the head of his regt., the
  command of which had devolved upon him. Another shot took effect on
  same arm, but he immediately seized the bridle with his teeth.” At the
  close of the day his left arm was amputated close to the shoulder.
  Proceeded to India in 1837 as Col. of 3rd Lt. Dgns. Distinguished
  himself in the Afghan, Gwalior, and Sutlej campaigns. Made a K.C.B.
  for Ghuznee. Commanded the cavalry in the Punjaub campaign. He was a
  G.C.B. and K.H., Col.-in-Chf. 16th Lancers, and Inspector-General of
  Cavalry in 1854. M., 29th July, 1825, Maria, eldest dau. of Francis
  Roche, of Rochemount, co. Cork, and had issue. D. at Aghada Hall, co.
  Cork, 8th April, 1859.

Footnote 4:

  Commanded the regt. at the close of Waterloo day. Bt. maj. for
  Waterloo. Appointed Lt.-col. of 7th Dgn. Gds. 18th December, 1823.
  Commanded the latter regt. until June, 1830. M., 23rd Aug., 1843,
  Caroline, eldest dau. of Lancelot Rolleston, of Watnall Hall. Resided
  at Woodborough Hall, co. Notts. D. before 1849.

Footnote 5:

  Promoted maj. in same regt. 16th June, 1820. Quitted the service in
  1822.

Footnote 6:

  Eldest son of the Rev. Philip Wodehouse (2nd son of Sir Armine
  Wodehouse, M.P. for Norfolk), by Apollonia, dau. and co-heir of John
  Nourse, of Woodeaton, co. Oxford. Lt.-col. unattached 1821, and
  Inspecting Field Officer of Militia same date. M., 13th June, 1832,
  Lydia, dau. of Joseph Lea, of The Hill, Stonebridge, and had issue.

Footnote 7:

  This officer had a curious and unpleasant experience at Cambray a few
  days after Waterloo. As he was riding through some gardens the ground
  suddenly gave way under his horse’s feet. The captain threw himself
  off his charger’s back, and the next moment the horse fell to the
  bottom of a well 80 or 100 feet deep, and was killed instantaneously.
  (_Records._) Promoted maj. in same regt. 11th July, 1822. Retd. on h.
  p. as lt.-col. 14th Jan. 1826. Living in 1830.

Footnote 8:

  Of Beighton, Yorkshire. Promoted maj. in same regt. 18th Dec. 1823.
  Quitted the service before 1830. M., 1832, Harriet, dau. of Sir Wm.
  Cave Browne-Cave, Bart., of Stamford.

Footnote 9:

  Placed on h. p. 25th May, 1816. Restored to f. p., as capt. in 41st
  Foot, 3rd Jan., 1822. Living in 1824.

Footnote 10:

  Placed on h. p. 25th May, 1816.

Footnote 11:

  M.I. at Waterloo.

Footnote 12:

  Of Mulbarton Lodge, co. Norfolk. Was 4th son of Abel Walford Bellairs,
  High Sheriff for Rutland, who represented a very ancient
  Leicestershire family, which can be traced back to the 12th century.
  Served in the Pa. Received the honour of knighthood from George IV. M.
  Cassandra, dau. and heir of Edmund Hooke, of Mulbarton Lodge. Quitted
  the service as captain in 1820, and d. 2nd October, 1863, leaving
  issue. Henry Bellairs, elder brother to the above, entered the Rl.
  Navy, and was wounded at Trafalgar. He afterwards entered the 15th
  Hussars, and on leaving the army took Holy Orders and became Vicar of
  Hunsigore, Yorkshire.

Footnote 13:

  Retd. on h. p. with rank of lt.-col. 9th June, 1825. M., 8th Dec.,
  1825, Harriet Frances, 2nd dau. of Lawrence, 2nd Lord Dundas. Living
  in 1842.

Footnote 14:

  Eldest son of Edward Byam, of Cedar Hill, Antigua, by Christiana
  Matilda, dau. of Mathew Byam, of Dublin. Quitted the service in 1817.
  Inherited the family estates in Antigua, and became President of that
  island. Knighted in 1859. M., 8th Feb., 1815, Martha, dau. of Thos.
  Rogers, of Antigua, and had issue. Living in 1862.

Footnote 15:

  Promoted capt. same regt. 25th Aug., 1819. Lt.-col. unattached, 26th
  Sept., 1826. Col. 23rd Nov., 1841. Maj.-gen. 11th Nov., 1851. Served
  in the Pa., and was severely wounded by a grape shot while carrying
  the regimental colours of the 38th Foot at Salamanca. Col.-in-Chf.
  18th Hussars 1858. Bn. 1794. Brother to Wm. Byam. M., 1829, Eliz.
  Augusta, sister of Sir Grenville Temple, Bart., and had issue. D. 9th
  Sept., 1864. For an account of this historical family see _Gentleman’s
  Magazine_ for 1848.

Footnote 16:

  Bn. 1791. Younger son of Jas. Dawkins (who assumed the surname of
  Colyear on succeeding to the estates of his uncle, Charles, Earl of
  Portmore), by Hannah, dau. of Thos. Phipps. M. Elizabeth, dau. of Rev.
  Sir Wm. Cooper, Bart., and d. s. p. 1821.

Footnote 17:

  Of Gledhow Hall, co. York, and Astle Hall, co. Chester Bn. 19th Nov.,
  1794. Eldest son of John Dixon, of Gledhow, by Lydia, dau. of Rev.
  John Parker, of Astle. Quitted the service as a capt. in above regt.
  M., 24th Dec., 1829, Emma, dau. of Rev. E.S. Wilmot, of Chaddesden,
  co. Derby, and d. s. p. 3rd Aug., 1838.

Footnote 18:

  Afterwards Sir John James Douglas, Bart., of Springwood Park, Kelso,
  son of Sir George Douglas, of co. Roxburgh, 2nd Bart. and M.P. for
  that county, by Lady Eliz. Boyle, dau. of John, 3rd Earl of Glasgow.
  Born 18th July, 1792. Served in the Pa. Capt. 16th Dec., 1819. H. p.
  25th July, 1820. M., 1822, the only dau. and heir of Henry Scott, of
  Belford, co. Roxburgh, and assumed the surname of Scott in addition to
  that of Douglas. D. 23rd Jan., 1836, leaving issue.

Footnote 19:

  Promoted capt. 15th June, 1820. Placed on h. p. 25th Oct., 1821 Living
  in 1830.

Footnote 20:

  Quitted the service in 1821.

Footnote 21:

  M.I. at Waterloo.

Footnote 22:

  Called “Henry Griffiths” in _Army List_ for 1829 and in subsequent
  _Lists_. Lieut. 24th May, 1815. H. p. as lieut. from Rl. Staff Corps
  12th March, 1829. Appointed a Mil. Knight of Windsor and d. in Oct.,
  1852.

Footnote 23:

  Out of the regt. in Aug., 1819.

Footnote 24:

  Surgeon 8th Foot 25th Sept., 1818. Serving in 1824. Out of the regt.
  in Feb., 1826.

Footnote 25:

  Surgeon 2nd May, 1822. Serving with regt. in 1830. H. p. before 1846.

Footnote 26:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818. Living in 1830.

Footnote 27:

  Placed on h. p. from 2nd Lt. Dns. German Legion, 21st Aug., 1817.


                16TH (OR THE QUEEN’S) REGIMENT OF LIGHT
                               DRAGOONS.

                           [_16th LANCERS._]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONELS.              Regiment.│Army.

   [1] James Hay, W.                 18 Feb.  1813 │

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] George Home Murray            18 Feb.  1813 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] John Henry Belli              29 Jan.  1807 │Maj., 7 May, 1812

   [4] Clement Swetenham             11 June, 1807 │

   [5] Richard Weyland, W.            5 Sept. 1811 │18 July, 1811

       John Phillips Buchanan, K.    28 May,  1812 │

   [6] Wm. Tomkinson                  3 June, 1812 │12 Mar. 1812

   [7] Charles King                  18 Feb.  1813 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [8] J. — Barra, Adjt.              4 Oct.  1808 │

   [9] Wm. Osten                     17 Nov.  1808 │

  [10] Trevor Wheler                 11 July, 1811 │

  [11] Francis Swinfen                1 Aug.  1811 │

  [12] George Baker                  15 Aug.  1811 │

  [13] Richard Beauchamp             19 Feb.  1812 │

  [14] Nath. Day Crichton, W.        20 Feb.  1812 │

  [15] Edward B. Lloyd               12 Mar.  1812 │

  [16] Wm. Nepean                     2 Apr.  1812 │

  [17] Jas. Arch. Richardson         12 Nov.  1814 │1 Apr. 1813

  [18] John Luard                     2 Mar.  1815 │30 May, 1811

  [19] Wm. Harris                    30 Mar.  1815 │21 Jan. 1813

  [20] Hon. C. Monckton              30 Mar.  1815 │8 July, 1813

  [21] Alexander Macdougall             30    Dec. │1813
           30  Mar. 1815                           │

                CORNETS.                           │

  [22] Wm. Beckwith                   7 Jan.  1813 │

  [23] Wm. Polhill                    1 July, 1813 │

  [24] George Nugent                  7 Oct.  1813 │

  [25] Alexander Hay                 11 Nov.  1813 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [26] George Neyland                10 Sept. 1812 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [27] John Harrison                 25 Jan.  1810 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [28] Isaac Robinson                21 Apr.  1804 │22 Dec. 1803

          ASSISTANT SURGEONS.                      │

  [29] John M’Gr. Mallock            16 Apr.  1812 │

  [30] Dennis Murray                 22 June, 1815 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [31] John Jones                    25 Nov.  1813 │

               _Blue._  _Facings scarlet._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Lt.-Gen. James Hay, C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 79th Highlanders.
  Served in the Pa. with above regt., and as capt. commanded the regt.
  in an affair with the Lancers de Berg, at Espesia, in which the enemy
  was defeated, and an officer with 70 men taken prisoners. Honourably
  mentioned in Wellington’s despatches. Had his right arm broken at
  Salamanca. Recd. the gold medal and clasp. Was so seriously wounded at
  Waterloo that he could not be moved from the field for eight days.
  Given a distinguished service pension. D. at his seat, near Kilburn,
  co. Longford, 25th Feb., 1854.

Footnote 2:

  Made bt.-lt.-col. and C.B. for Waterloo. Lt.-col. of above regt. 25th
  May, 1822. Served in the Pa., and recd. the gold medal for Salamanca.
  D. at Cawnpore 15th Dec., 1833, whilst in command of above regt. and
  holding the rank of brig.-gen. at that station.

Footnote 3:

  Maj. in same regt. 10th Oct., 1816. Bt.-lt.-col. 21st Jan., 1819.
  Unattached h. p. list 1826. Son of John Belli, whose widow’s death is
  recorded in the _Gentleman’s Magazine_ for 1842.

Footnote 4:

  Eldest son of Roger Comberbach, who assumed the surname and arms of
  Swetenham. Bn. 7th Feb., 1787. Served in the Pa. with above regt.
  Quitted the service with rank of maj. in 1817. M., 1st May, 1817,
  Eleanor, dau. of John Buchanan, of Donelly, co. Donegal, and had
  issue. Owned the estate of Somerford Booths, co. Chester, which had
  been in possession of his ancestors since A.D. 1100. D. 17th Nov.,
  1852.

Footnote 5:

  3rd son of John Weyland, of Woodeaton, co. Oxford, and Woodrising, co.
  Norfolk. Served in the Pa. Quitted the service as maj. in 1820. Bn.
  25th March, 1780. M., 12th Sept., 1820, Charlotte, dau. of Charles
  Gordon, of Cluny, and widow of Sir J.L. Johnstone, Bart., and had
  issue. D. in Oct., 1864.

Footnote 6:

  Bn. 18th Jan., 1790. 4th son of Henry Tomkinson, of Dorfold, Nantwich,
  by Anne, dau. of John Darlington, of Aston, co. Chester. Attained rank
  of lt.-col., h. p. 10th Jan., 1837. Served in the Pa., and was
  severely wounded at the passage of the Douro. Purchased the estate of
  Willington Hall, co. Chester, from Lord Alvanley in 1828. M., 9th
  Feb., 1836, Susan, dau. of Thos. Tarleton, and had issue. D. 1872.

Footnote 7:

  Was made brig.-maj. to the 4th Brigade after the battle of Waterloo.
  Ten years later, at siege of Bhurtpore, assisted by Capt. Luard and
  two orderlies of 16th Lancers, captured a Rajah. K.H. Lost an arm at
  El Bodon in the Par. War, when lieut. in 11th Lt. Dgns. D. at Dublin,
  5th July, 1844.

Footnote 8:

  Joseph Barra was a gallant Par. veteran, where he won his spurs.
  Promoted capt. 29th July 1815. Placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816.
  Appointed Adjt. of the “Chester Yeomanry,” which post he held until
  his death, 13th July, 1839. Bd. at Knutsford with military honours. At
  his funeral a sword was placed on his coffin, which bore this
  inscription:—“To Lieut. and Adjt. Barra, 16th or Queen’s Lt. Dgns.,
  this sword was presented by the officers of his regt. as a token of
  their high esteem and approbation of his services both at home and
  abroad, 30th March, 1815.”

Footnote 9:

  Wilhelm Baron Osten, K.H., had previously served in the K.G.L., and
  had smelt powder in the Par. War. Member of the family of Van der
  Osten in Hanover, “of high military and judicial fame.” Retd. from
  British service in 1834. Afterwards gen. in Hanoverian army. D. at
  Rufford Abbey 24th Jan., 1852.

Footnote 10:

  Afterwards Sir Trevor Wheler, Bart. Maj. 5th Dgn. Gds. 1829. Bn. 20th
  Dec., 1797. Eldest son of Sir Trevor Wheler, 8th Bart., by Harriet,
  dau. of Richard Beresford, of Ashbourne, co. Derby. Was twice m., and
  left issue by 1st wife. D. 6th Sept., 1869.

Footnote 11:

  Eldest son of John Swinfen by his second wife, Anne Ford. Placed on h.
  p. as lieut. 25th May, 1817. D. at Lapley Hall, co. Stafford, 20th
  Aug., 1839, leaving issue by his mge. with Mary Anne Yonge.

Footnote 12:

  7th son of Wm. Baker, M.P., of Bayfordbury, Herts. Col. on retd. h. p.
  list 1846. D. 22nd Dec., 1859.

Footnote 13:

  5th son of Sir Thos. Beauchamp, Bart., by Mary, 2nd dau. of Robert
  Palmer, of Sunning, Berks. Bn. 30th Jan., 1793. Afterwards lt.-col.
  Grenadier Guards. M., 4th October, 1828, Sophia, youngest dau. of
  Benjamin Ball, of Fort Fergus, co. Clare, and had issue. Ret. as col.
  9th March, 1832. D. 1850.

Footnote 14:

  Appointed capt. 5th Dgn. Gds. 17th Jan., 1822. Maj. in same regt. 6th
  April, 1826. D. 6th May, 1833, in London.

Footnote 15:

  Eldest son of Bell Lloyd, of Crogen yr Edeirnion, co. Merioneth, by
  Anne, dau. of George Anson, of Orgrave, co. Stafford. Placed on h. p.
  as lieut. 5th Aug., 1819. M., 1819, Lowry, dau. of Robert Morris, and
  had issue. D. 8th May, 1864.

Footnote 16:

  3rd son of Sir Evan Nepean, 1st bart., Under Sec. of State for
  Ireland. Bn. 1795. Attained the rank of maj.-gen. M., in 1820, Emilia,
  dau. of Col. Yorke, and had issue. D. 8th Dec., 1864.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 25th Jan., 1816.

Footnote 18:

  4th son of Peter John Luard, of Blyborough, capt. 4th Lt. Dgns., by
  Louisa Dalbiac. Afterwards maj. and bt.-lt.-col. 21st Foot. Served in
  the Rl. Navy, 1802–7. Entered 4th Lt. Dgns. 1809. Served in the Pa.
  Captured a Rajah at the siege of Bhurtpore. An eminent draughtsman.
  Bn. 5th May, 1790. D. 1875.

Footnote 19:

  Capt. 2nd June, 1825. H. p. 8th June, 1830. Living in 1846.

Footnote 20:

  2nd son of 4th Viscount Galway, by Eliz., dau. of Dan. Matthew, of
  Felix Hall, Essex. Captain in Cape Corps, 1823. Exchanged to 24th Foot
  1824. D. 11th May, 1830.

Footnote 21:

  Serving in 1824. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 22:

  Bn. 20th Aug., 1795. Eldest son of Wm. Beckwith, of Trimdon, co.
  Durham, by Caroline, dau. of John Nesham, of Houghton-le-Spring.
  Served in the Pa. with 16th Lt. Dgns. In 1831, as maj. of the 14th Lt.
  Dgns., greatly distinguished himself by the presence of mind and
  determination he showed in suppressing the Bristol riots. These riots
  were not suppressed until many of the ringleaders and their followers
  had perished, some being cut down by the cavalry when charging through
  the streets, but by far the greater number being burnt to death, when
  intoxicated, in the conflagration that devastated part of the city.
  Before the arrival of the squadron of the 14th Lt. Dgns. at Bristol
  the only available military force was a troop of the 3rd Dgn. Gds.,
  which was ordered to protect the city gaol. The captain of this troop
  remained in his quarters, and allowed a cornet of only sixteen months’
  service to command the troop on this special service. It is recorded
  of this young officer, Cornet Charles Kelson, that when riding with
  his troop through the slums of Bristol a burly blacksmith rushed out
  of his shop, sledge-hammer in hand, and aimed a blow at the officer’s
  head. As the smith bent his head with the weight of the hammer the
  subaltern’s sword flashed through the air, and the Goliath’s head
  rolled on the ground. Beckwith was a K.H., and at his death a Gen. and
  Col.-in-Chf. 14th Hussars. He m., 5th April, 1821, Priscilla Maria,
  dau. and heiress of Thos. Hopper, of Silksworth House, co. Durham, but
  d. s. p. 23rd Feb., 1871.

Footnote 23:

  2nd son of Edward Polhill, of Clapham, by Sarah, dau. of John Spooner,
  of Barbadoes. Lieut. in same regt. 13th Dec., 1815. Exchanged to 1st
  Life Gds. 26th Oct., 1816. On h. p. 23rd Lt. Dgns. 23rd Jan., 1819.
  Living in 1860.

Footnote 24:

  Lieut. 14th Dec., 1815. Lieut. 7th D.G. 14th Dec., 1821. Capt. 22nd
  July, 1824. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 25:

  Of Nunraw. Bn. 6th Sept., 1796. M.I. at Waterloo. 3rd son of Robert
  Hay of Drumelzier, by Janet, eldest dau. of James Erskine, of
  Cardross.

Footnote 26:

  Left the regt. 2nd Sept., 1824.

Footnote 27:

  Lieut. 25th Jan., 1816. H. p. 25th March same year.

Footnote 28:

  Serving with the regt. in 1830. Dep. Inspector-Genl. 22nd July, 1830.
  H. p. before 1846.

Footnote 29:

  Surgeon 46th Foot 2nd Feb., 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 30:

  Surgeon 23rd Nov., 1832. Appointed surgeon to 10th Lt. Dns., 14th
  Dec., 1841. Out of said regt. 30th June, 1848.

Footnote 31:

  Out of the regt. in 1822.


             18TH REGIMENT OF LIGHT DRAGOONS (HUSSARS).[C]

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONELS.              Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Hon. Henry Murray              2 Jan.  1812 │
               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [2] Richard Croker                 9 July, 1812 │
   [3] James Grant                   17 Dec.  1812 │
   [4] George Luard                  21 July, 1813 │
   [5] Jas. Rich. Llewis Lloyd       12 Nov.  1814 │25 Aug. 1809
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
   [6] Charles Hesse, W.              4 May,  1809 │
   [7] James Henry Waldie            13 Feb.  1812 │
   [8] George Woodberry              10 Dec.  1812 │
   [9] Hon. Lionel C. Dawson         24 June, 1813 │10 Nov. 1807
  [10] Martin French                 14 Oct.  1813 │29 Oct. 1812
  [11] Thomas Prior                   6 Jan.  1814 │
  [12] Robert Coote                  22 Feb.  1814 │
  [13] Henry Duperier, Adjt., W.     23 Feb.  1814 │
  [14] John Thos. Machell            24 Feb.  1814 │
  [15] Donald M’Duffie               29 Sept. 1814 │10 Mar. 1814
       _Henry Somerset_              12 Nov.  1814 │
       _Horace Seymour_              12 Nov.  1814 │29 Dec. 1812
  [16] Wm. Henry Rowlls              22 Dec.  1814 │
  [17] John Rolfe Gordon              9 Feb.  1815 │15 Oct. 1812
  [18] William Mouins                20 Apr.  1815 │
               PAYMASTER.                          │
  [19] Wm. Deane                     13 Aug.  1802 │
                SURGEON.                           │
  [20] Wm. Chambers                  25 Feb.  1804 │9 July, 1803
           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │
  [21] John Quincey                   5 Mar.  1812 │
          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │
  [22] Daniel Pilcher                13 June, 1811 │
               _Blue._  _Facings white._  _Lace silver._

Footnote C:

  Known as the “Drogheda Light Horse.” Raised in Ireland by the Marquis
  of Drogheda, in 1759, and numbered as the 19th Lt. Dragoons. Was
  re-numbered in 1763 as the 18th Lt. Dragoons; became Hussars in 1807,
  and was disbanded in 1821.

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Gen. the Hon. Sir H. Murray, K.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 14th Lt.
  Dgns. 4th son of David, 2nd Earl of Mansfield, by his 2nd wife, the
  Hon. Louisa Cathcart, dau. of Charles, 9th Lord Cathcart. Bn. 6th
  Aug., 1784. Commanded the above regt. in the Pa., and was present at
  the battle of Morales, although then suffering from a severe wound in
  the knee. “Two days after, inflammation set in in the knee, yet he
  followed the regt. in a spring waggon in rear, till upon the
  representation of the surgeon that if he went on with the troops he
  must die, he was sent back to the hospital station at Palencia, where,
  with abscess and acute rheumatism, he nearly died” (Col. Malet’s
  _Records 18th Hus._). At Waterloo he led the regt. in Sir H. Vivian’s
  brilliant charge at the conclusion of the battle. M., 28th June, 1810,
  Emily, dau. of Gerard de Visme, and had issue. Resided during the
  latter part of his life at Wimbledon Lodge, and d. there 29th July,
  1850. M.I. St. Mary’s Church, Wimbledon.

Footnote 2:

  Richard Hare Croker was 2nd son of Richard Croker, of Ballynagarde,
  co. Limerick, by Margaret Anne, sister of 1st Earl of Listowel, and
  dau. of Richard Hare. Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. H. p. 16th Nov., 1820.
  Afterwards col. retd. list. M. Amelia, dau. of John Haigh, of Whitwell
  Hall, co. York, and had issue. D. 15th Jan., 1854 at Leamington.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards Maj.-gen. James Grant, C.B., Gov. of Scarborough Castle.
  Served at Seringapatam and in Sicily. Also served in India with 17th
  Lt. Dgns. and in the Pa. with above regt. Bt.-lt.-col. for Waterloo.
  D. at Hillingdon, Mdx., 5th April, 1852.

Footnote 4:

  3rd son of Peter John Luard, of Blyborough, capt. 4th Lt. Dgns., by
  Louisa, dau. of Charles Dalbiac, of Hungerford Park. Bn. 1788. Served
  in the Pa. Placed on h. p. as maj. 8th April, 1826. D. unm. in Dec.,
  1847.

Footnote 5:

  Quitted the service in 1818.

Footnote 6:

  Capt. in the Staff Corps 22nd Feb., 1816. Placed on h. p. 1819.
  Afterwards killed in a duel with Count Leon, a natural son of the
  Emperor Napoleon.

Footnote 7:

  Commanded his troop at Waterloo. Placed on h. p. as lieut. 7th Sept.,
  1820. Living in 1846.

Footnote 8:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. when it was disbanded.

Footnote 9:

  “On baggage guard, marched with the regt. 16th, ordered to the rear
  17th June, 1815.” 4th son of John, 2nd Visct. and 1st Earl of
  Portarlington. Bn. 7th May, 1790. M., 15th Sept., 1820, Lady Eliz.
  Nugent, 2nd dau. of 7th Earl of Westmeath, and had issue. D. 25th
  Feb., 1842.

Footnote 10:

  The family of French claims to be one of the 14 ancient “tribes” of
  Galway. Certain it is that it is a very ancient one, and has left many
  branches in the sister kingdom. There seem to have been several
  bearing the Christian name of “Martin,” including an “Hon. Martin
  Ffrench” (son of 2nd Baron Ffrench). Bn. 1790, and d. 1871.

Footnote 11:

  Eldest son of Thos. Prior, of Rathdowney, Queen’s Co., by Catherine,
  dau. of Joseph Palmer, of Cuffboro’ in same county. Placed on h. p.
  23rd April, 1817. Capt. h. p. 28th Nov., 1834, Living 1846.

Footnote 12:

  Robert Carr Coote was promoted capt. 26th Nov., 1818. Placed on h. p.
  11th Nov., 1821. 2nd son of Chidley Coote, of Ash Hill, co. Limerick,
  by Eliz., dau. of the Rev. Ralph Carr, of Bath. M. Margaret Grier, and
  had issue. His elder brother succeeded to the Coote baronetcy on the
  death of Lord Mountrath. D. 5th Nov., 1834.

Footnote 13:

  H. p. in Nov. 1821. Living in 1846.

Footnote 14:

  4th son of Lt.-Col. Christopher Machell, of Beverley, by Anne, dau. of
  Col. Christopher Scott, of Aldbro’. Placed on h. p. 10th Nov., 1821.
  D. 13th Oct., 1853, at Beverley.

Footnote 15:

  Left the regt. in April, 1817. H. p. as lieut. 40th Foot 27th April,
  1820. Living in 1846.

Footnote 16:

  Commanded his troop at Waterloo. Placed on h. p. 23rd April, 1817.

Footnote 17:

  Quitted the service in 1816.

Footnote 18:

  Served in the Pa. with the 52nd L.I. Placed on h. p. 25th March, 1817.
  Afterwards lt.-col. of the East Kent Militia. Bn. 20th Feb., 1792.
  Eldest son of John Monins (late 43rd L.I.), of The Palace, Canterbury.
  M., 7th Oct., 1812, Miss Jull, and had issue. D. 1857.

Footnote 19:

  “Marched with the regt. 16th, ordered to the rear the 17th June.” Ret.
  f. p. 1842. D. 1852.

Footnote 20:

  Surgeon to 22nd Foot 13th Dec., 1821. H. p. 3rd Sept., 1825. Living in
  1830.

Footnote 21:

  Assistant-surgeon to 15th Hussars 6th June, 1822. D. or left the regt.
  in 1827.

Footnote 22:

  H. p. 10th Nov., 1821. Living in 1830.


                  23RD REGIMENT OF LIGHT DRAGOONS.[D]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONELS.              Regiment.│Army.

   [1] John, Earl of                  6 Apr.  1809 │Col., 4 June, 1814
       Portarlington                               │

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] John Mervin Cutcliffe, W.      2 Sept. 1813 │

   [3] Peter Augustus Lautour         6 Jan.  1814 │20 May, 1813

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [4] Charles Webb Dance, W.         9 Apr.  1807 │

   [5] Philip Zachariah Cox          15 Mar.  1810 │

   [6] John Martin                    8 Feb.  1813 │

   [7] Thomas Gerrard, W.             1 July, 1813 │Maj., 1 Jan. 1812

   [8] Roderick M’Neil               19 Jan.  1815 │1 Dec. 1814

   [9] Henry Grove                   19 Apr.  1815 │Maj., 1 Jan. 1812

  [10] James Maxwell Wallace         20 Apr.  1815 │22 Oct. 1807

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [11] George Dodwell                25 Apr.  1805 │

  [12] Ant. Bolton                   16 Oct.  1806 │19 Dec. 1805

  [13] Stephen Coxens, K.            17 Nov.  1808 │

  [14] Charles Tudor                 14 Mar.  1810 │26 Oct. 1808

  [15] John Banner                   15 Mar.  1810 │

  [16] John Lewes                     4 Mar.  1813 │

  [17] Cæsar Bacon                   14 Oct.  1813 │

  [18] Brabazon Disney, W.           15 Sept. 1814 │5 Aug. 1813

  [19] Robert Johnson                20 Oct.  1814 │

  [20] Thomas B. Wall, W.             9 Feb.  1815 │

  [21] H. Hill, Adjt.                 5 Apr.  1815 │

  [22] George Wm. Blathwayt           4 May,  1815 │

                CORNET.                            │

  [23] Wm. Hemmings                   6 Apr.  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [24] Thomas Dillow                 31 Jan.  1809 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [25] Joseph Crouchley              15 Feb.  1810 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [26] Samuel L. Steele              20 Apr.  1809 │12 Nov. 1803

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [27] H. Cowen                       4 Aug.  1808 │

          VETERINARY SURGEON.                      │

  [28] John Ship                      3 Apr.  1806 │

              _Blue._  _Facings crimson._  _Lace silver._

Footnote D:

  Raised in 1794 as the 26th Lt. Dragoons. Re-numbered “23rd” in 1802.
  Made Lancers in 1816. Disbanded in Jan. 1818.

Footnote 1:

  The star of the Dawsons was not propitious on the morning of the 18th
  June, 1815. Whilst one brother had been sent to the rear on the
  evening of 17th June as officer in charge of the baggage guard of 18th
  Hussars, the eldest brother, John Dawson, 2nd Earl of Portarlington,
  had betaken himself that same evening to Brussels or elsewhere. The
  consequence of this step was that “on the morning of Waterloo, by an
  unfortunate mistake, he was prevented from joining his regiment in
  time to command it in the brilliant exploits it performed on that
  memorable day.” His anguish was extreme. He joined the 18th Hussars,
  and served with Sir H. Vivian’s brigade in the destructive and
  successful charge made by that corps towards the close of the battle.
  In this charge Lord Portarlington had a horse shot under him. No one
  who knew this nobleman doubted his courage for a moment, but his
  absence from duty on such an occasion necessitated his retirement from
  the 23rd Dgns. in Sept., 1815. The Prince Regent showed much kind
  feeling for Portarlington, and did his best to uphold the unfortunate
  officer in the eyes of the world. Lord Portarlington purchased a
  half-pay ensigncy in 86th Foot 21st Oct., 1821. Became lieut. on h. p.
  10th Sept., 1825. Capt. h. p. 9th Aug., 1831. This rank was a curious
  anomaly, as his lordship’s name had been retained in the _Army List_
  as a “colonel” ever since Waterloo, and he was also awarded the
  Waterloo medal. But the one misfortune of his life was ever before
  him, and the remorse from knowing that he alone was the author of it
  weighed upon him to such an extent that he took to dissipation, lost a
  large fortune, and d. at a humble lodging in an obscure London slum,
  28th Dec., 1845. In early life he had served in the Pa., and was
  present at the battle of Talavera. He d. unm.

Footnote 2:

  Commanded the regt. at Waterloo in the absence of Lord Portarlington,
  and was severely wounded early in the day. Bt.-lt.-col. and C.B.
  Promoted lt.-col. of this regt. 28th Sept., 1815. Placed on h. p. in
  1818 on the reduction of his regt. D. in 1822. He belonged to the
  Devonshire family of this name (Cutcliffe, of Damage), the head of
  which bears the Christian name of “Mervyn.”

Footnote 3:

  Younger son of Joseph François Louis de Lautour, who came of an old
  Alsatian family, for many years a banker at Madras. Served in the Pa.
  with the 11th Lt. Dgns., and specially distinguished himself at El
  Bodon. On 7th Sept., 1812, when in command of a squadron of 11th
  Dgns., he attacked and took prisoners a company of French artillery
  near Valladolid. At Waterloo he succeeded to the command of the above
  regt. early in the day, and later on, same day, to the command of the
  brigade. C.B., and K.H., and bt. of lt.-col. Placed on h. p. 25th
  Jan., 1818. Afterwards Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 3rd Lt. Dgns. M. Cameron,
  dau. of John Innes, of Cowie, and had issue. D. at Bromley 11th Jan.,
  1856.

Footnote 4:

  Promoted capt. 20th June, 1816, and appointed maj. 2nd Life Gds. 24th
  July, 1816. Bt.-lt.-col. 27th March, 1817. Exchanged to h. p. with
  Maj. Roderick M’Neil, 19th July, 1822. Had been knighted by George IV.
  in the previous August. D. 13th Nov., 1844.

Footnote 5:

  On h. p. 1817. M., 17th Feb., 1817, Louise, youngest dau. of Adm. Sir
  Albemarle Bertie, Bart. D. 24th Jan., 1811.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards lieut.-col. unattached. Living 1842.

Footnote 7:

  3rd son of Thos. Gerrard, of Gibbstown, co. Meath. Bn. 9th Dec., 1779.
  H. p. 1818. Lt.-col. h. p. 1821. M., 18th March, 1831, Letitia, dau.
  of Rev. George Garnett, of Williamston, co. Meath, and had issue. D.
  7th April 1836.

Footnote 8:

  Afterwards maj. 2nd Life Gds. Bt.-lt.-col. 17th Jan., 1822. Lt.-col.
  91st Foot 16th July 1841–1842. D. as gen. in Oct., 1863.

Footnote 9:

  On h. p. 1818. Bt.-lt.-col. 1821.

Footnote 10:

  Afterwards Sir James Maxwell Wallace, K.H., Col.-in-Chf. 17th Lancers.
  Son of John Wallace, of Greenock, N.B., by a dau. of Robert Colquhoun.
  Bn. 1785. Served at the Cape of Good Hope as cornet 21st Lt. Dgns.,
  and saw much service in Caffraria, 1812. On the 16th June, 1815, was
  appointed orderly officer, by Wellington’s permission, to Gen. Count
  Dornberg, and following day acting brig.-maj. Was twice m. His 2nd
  wife (in 1836) was the widow of Sir Alexander Don, Bart., of Newton
  Don, N.B. D. 3rd Feb., 1867, aged 82.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 30th May, 1816. Living in 1846.

Footnote 12:

  Lieut. 3rd D.G. 3rd Aug., 1818. Adjt. 6th Nov., 1823. Capt. 11th Foot
  3rd Aug., 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 13:

  Son of Ebenezer and Anne Coxens, to whom a pension of £80 per annum
  was granted in 1815.

Footnote 14:

  H. p. 25th Jan., 1818. Living in 1846.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. 93rd Highlanders 21st Nov., 1828. In 1836 he wrote a reply in
  _The United Service Magazine_ to Col. Gawler’s _Crisis of Waterloo_,
  of which more hereafter. D. 24th Dec., 1837.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 25th Jan., 1818. Living in 1830.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 25th Jan., 1818. Major, unattached, 10th Jan., 1837. Living in
  1860. Served previously in 11th Lt. Dns.

Footnote 18:

  Son of Thos. Disney, of Rock Lodge, co. Meath. Capt. 67th Foot 8th
  Apr., 1816. H. p. 25th July, 1817. Exchanged to Rl. Fusiliers 22nd
  Apr., 1819. Major 3rd March, 1825. Lt.-col. 31st Aug., 1830,
  unattached. D. in Dublin 15th March, 1833.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 25th Jan., 1818. Living in 1830. Called “Johnston” in _Army
  List_ for 1830.

Footnote 20:

  Capt. h. p. 81st Foot 16th May, 1822. Appointed Sub-Inspector of
  Militia in the Ionian Islands, 30th May, 1829.

Footnote 21:

  Reduced with the regt. in Jan., 1818.

Footnote 22:

  The representative of Wm. Blathwayt, Secretary at War to King William
  III., and Clerk of the Privy Council to no less than four English
  Sovereigns. G.W. Blathwayt, of Dyrham Park, Chippenham, was bn. 25th
  Feb., 1797. M. 21st Jan., 1822, Mary Anne, dau. of the Rev. T.
  Agmondisham Vesey, and had issue. In 1851 he was a lieut.-col. on the
  retd. list. D. 14th May, 1871.

Footnote 23:

  Lieut. 17th Aug., 1815. H. p. 93rd Highlanders 25th Mar., 1817. Capt.
  25th Borderers 19th Sept., 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 24:

  Reduced with the regt. in Jan., 1818.

Footnote 25:

  Reduced with the regt. in Jan., 1818. Living in 1830.

Footnote 26:

  D. or left the regt. in 1816.

Footnote 27:

  Surgeon to 41st Foot 8th June, 1820. Serving in 1824. Out of the regt.
  in 1825.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. Jan. 1818. D. at Hackney, 1834.


                    1ST REGIMENT OF FOOT GUARDS.[E]

                      (_2nd and 3rd Battalions._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

             SECOND MAJOR.                Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Henry Askew, W.               25 July, 1814 │Col., 4 June, 1814

              THIRD MAJOR.                         │

   [2] Hon. Wm. Stuart, W.           25 July, 1814 │Col., 4 June, 1814

              CAPTAINS AND                         │
            LIEUT.-COLONELS.                       │

   [3] Hon. H.T.P. Townshend, W.     26 Oct.  1809 │

   [4] Richard Harvey Cooke, W.       7 Nov.  1811 │

   [5] Edward Stables, K.             4 June, 1812 │

   [6] Sir Francis d’Oyly,           23 Sept. 1812 │
       K.C.B., K.                                  │

   [7] Henry d’Oyly, W.              27 May,  1813 │

       _John George Woodford_         1 July, 1813 │

   [8] George Fead, W.               13 Dec.  1813 │

   [9] Charles Thomas, K.            25 Dec.  1813 │

  [10] Alexander, Lord Saltoun       25 Dec.  1813 │

  [11] John Reeve                    25 Dec.  1813 │

  [12] Wm. Miller, K.                 3 Mar.  1814 │

  [13] Hon. James Stanhope           25 July, 1814 │17 Mar. 1814

  [14] Goodwin Colquitt              25 July, 1814 │

  [15] Wm. Henry Milnes, K.          25 July, 1814 │

       _Sir Henry H. Bradford_,      25 July, 1814 │28 Dec. 1809
       K.C.B., W.                                  │

  [16] Sir Henry Hardinge, K.C.B.    25 July, 1814 │30 May, 1811

       _Sir Thos. Noel Hill_,        25 July, 1814 │3 Oct. 1811
       Kt., K.C.B.                                 │

       _Delancey Barclay_            25 July, 1814 │28 Feb. 1812

       _Lord Fitzroy Somerset,_      25 July, 1814 │27 Apr. 1812
       K.C.B., W.                                  │

       LIEUTENANTS AND CAPTAINS.                   │

  [17] Robert Adair, W.              26 Oct.  1809 │

  [18] Thos. Streatfield, W.         23 Nov.  1809 │

  [19] J.H. Davies                    7 Dec.  1809 │4 Feb. 1804

  [20] Charles Allix, Adjt.          13 Dec.  1810 │

       _Lord James Hay_              27 June, 1811 │8 Feb. 1810

  [21] Edward Grose, K.              26 Sept. 1811 │

       _James Gunthorpe_, Adjt.       7 Nov.  1811 │

       _Chath. Hor. Churchill_       27 Aug.  1812 │Maj., 22 Nov. 1813

  [22] Hon. Robert Clements, W.      23 Sept. 1812 │

       _Lord Charles Fitzroy_        23 Sept. 1812 │

  [23] Robert Ellison                20 Dec.  1812 │

  [24] Harry Weyland Powell          22 Jan.  1813 │

       _Newton Chambers_, K.          7 Apr.  1813 │

       _George Disbrowe_              8 Apr.  1813 │

       _Wm. Gordon Cameron_          10 June, 1813 │

  [25] Lonsdale Boldero              20 Oct.  1813 │

  [26] Robert Wm. Phillimore         13 Dec.  1813 │

       _Hon. Orlando Bridgeman_,      8 Jan.  1814 │
       W.                                          │

  [27] Charles Parker Ellis, W.      10 Jan.  1814 │

  [28] James Simpson, W.             11 Jan.  1814 │

       _Augustus, Viscount Bury_     12 Jan.  1814 │

  [29] Edward Clive                  13 Jan.  1814 │

  [30] Wm. Fred. Johnstone           16 Mar.  1814 │

  [31] Francis Fownes Luttrell,      17 Mar.  1814 │
       W.                                          │

  [32] Thomas Brown, K.              22 Mar.  1814 │

  [33] Edward Pery Buckley           23 Mar.  1814 │

       _Francis Dawkins_             28 Apr.  1814 │

  [34] James Nixon                   12 May,  1814 │

  [35] Charles F.R. Lascelles, W.     9 June, 1814 │

       _Wm. George Moore_            30 Sept. 1814 │14 Apr. 1814

  [36] Samuel W. Burgess, W.         20 Oct.  1814 │

               ENSIGNS..                           │

  [37] Rees Howell Gronow            24 Dec.  1812 │

  [38] Robert Batty, W.              14 Jan.  1813 │

  [39] Richard Master                21 Jan.  1813 │

  [40] Wm. Barton, W.                 4 Feb.  1813 │9 May, 1811

  [41] Hon. H.S.V. Vernon             8 Apr.  1813 │

  [42] Edward Pardoe, K.             29 Apr.  1813 │

  [43] Courtney Chambers             10 June, 1813 │

  [44] James Butler                  23 June, 1813 │17 June, 1812

  [45] Thos. Robert Swinburne        24 June, 1813 │

  [46] Charles James Vyner            2 Sept. 1813 │

  [47] Fred. Dashwood Swann          20 Oct.  1813 │

       _James, Lord Hay_, K.         21 Oct.  1813 │

  [48] John Pasley Dirom             18 Nov.  1813 │Lt., 2 Sept. 1813

  [49] John F.M. Erskine              1 Dec.  1813 │

  [50] Robert Bruce, W.               9 Dec.  1813 │

  [51] Hon. T. Seymour Bathurst      11 Jan.  1814 │

  [52] Hon. Ern. A. Edgcombe         12 Jan.  1814 │

  [53] George Fludyer, W.            13 Jan.  1814 │

  [54] Wm. Fred. Tinling             27 Jan.  1814 │

  [55] Algernon Greville              1 Feb.  1814 │

  [56] George Thomson Jacob           3 Feb.  1814 │

  [57] Donald Cameron                17 Feb.  1814 │

  [58] Samuel Hurd                    3 Mar.  1814 │

  [59] Fletcher Norton               17 Mar.  1814 │

  [60] Henry Lascelles, W.            7 Apr.  1814 │

  [61] George Mure                   14 Apr.  1814 │

  [62] George Allen                  21 Apr.  1814 │

  [63] Thos. Elmsley Croft, W.       28 Apr.  1814 │

  [64] Hon. S.S. Barrington, K.      24 Nov.  1814 │7 Sept. 1814

  [65] Joseph St. John               25 Nov.  1814 │

  [66] Daniel Tighe                  26 Nov.  1814 │

  [67] James Talbot                  16 Feb.  1815 │

            QUARTERMASTER..                        │

  [68] Robert Colquhoun              25 Nov.  1812 │21 Aug. 1806

               SURGEONS..                          │

  [69] Wm. Curtis                     5 Oct.  1809 │21 Aug. 1806

  [70] Sam. Wm. Watson               25 Dec.  1813 │14 July, 1809

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [71] John Harrison                 29 June, 1809 │

  [72] Andrew Armstrong              18 July, 1811 │

  [73] John Gardner                  25 Dec.  1813 │

  [74] Fred. Gilder                   9 June, 1814 │

                     _Facings blue._  _Lace gold._

Footnote E:

  By a General Order, dated 29th July, 1815, H.R.H. the Prince Regent
  was pleased to approve of the 1st Regt. of Foot Guards being made a
  regt. of Grenadiers, and styled “The 1st, or Grenadier, Regt. of Foot
  Guards” in commemoration of their having defeated the Grenadiers of
  the French Imperial Guards at Waterloo.

Footnote 1:

  Bn. 7th May, 1775. 3rd son of John Askew, of Pallinsburn, co.
  Northumberland. C.B. Knighted by George IV. Lt.-gen. D. s. p. 25th
  June, 1847, at Cologne.

Footnote 2:

  3rd son of Alexander, 10th Baron Blantyre, by Catherine, dau. and heir
  of Patrick Lindsay, of Eaglescairnie. Bn. 1778. C.B. for Waterloo.
  Attained rank of lt.-gen., and d. unm. 15th Feb., 1837.

Footnote 3:

  Lt.-col. of the Grenadier Guards 25th July, 1821. Bt.-col. 12th
  August, 1819. Aftds. K.C.H. and Lt.-Gov. of Windsor Castle. 2nd son of
  1st Viscount Sydney, by Elizabeth, eldest dau. and co-heir of Richard
  Powys, of Hintlesham, co. Suffolk. D. unm. 24th May, 1843.

Footnote 4:

  Second in the Pa., and commanded a detachment of Guards at St.
  Sebastian, for which he received the gold medal. C.B. for Waterloo.
  Quitted the service as bt.-col. 25th March, 1818. D., in London, 8th
  Oct., 1856.

Footnote 5:

  M.I. at Waterloo. He was of Great Ormead, Herts.

Footnote 6:

  3rd son of the Rev. Matthias d’Oyly, Rector of Buxted, Sussex, and
  Archdeacon of Lewes, by his marriage with Miss Poughfer. Had served in
  this regt. since 1794. In the expedition to the Helder, in 1799, he
  acted as A.D.C. to his uncle, Gen. d’Oyly. Served in Sicily, also in
  the Pa.; and was made K.C.B. for his valuable services in Spain and
  France. Fell by a musket ball towards the close of Waterloo.

Footnote 7:

  Brother to the above. Bn. 21st April, 1780. Promoted maj.-gen. 28th
  June, 1838, and was made Col.-in-Chf. of 33rd Foot, 28th Sept., 1847.
  Lt.-Gen. 1851. Had served in Holland and the Pa. Was A.D.C. to Gen.
  Cooke at the siege of Cadiz, and was sent home with despatches
  announcing the raising of the siege in 1812. Severely wounded at
  Waterloo. M. 1836, Caroline, youngest dau. of Colonel Gore-Langton,
  M.P. D. 26th Sept., 1855.

Footnote 8:

  Made C.B. for Waterloo. Son of Lt.-Gen. George Fead, Col. Comdt. R.A.,
  who d. at Woolwich in 1815. Retd. 1828, and d. at Lewisham, 13th
  Sept., 1847. By his will, dated 16th Dec., 1844, he bequeathed all his
  property to his wife, Caroline Fead, who was sole executrix to his
  will.

Footnote 9:

  Began his military career as ensign in the East Middlesex Militia,
  from which he volunteered to accompany the expedition to Holland in
  1799, and received promotion for his gallantry in that campaign from
  the Duke of Gloucester. Served in the Pa., and distinguished himself
  at Salamanca. In the autumn of 1814 he married Sarah Garcy Brandon,
  niece of Mr. Serjeant Shepherd. A pens. of £200 per ann. was granted
  to his widow, who was left in distressed circumstances.

Footnote 10:

  Son of Alexander Fraser, 15th Lord Saltoun, by Margaret, only dau. and
  heir of Simon Fraser, of Ness Castle. Saw much service in the Pa. Had
  four horses shot under him whilst defending Hougomont without (Col.
  M’Donell defending within). “Towards the close of Waterloo day he
  returned to his place in the line with about but one-third of the men
  with whom he had gone into action. He then took a prominent part in
  the last celebrated charge of the Guards.” K.T.; K.C.B.; G.C.H.;
  K.M.T.; K.St.G. Lt.-Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 2nd Foot. Commanded a
  brigade in the war with China, 1842. Was justly described by
  Wellington, on one occasion, as a “pattern to the army both as man and
  soldier.” M. a natural dau. of Lord Chancellor Thurlow, and d. s. p.
  18th August, 1853, near Rothes.

Footnote 11:

  Eldest son of Wm. Reeve, of Leadenham House, Grantham, by Millicent,
  dau. of Capt. John King, of 1st Foot Guards. Attained the rank of Gen.
  and Col.-in-Chf. 61st Regt. Had served in the Pa., and at Walcheren.
  M., 11th July, 1821, Lady Susan Sherard, dau. of Philip, 5th Earl of
  Harborough, and had issue. D. 3rd Oct., 1864.

Footnote 12:

  D. at Brussels on 19th June, 1815, of wounds received at Quatre Bras.
  On being wounded he sent for his friend, Col. C. Thomas, and said, “I
  feel I am mortally wounded, but I am pleased to think it is my fate
  rather than yours, whose life is involved in that of your young wife.”
  After a pause, he said: “I should like to see the colours of the regt.
  before I quit them for ever.” They were brought and waved round his
  wounded body. “His countenance brightened, he smiled, declared himself
  well satisfied, and was carried from the field.” M.I. at Waterloo. Was
  2nd son of Sir William Miller, Bart. (a lord of session by title of
  Lord Glenlee), by Grizel, dau. of George Chalmers, of co. Fife.

Footnote 13:

  3rd son of Charles, 3rd Earl Stanhope, by his 2nd wife, Louisa, dau.
  and sole heir of the Hon. Henry Grenville, Gov. of Barbados. Bn. 7th
  Sept., 1788. M. 9th July, 1820, the Hon. Frederica Murray, dau. of 3rd
  Earl of Mansfield, and had issue. Placed on h. p. 28th Feb., 1822. D.
  5th March, 1825.

Footnote 14:

  C.B. for Waterloo. Quitted the service in 1820. Brother to the John
  Colquit who, as capt. in this regt. highly distinguished himself at
  the taking of Seville in 1812, and d. of his wounds soon after.
  Goodwin Colquit m. Miss Wallace, of Kelly, N.B., and had issue.

Footnote 15:

  2nd son of Sir Robert Milnes, Bart., by Charlotte, 3rd dau. of Capt.
  J.A. Bentinck, R.N. D. from his wounds, 20th June, 1815. M.I. at
  Waterloo.

Footnote 16:

  Afterwards Viscount Hardinge, G.C.B., and K.T.S. 3rd son of Rev. Henry
  Hardinge, Rector of Stanhope, co. Durham, by Frances, dau. of James
  Best, of Park House, Boxley, Kent. Served throughout the Par. War,
  most of the time being D.Q.M.G. of the Portuguese army. Received the
  gold medal and five clasps. In 1815 was attached to the Prussian army,
  being so employed by Wellington, whom he kept _au fait_ of what was
  passing. Was present at the battle of Ligny, where he was sev. wnded.
  in the left hand. “On the night of the 16th June, 1815, he lay in a
  wretched hut with his amputated left hand lying by his side.”
  Wellington’s despatch to Earl Bathurst, of 30th June, 1815, did full
  justice to Hardinge’s services with Prince Blucher’s army. In 1846 was
  created a viscount in acknowledgment of his valuable services as
  Gov.-Gen. in the East Indies. (Medal and two clasps for the Sutlej
  campaign.) Col.-in-Chf. 57th Regt., 1843. Com.-in-Chf. at home, 1852,
  and F.-M. 1855. M. 10th Dec., 1821, Lady Emily Stewart, 7th dau. of
  Robert, 1st Marquis of Londonderry, and had issue. D. 24th Sept.,
  1856.

Footnote 17:

  D. at Brussels on 23rd June, 1815, of wounds received at Quatre Bras;
  son of Robert Adair, to whom administration of his son’s effects and
  personalty was granted, 29th March, 1816. P.C.C.

Footnote 18:

  2nd son of Henry Streatfield, of Chillingstone, Edenbridge, Kent, by
  Elizabeth, dau. of Dr. Ogle, Dean of Winchester. Promoted capt. and
  lt.-col. 2nd July, 1815. Quitted the service, 26th Dec, 1821. D. at
  Penshurst, 26 Sept., 1852.

Footnote 19:

  This officer’s proper name was “Thomas Henry Hastings Davies.” He was
  of Elmley Castle, co. Worcester, and M.P. for Worcester. 2nd son of
  Thomas Davies, Advocate-General, Calcutta. Retd. on h. p. as lt.-col.
  1818. M., 21st Jan., 1824. Augusta, only child of Thomas de Crespigny,
  and d. s. p. 11th Dec., 1846.

Footnote 20:

  2nd son of John Peter Allix, of Swaffham House, Cambridge, by Sarah,
  dau. of Rev. Wm. Collyer. Bn. 24 April, 1787. M. 10th April, 1841,
  Mary, dau. of Charles Allix, of Willoughby Hall, co. Lincoln, and had
  issue. Capt. and lt.-col. 4th July, 1815. Col. 10th Jan., 1837. D.
  24th April, 1862.

Footnote 21:

  This officer’s name appears on the tablet erected by the Grenadier
  Guards, in the church at Waterloo, in memory of the officers of that
  regt. who fell in the Waterloo campaign. His parentage cannot be
  traced, and he seems to have left no will. The name of Grose is
  familiar to all from being that of the author of _Military
  Antiquities_.

Footnote 22:

  2nd son of the 1st Earl of Leitrim by Eliz., dau. of 1st Earl of
  Massareene. Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. D. in July, 1828, as capt. and
  lt.-col. same regt.

Footnote 23:

  2nd son of Henry Ellison, of Hebburn, co. Durham, by Henrietta, dau.
  of John Isaacson. Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. Maj. and bt.-col. in same
  regt. 9th Jan., 1838. D. 3rd July, 1843, leaving issue by his wife,
  who was a dau. of 4th Lord Rokeby.

Footnote 24:

  Served at Walcheren and in the Pa. Son of Thomas Powell and Clarissa
  his wife. M., in 1816, Eliza Buckworth, and had issue. Quitted the
  service in 1821. D. 17th July, 1840. M.I. in Lyndhurst Church, Hants.

Footnote 25:

  Afterwards adjt. to his battalion, and maj. same regt. 1845. His name
  is not given in the pedigree of “Boldero, of co. Suffolk,” but as
  there is a “Lonsdale” Boldero in the Suffolk family at this present
  time, the above, doubtless, belonged to this ancient family. Retd. in
  Oct., 1846.

Footnote 26:

  This officer’s name was Wm. Robert, and not as given in the 1815 _Army
  List_. Retd. on h. p. 22nd July, 1824, as capt. Eldest son of W.R.
  Phillimore, of Kendalls, co. Herts, by the Hon. Sarah Ongley, dau. of
  1st Lord Ongley. Bn. 1793. M. Anna, dau. of W.A. West, and had issue.
  D. at Brighton, 30th Nov., 1846.

Footnote 27:

  2nd son of John Ellis, by Antonetta, dau. of Sir P. Parker, Bart.
  Dangerously wounded at Waterloo. Lt.-col. h. p. 1831. Col. 1841. M.
  5th May, 1817, Julia, dau. of Vice-Adm. Christopher Parker. D. at
  Clevedon, 6th Aug., 1850.

Footnote 28:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir James Simpson, G.C.B. Com.-in-Chf. in the Crimea
  after the death of F.-M. Lord Raglan. Served in the Pa. from May,
  1812, to May, 1813. In 1815 was a student in the “first,” or as it was
  called later, the “senior” department of the R.M. College (which dept.
  was the forerunner of the “Staff College”), but joined his battn. (the
  2nd) in Flanders in the spring of this year. Was sev. wnded. at Quatre
  Bras. Served as 2nd in command to Sir Charles Napier during the
  campaign against the mountain and desert tribes situated on the right
  bank of the Indus in 1845. Was Chief of the Staff in the Crimea, for
  which he was well qualified by his long experience of staff work. Much
  against his will he was chosen to succeed Lord Raglan as C.-in-C.
  After two unsuccessful attacks on the Redan had taken place, Gen.
  Simpson was subjected to severe criticisms, and although he was upheld
  by the Home Government, and made G.C.B. with rank of full gen., he
  soon after resigned his command, and was succeeded by Sir Wm.
  Codrington. Simpson returned to England. He was son of David Simpson,
  of Teviot-bank, N.B., by Margaret, dau. of John Eliot, of
  Borthwick-brae. M., 1839, Eliz., dau. of Sir Robert Dundas, Bart. (she
  d. 1840) and d. at Horringer, near Bury St. Edmunds, 18th April, 1868.

Footnote 29:

  Eldest son of Edward Bolton Clive, of Whitfield, co. Hereford, by the
  Hon. Harriet Archer, dau. and co.-heir of Andrew, last Baron Archer,
  Capt. and lt.-col. 1826. Col. 1840. D. unm. 14th April, 1845.

Footnote 30:

  Attained the rank of capt. and lt.-col. and quitted the service in
  1840. Living in 1874.

Footnote 31:

  3rd son of John Fownes-Luttrell, of Dunster Castle. M.P. for Minehead,
  by Mary, eldest dau. of Francis Drewe, of Grange, Devon. Bn. 1792.
  Lt.-col. Grenadier Guards. Quitted the service 28th April, 1825. Of
  Kilve Court, and Wootton House, Somerset. M., 1824, his cousin Emma
  Drewe. D. Jan., 1862, leaving issue.

Footnote 32:

  Belonged to the family of “Brown of Kingston Blount, co. Oxford.” Was
  killed at Quatre Bras. M.I. at Waterloo. His brother, Henry Alexander
  Brown, lived for many years at St. Leonard’s, where he was long
  remembered as “a fine old gentleman of the old school.”

Footnote 33:

  Afterwards Gen. E.P. Buckley, M.P., of New Hall, Salisbury. M., 13th
  May, 1828, Lady Catherine Bouverie, dau. of 3rd Lord Radnor, and had
  issue. Son of Col. Edward P. Buckley, of Woolcombe Hall, co. Dorset,
  by Lady Georgina West. D. 1873.

Footnote 34:

  Exchanged to 60th Foot 15th June, 1820, and retd. on h. p. three weeks
  later. Living in 1846.

Footnote 35:

  Son of Rowley Lascelles by Eliz., younger dau. of Sir Charles Gould,
  Bart. (who assumed the name of Morgan), by Jane, eldest dau. of Thomas
  Morgan, of Ruperra, co. Glamorgan. Maj. in this regt. 4th July, 1843,
  and lt.-col. comg. 10th April, 1849. Retd. on f. p. before 1855. D.
  8th Nov. 1860.

Footnote 36:

  There were two officers of this name in the army in 1815. The other
  Samuel was a capt. on retd. list of 10th Veteran Battn. The above
  Samuel quitted the service before 1824.

Footnote 37:

  Son of Wm. Gronow, of Court Herbert, co. Glamorgan, the representative
  of a very old Welsh family. Quitted the service 24th Oct., 1821. Lt.
  Gronow belonged to the 1st Batt., which was not at Waterloo. Sir T.
  Picton took him out to Flanders as an “honorary” A.D.C., but finding
  no employment for him, he was advised to join the 3rd batt. of his
  regt. which was at Waterloo. This he did, and took part in the great
  battle as a guardsman. His experiences of that memorable day have been
  given to the world in an interesting little book entitled
  _Reminiscences of Capt. Gronow_. He was aftds. M.P. for Stafford, and
  d. in Paris 22nd Nov., 1865.

Footnote 38:

  Son of Dr. Robert Batty, of Hastings (who was born at Kirby Lonsdale
  in co. Westmoreland). Educated at Caius College, Cambridge. An eminent
  amateur draughtsman. F.R.S. Wrote a short account of the campaign in
  the Netherlands, 1815, illustrated with plates of the battle of
  Waterloo drawn by himself. M. Johanna, eldest dau. of Sir John Barrow,
  1st Bart., of Ulverstone, co. Lancaster. D. 20th Nov., 1848, as
  lt.-col. on h. p. list.

Footnote 39:

  Bn. 24th March, 1795. 4th son of Richard Master, by Isabella, dau. of
  Lt.-col. Wm. Egerton, of the 1st Foot Guards. Promoted lt. and capt.
  1st July, 1815. H. p. 25th Feb., 1819. M. Anna Catherine Frederica von
  Puckpock, of Wasserburg, in Bavaria. Served in the Netherlands in the
  campaigns of 1813, 1814, and 1815. Served also in Corsica (1812),
  North America, and the West Indies. He received a reward from the
  Patriotic Fund. Living in 1860.

Footnote 40:

  Had served previously in the 87th Foot. Promoted lt. and capt. 3rd
  July, 1815. On h. p. 4th Oct., 1827.

Footnote 41:

  The Hon. Henry Sedley Venables Vernon was eldest son of the 3rd Lord
  Vernon, by his 2nd wife, Alice, dau. of Sir John Whiteford, Bart.
  Promoted lt. and capt. 5th July, 1815. Quitted the service 28th March,
  1822. M., 29th August, 1822, Eliza, dau. of Edward Coke, of Longford
  Court, co. Derby, and had issue. D. 12th Dec., 1845.

Footnote 42:

  4th son of John Pardoe, M.P., for Plympton, Camelford, and Westlowe,
  by Jane, dau. of Thomas Oliver, of the Great House, Leyton, Essex. Bn.
  4th April, 1796. Sev. wnded. at the siege of Bergen-op-Zoom, 1814, and
  especially mentioned in despatches.

Footnote 43:

  Promoted lt. and capt. 6th July, 1815. Aftds. capt. in 57th Foot. Maj.
  in 25th Foot 1825. Commanded the latter regt. for eighteen years. D.
  in June, 1848.

Footnote 44:

  James Arthur Butler had formerly served in the 2nd Foot. Exchanged to
  80th Foot as capt. in 1823. On h. p. as maj. unattached 19th Nov.,
  1825. Bt.-lt.-col. 1838. Attained rank of gen. 5th Dec., 1871. He
  carried the colours of his battn. at Waterloo, and was present at the
  storming of Peronne, that virgin fortress which had never before
  surrendered to an enemy. Living in 1874.

Footnote 45:

  Eldest son of Thomas Swinburne, of Pontop Hall, co. Durham, by
  Charlotte, dau. and co-heir of Robert Spearman. Attained rank of
  maj.-gen., and was F.R.S. He was at the taking of Peronne in 1815, and
  in 1823 exchanged as capt. to 3rd Dgn. Gds. Was twice married, and
  left issue by both wives. D. 28th Feb., 1864.

Footnote 46:

  2nd son of Robert Vyner, of Grantby Hall, co. Lincoln, by Lady
  Theodosia Ashburnham, dau. of 2nd Earl of Ashburnham. Bn. 1797.
  Promoted l. and capt. in 1817. Went on h. p. in 1822. D. unm. in 1837.

Footnote 47:

  Promoted lt. and capt. 16th July, 1818. Placed on h. p. 25th Dec.,
  1818. Retd. 15th Sept., 1839.

Footnote 48:

  Eldest son of Lt.-gen. Alexander Dirom of Mount Annan, co. Dumfries,
  by Magdalen, dau. of Robert Pasley. Bn. 6th Nov., 1794. Left the
  service as lt.-col. in 1836. D. s. p. 2nd June, 1857.

Footnote 49:

  John Francis Miller Erskine succeeded as 9th Earl of Mar, and 14th
  Lord Erskine, on the death of his father, the 8th Earl of Mar, in
  1828. Aftds. inherited as 11th Earl of Kellie. Quitted the service in
  1821. M. 24th April, 1827, Philadelphia, dau. of Sir Granville
  Menteth, Bart. D. s. p. 19th June, 1866.

Footnote 50:

  Eldest son of Alexander Bruce, of Kennet, N.B., by Hugh (_sic_), dau.
  of Hugh Blackburn, of Glasgow. Established his claim to the attainted
  barony of “Balfour of Burleigh,” and succeeded in 1869 as 6th Lord.
  Quitted the service in 1824. M., 2ndly, 1848, Jane Dalrymple Hamilton,
  dau. of Sir James Fergusson, Bart., and had issue, a son and successor
  to the title. D. 13th Aug., 1864.

Footnote 51:

  3rd son of Henry, 3rd Earl Bathurst, by Georgina, dau. of Lord George
  Lennox. Appointed to Cape Corps as capt. in 1823. Lt.-col. 9th June,
  1825. Retd. on h. p. (unattached list) in 1828. M., 6th October, 1829,
  Julia, dau. of John Peter Hankey, and d. in 1834 leaving issue.

Footnote 52:

  Eldest son of 2nd Earl of Mount-Edgcombe, by Lady Sophia Hobart, dau.
  of 2nd Earl of Buckinghamshire. Quitted the service in 1819. Aftds.
  Col. of the Cornwall Militia, and A.D.C. to the Queen. M. 6th Dec.,
  1831, Caroline, eldest dau. of Rear-Adm. Fielding, and had issue.
  Succeeded as 3rd Earl in 1839. D. 3rd Sept., 1861.

Footnote 53:

  Eldest son of George Fludyer, of Ayston, co. Rutland, by Lady Mary
  Fane, dau. of 9th Earl of Westmoreland. Quitted the service in 1834.
  D. in Feb., 1856. His youngest brother (John Henry) succeeded to the
  Fludyer baronetcy in 1876.

Footnote 54:

  Promoted maj. on unattached list 10th Dec., 1825. D. in London 7th
  Apr., 1850.

Footnote 55:

  There were several “Algernon Grevilles” in the younger branches of the
  noble house of Warwick. The above appears to be the son of Capt. W.
  Fulke Greville, R.N. Bn. 1791. D. 23rd Nov., 1857, having m. in Dec.,
  1813, Caroline, 2nd dau. of Sir Bellingham Graham, and left issue.

Footnote 56:

  Exchanged to 3rd Dgn. Gds. as cornet in 1818. H. p. 24th Sept., 1818.
  Restored to f. p. as lt. 4th Dgn. Gds., 1839. Col. Dorset Militia,
  1846. D. at Rayrigg, Windermere, 13th May, 1885.

Footnote 57:

  Of Lochiel. Eldest son of Donald Cameron, by Anne, dau. of Sir Ralph
  Abercromby. Quitted the service in 1832. M., same year, Lady Vere
  Catherine Hobart, sister of 5th Earl of Buckinghamshire, and had
  issue. “Lochiel” d. 2nd Dec., 1858.

Footnote 58:

  On h. p. 60th Foot as capt. 24th July, 1817. Retd. in Sep., 1825.

Footnote 59:

  Afterwards Baron Grantley. Eldest son of Fletcher Norton, by Caroline,
  dau. of James Balmain. Succeeded as 3rd Baron in 1822. Quitted the
  service in 1821. M., 26th July, 1825, Charlotte, 2nd dau. of Sir Wm.
  Beechey, Knt. D. s. p. 28th Aug., 1875.

Footnote 60:

  Afterwards 3rd Earl of Harewood. 2nd son of Henry, 2nd Earl, by
  Henrietta, eldest dau. of Lt.-Gen. Sir John Sebright, Bart. Retd. on
  h. p. as lt., 24th Aug., 1820. M., 5th July, 1823, Lady Louisa Thynne,
  dau. of 2nd Marquis of Bath, and had issue. D. 22nd Feb., 1857.

Footnote 61:

  Eldest son of Thomas Mure, of Warriston, by Helen, eldest dau. of the
  Hon. Patrick Boyle, of Shewalton. co. Ayr. His grandfather served with
  the Scots Greys at Fontenoy. H. p. June, 1820. M., 17th Sept., 1835,
  Fanny, only dau. of Wright Squire, of Bridge House, Peterboro’, and d.
  s. p. 16th March, 1868.

Footnote 62:

  Quitted the service in 1826. D. at Sidmouth, 9th May, 1826.

Footnote 63:

  Bn. 2nd Sept., 1798. Eldest son of Sir Richard Croft, Bart., by
  Margaret, dau. of Dr. Denman. Educated at Westminster School. F.S.A.
  Succeeded as 2nd bart. in 1818. Quitted the service in 1820, and m. in
  1824 only child of Richard Lateward, and had issue a dau. D. 29th
  Oct., 1835.

Footnote 64:

  Killed at Quatre Bras. 3rd son of the Right Hon. and Rev. Lord
  Viscount Barrington, Prebendary of Durham, by Elizabeth, 2nd dau. of
  Robert Adair.

Footnote 65:

  Placed on h. p. as lt. in 19th Lt. Dgns. in 1822. Living in 1830.

Footnote 66:

  2nd son of Wm. Tighe, of Woodstock, co. Kilkenny, by Marianne, dau.
  and co-heir of Daniel Gahan, of Coolquill, co. Tipperary. Of Rosanna,
  co. Wicklow. High Sheriff, 1827. H. p. 15th Feb., 1821. M., 1st March,
  1825, the Hon. Frances Crofton, and had issue. D. 20th Dec., 1881.

Footnote 67:

  4th son of Matthew Talbot, of Castle Talbot, co. Wexford, by his 2nd
  wife, who was a dau. of John D’Arcy of Kiltullagh. Of Knockmullen, co.
  Wexford. On h. p. 2nd Dgn. Gds., 1822. M., 1824, Mary, dau. of Edward
  Sutton, of Summer Hill, Wexford, and had issue. D. 1852.

Footnote 68:

  D. 1st Aug., 1844.

Footnote 69:

  D. in London, 1824.

Footnote 70:

  Surgeon-major 11th Nov., 1824. H. p. 17th March, 1837. D. 3rd Nov.,
  1849.

Footnote 71:

  Surgeon-major 17th March, 1837. H. p. 17th Apr., 1840. Living in 1846.

Footnote 72:

  Died in Edinburgh, Feb. 1828.

Footnote 73:

  Surgeon to the Wilts Yeomanry, in 1840.

Footnote 74:

  Appointed Assist.-Surg. Coldstream Guards, 20th June, 1822. Surgeon
  16th March, 1838. Retd. on h. p. 14th April, 1843. Living in 1874.


                  COLDSTREAM REGIMENT OF FOOT GUARDS.

                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

             SECOND MAJOR.                Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Alexander Geo. Woodford       25 July, 1814 │Col., 4 June, 1814

              CAPTAINS AND                         │
            LIEUT.-COLONELS.                       │

   [2] James Macdonell, W.            8 Aug.  1811 │7 Sept. 1809

   [3] Daniel M’Kinnon, W.           25 July, 1814 │

   [4] Henry Dawkins                 25 July, 1814 │

       _Hon. Alex. Abercromby_,      25 July, 1814 │Col., 4 June, 1814
       W.                                          │

       _Sir Colin Campbell_,         25 July, 1814 │Col., 4 June, 1814
       K.C.B.                                      │

   [5] Hon. Edward Acheson           25 July, 1814 │6 Mar. 1811

       _Sir Wm. M. Gomm_, K.C.B.     25 July, 1814 │17 Aug. 1812

   [6] Henry Wyndham, W.             25 July, 1814 │20 Jan. 1814

       LIEUTENANTS AND CAPTAINS.                   │

   [7] George Bowles                  1 Feb.  1810 │

   [8] Thos. Sowerby                 27 June, 1810 │

       _John Fremantle_               2 Aug.  1810 │Lt. Col., 21 Mar.
                                                   │1814

   [9] Wm. Lovelace Walton,           7 Mar.  1811 │
       Acting Adjt.                                │

       _Charles A.F. Bentinck_       24 Sept. 1812 │

  [10] John Stepney Cowell            9 Sept. 1813 │

  [11] Edward Sumner, W.             23 Sept. 1813 │24 Sept. 1812

  [12] John Lucie Blackman, K.       11 Jan.  1814 │

  [13] Beaumont, Lord Hotham         13 Jan.  1814 │

  [14] Hon. Robert Moore, W.          2 June, 1814 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [15] Hon. James Forbes             13 Feb.  1812 │

  [16] Henry Gooch                   23 July, 1812 │

       _Augustus Cuyler_             15 Oct.  1812 │9 June, 1812

  [17] Mark Beaufoy                  12 Nov.  1812 │

  [18] Hen. Fred. Griffiths, W.      25 Jan.  1814 │

  [19] Hon. John Montagu, W.         27 Jan.  1814 │

  [20] George Rich. Buckley          17 Feb.  1814 │

  [21] James Hervey                  16 Mar.  1814 │

  [22] Henry Vane, W.                15 Mar.  1814 │

  [23] Francis Jas. Douglas          17 Mar.  1814 │

  [24] Robert Bowen                  24 Mar.  1814 │

  [25] Alexander Gordon              19 May,  1814 │

  [26] Hon. Walter Forbes             2 June, 1814 │

  [27] Charles Short                 13 Oct.  1814 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [28] Benjamin Selway               26 Nov.  1812 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [29] Wm. Whymper                   25 Dec.  1813 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [30] George Smith                  17 Dec.  1812 │

  [31] Wm. Hunter                    10 Feb.  1814 │

                     _Facings blue._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards F.-M. Sir Alexander Woodford, G.C.B. and G.C.M.G. Elder
  brother to Col. John G. Woodford (see Staff). On the death of Sir
  Ralph Woodford, Bart., Governor of Trinidad, Alexander Woodford became
  the head of this ancient family. His father was descended maternally
  from the Brideokes, of classical memory, of whom Dr. Brideoke, the
  “sometime” chaplain to James, the 4th Earl of Derby, in the reign of
  Charles I., was a good specimen of the “fighting parson” of olden
  days. This same Dr. Brideoke became Dean of Salisbury, and, by his
  extraordinary presence of mind and address, saved the heroic Countess
  of Derby, and her house at Latham, from being stormed by the
  Cromwellian army. In like manner did his descendant, Alexander
  Woodford, defend the farm of Hougomont in the early part of the
  afternoon of Waterloo Day against the repeated and vigorous attacks of
  the French. C.B. for Waterloo. Had previously served in the Pa. and
  received the gold cross and one clasp. Was also K.M.T., and K. St. G.
  of Russia. Filled high commands in the Ionian Islands and elsewhere.
  Col.-in-Chf. 40th Foot, 1842. Transferred to the Scots Fusilier Guards
  15th Dec., 1861. D. 26th Aug., 1870.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir James Macdonell, G.C.B. and K.C.H., Col.-in-Chf.
  71st Highland L.I. Was 3rd son of Duncan Macdonell, of Glengarry, and
  bn. at the family seat in Inverness-shire. Served in the Pa. and also
  at Maida, for which he recd. the gold medal. Macdonell’s gallant
  defence of Hougomont is a matter of history. More than once was the
  place nearly taken by the French. “The French, however,” says Siborne,
  in his graphic account of the battle of Waterloo, “succeeded in
  forcing the gate; but the defenders betook themselves to the nearest
  cover, whence they poured a fire upon the intruders, and then rushing
  forward a struggle ensued which was distinguished by the most intrepid
  courage on both sides. At length Lt.-col. Macdonell, Capt. Wyndham,
  Ensigns Gooch and Hervey, and Sergt. Graham, of the Coldstream Guards,
  by dint of great personal strength and exertions, combined with
  extraordinary bravery and perseverance, succeeded in closing the gate
  against their intruders.” The struggle for the possession of Hougomont
  went on the whole day until the French retreat set in late in the
  evening. C.B. and K.M.T. for Waterloo. D. 15th May, 1859.

Footnote 3:

  The historian of the Coldstream Guards, 2nd son of Wm. M’Kinnon, who
  was a direct descendant of Lachlan M’Kinnon, of the Isle of Skye, who
  was made a Knight Banneret by Charles II. on the field of Worcester.
  Maj. in above regt. 22nd June, 1826, bt.-col. same date. M. a dau. of
  John Dent, and d. s. p. 22nd June, 1836.

Footnote 4:

  Eldest son of Henry Dawkins, of Over-Norton, co. Oxford. His mother
  was daughter of the late Gen. Sir H. Clinton, Commander-in-Chief of
  the British forces in America. Served with his regt. in the Pa. from
  1809 to the close of the war, and was badly wounded before Bayonne
  when the French made a sortie from that town. Bn. 1788. M., 1821,
  eldest dau. of Thos. Duncombe, of Copgrove, co. York, and had issue.
  D. in Nov., 1864.

Footnote 5:

  2nd son of Arthur, 1st Visct. Gosford, by Millicent, dau. of Lt.-gen.
  Edward Pole. Col. Acheson was ordered to defend a certain part of the
  wood at Hougomont on Waterloo Day. “The enemy made a tremendous
  attack, and, at the first charge, the colonel’s horse was shot dead.
  He fell under his horse, and was considerably stunned by the fall, in
  which situation he must have lain some time, as the enemy had passed
  and repassed, regarding him as dead. When he had recovered he found
  himself a prisoner by the weight of his horse. He extricated himself
  with difficulty by drawing his leg out of his boot.” D. unm. 24th
  July, 1828.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir H. Wyndham, K.C.B., M.P. for Cumberland and
  Col.-in-Chf. 11th Hussars. Natural son of 3rd Earl of Egremont. Was in
  eight general engagements in the Pa. “Seeing the carriage of Jerome
  Bonaparte in the wake of the general retreat of the French at
  Waterloo, he made a dashing attempt to capture Napoleon’s brother, but
  Jerome leaped out by one door while Wyndham opened the other.”
  Succeeded, in 1845, to the Egremont estates. D. s. p. at Cockermouth
  Castle, 2nd Aug. 1860, aged 70.

Footnote 7:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir George Bowles, K.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 1st West India
  Regt. and Lieut. of the Tower of London. 2nd son of Wm. Bowles, of
  Heale House, Wilts. Served in North Germany in 1805–1806, under Lord
  Cathcart. Present at the siege and capture of Copenhagen in 1807.
  Served in the Pa., and was present at most of the general actions.
  Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. Master of the Household to the Queen 1845–1851.
  D. in London 21st May, 1876.

Footnote 8:

  Quitted the service in 1823. It appears from Plantagenet Harrison’s
  _History of Yorkshire_, that the family of “Sowerby” dates back to the
  reign of Henry I., when one “Sueni” was “Lord of Sowerby” in
  Cumberland. Some interesting particulars regarding the Sowerby family
  are to be found in Mr. Harrison’s book, but unfortunately they are
  particulars of the far-away Norman times.

Footnote 9:

  Afterwards Gen. W.L. Walton, Col.-in-Chf. 5th Fusiliers. Son of the
  Dowager Lady Strachan. Served forty years in the Coldstream Guards,
  six of which were in command of the regt. Served at Copenhagen in 1807
  and during the early part of the Par. War. Served also in Belgium,
  Holland, and France from Nov., 1813, to Nov., 1818. Was appointed
  Bde.-maj. to the 2nd Bde. of Guards (having been selected for that
  post by Sir John Byng) on the march from Waterloo to Paris, in place
  of Capt. Stothert, killed in action. M., 15th Aug., 1832, Harriet,
  dau. of P.H. Lovell, of Cole Park, Wilts. D., 11th Jan., 1865.

Footnote 10:

  Has barely a title to appear in this list, as he was taken ill the
  evening of 17th of June, 1815, and sent to Brussels. But as the
  Coldstreams were under fire on 16th June, 1815, having arrived at
  Quatre Bras at 4 P.M. that day, after a march of twenty-five miles
  from Enghien, it would be scarcely fair to omit this officer, who
  appears to have received the Waterloo medal. Was son of Gen. Andrew
  Cowell, Lt.-col. Coldstream Guards, of Coleshill, Bucks, by Martha
  Justine, younger dau. of Sir T. Stepney, Bart., of Llanelly (widow of
  Sir F. Head, Bart.). Took the additional surname of Stepney by royal
  licence. Created a baronet in 1871. M., 1820, Lady Mary Annesley, who
  d. 1821. 2ndly, in 1823, Euphemia, dau. of Gen. John Murray, of Castle
  Murray, co. Donegal, and had issue. Lt.-col., ret., 1830. K.H. for his
  services in the Pa. D. 15th May, 1877.

Footnote 11:

  Had previously served in the Rl. Fusiliers. D. at Brussels, 26th June,
  1815, from his wounds.

Footnote 12:

  Youngest son of Sir George Blackman, Bart., by Mary, eldest surviving
  dau. of Lt.-col. Henry Harnage, of Belleswardine, Salop. Buried in the
  orchard at Hougomont, in the defence of which place he lost his life.

Footnote 13:

  The family of Hotham has furnished some distinguished officers to both
  our army and navy—especially to the latter service. But the most
  notable member of this ancient family was John de Hotham, Bishop of
  Ely, Lord Chancellor of England from 1316–1320. He was a great
  favourite with the young King Edward III., and had the choosing of a
  wife for that monarch. The story goes that he selected Philippa of
  Hainault “on account of the largeness of her hips,” which he
  prognosticated meant a large family, and the shrewd chancellor-bishop
  was not far wrong, as Queen Philippa had seven sons. Lord Hotham, who
  served in the Pa., and was wounded at Salamanca, was eldest son of
  Col. Beaumont Hotham, of the Coldstreams, by Philadelphia, dau. of Sir
  John Dyke, Bart. Bn. 9th Aug., 1794. Lt.-col. unattached, 24th Dec.,
  1825. Gen. on retired list 1865. D. unm., 12th Dec., 1870.

Footnote 14:

  2nd son of Stephen, 2nd Earl of Mountcashel, by Margaret, eldest dau.
  of 2nd Earl of Kingston. Bn. 11th July, 1793. Promoted capt. and
  lt.-col. h. p. April, 1824. D. unm. 2nd Nov., 1856.

Footnote 15:

  Eldest son of Gen. Lord Forbes (premier Baron of Scotland), by Eliz.,
  eldest dau. of Walter Hunter, of Polmood, co. Peebles. D. as capt. and
  lt.-col. in this regt. 25th Feb., 1835.

Footnote 16:

  Promoted lt. and capt. 28th Oct., 1819. Quitted the service as
  lt.-col. 11th June, 1841.

Footnote 17:

  Quitted the service 9th Feb., 1825. D. at Bowness, 31st May, 1854.

Footnote 18:

  D. at the Tower of London 19th Jan., 1821.

Footnote 19:

  2nd son of 4th Lord Rokeby, by Eliz., dau. and heir of Francis
  Charlton. Lt. 64th Foot, 8th Apr., 1819. Quitted the service as
  lt.-col. 1832. D. unm. 12th Dec., 1843.

Footnote 20:

  2nd son of Edward Pery Buckley, of Woolcombe Hall, Dorset. D. 1815, at
  Paris, with the Army of Occupation, of fatigue.

Footnote 21:

  Quitted the service in Oct., 1837.

Footnote 22:

  Promoted capt. 1st Aug. 1822. D. at Sidmouth, 9th Aug., 1829.

Footnote 23:

  Was thrown from his horse in St. James’s Park, and d. from the
  injuries 29th May, 1821.

Footnote 24:

  Promoted capt. 55th Foot in Jan., 1823. Exchanged back to the
  Coldstreams the following month. Capt. and lt.-col. 1832.

Footnote 25:

  Killed at Cambray in a duel with a French officer 1st April, 1818.

Footnote 26:

  2nd son of Lord Forbes. Bn. 29th May, 1798. Quitted the service in
  1825 as capt. Succeeded as 18th baron in 1843. Was twice m., and left
  issue. D. 2nd May, 1868.

Footnote 27:

  Promoted lieut. and capt. 17th April, 1823. Quitted the service before
  1842 with rank of lt.-col. M., 4th June, 1828, Emily Sophia, eld. dau.
  of Richard Barwell, of Stanstead, Sussex. D. at Odiham, Hants, 19th
  Jan., 1857.

Footnote 28:

  Serving with the regt. in 1830.

Footnote 29:

  Placed on h. p. as surgeon-major 29th Apr., 1836. Living in 1846.

Footnote 30:

  Surgeon-major 4th Sept., 1836. Aftds. took the surname of “Chenevix”
  in lieu of that of Smith. Accompanied the Coldstreams to Holland in
  Nov., 1813, and served in the Netherlands and France until 1818. Was
  at the bombardment of Antwerp; the storming of Bergen-op-Zoom; Quatre
  Bras and Waterloo; capture of Paris. H. p. 16th Mar., 1838. D. at his
  residence in Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, Apr., 1852.

Footnote 31:

  Surgeon-major 16th Mar., 1838. H. p. 1836. Living in 1846.


                      3RD REGIMENT OF FOOT GUARDS.

                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

             SECOND MAJOR.                Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Francis Hepburn               25 July, 1814 │Col., 4 June, 1814

              CAPTAINS AND                         │
            LIEUT.-COLONELS.                       │

       _H. Willoughby Rooke_         28 Feb.  1812 │

   [2] Douglas Mercer                20 Dec.  1813 │

       _Hon. Sir Alex. Gordon_,      25 Dec.  1813 │6 Feb. 1812
       K.C.B., K.                                  │

   [3] Charles Dashwood, W.          25 Dec.  1813 │

   [4] Francis Home                  15 Mar.  1814 │

       _Charles Fox Canning_, K.     31 Mar.  1814 │19 Aug. 1813

   [5] Edward Bowater, W.            25 July, 1814 │

   [6] Charles West, W.              25 July, 1814 │

       LIEUTENANTS AND CAPTAINS.                   │

       _Wm. Stothert_, K.             4 Apr.  1811 │

   [7] Wm. Drummond                  24 Oct.  1811 │

   [8] Robert B. Hesketh, W.         31 Oct.  1811 │

   [9] Henry Hawkins                 12 Dec.  1811 │

  [10] R.H. Wigston                  19 Dec.  1811 │

  [11] Charles John Barnet           16 Apr.  1812 │

  [12] Joseph Wm. Moorhouse          23 Apr.  1812 │

  [13] Edward B. Fairfield           24 Mar.  1814 │

  [14] George Evelyn, W.             31 Mar.  1814 │

  [15] Hon. Hastings Forbes, K.       5 May,  1814 │

  [16] John Elrington                19 May,  1814 │

  [17] Hugh B. Montgomerie, W.        9 June, 1814 │

  [18] Thomas Craufurd (_sic_),       1 Sept. 1814 │
       K.                                          │

  [19] John Ashton, K.                2 Sept. 1814 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [20] Charles Lake, W.              31 Oct.  1811 │

  [21] Hon. Edward Stopford           7 Nov.  1811 │

  [22] Barclay Drummond, Acting       5 Mar.  1811 │
       Adjt.                                       │

  [23] George Douglas Standen        19 Mar.  1811 │

  [24] David Baird, W.               18 June, 1811 │

  [25] Wm. James                      4 Mar.  1813 │

  [26] Wm. Fred. Hamilton             1 Apr.  1813 │

  [27] Hon. Geo. Anson                8 Jan.  1814 │

  [28] Thos. Wedgwood                11 Jan.  1814 │

  [29] Whitwell Butler               12 Jan.  1814 │

  [30] Andrew Coutts Cochrane        13 Jan.  1814 │

  [31] Jeffery Prendergast            2 Feb.  1814 │

       C. Simpson, K.                 3 Feb.  1814 │

  [32] Hugh Seymour Blane            31 Mar.  1814 │

  [33] Henry Montagu                 21 Apr.  1814 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [34] John Skuce                    22 Mar.  1810 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [35] Samuel Good                   25 Dec.  1813 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [36] J.R. Warde                    27 Apr.  1809 │21 Aug. 1806

  [37] Fran. Gashry Hanrott          10 Dec.  1812 │

                     _Facings blue._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Served in the Pa., and received the gold medal for Vittoria.
  Distinguished for the share he took in the defence of Hougomont. C.B.
  2nd son of Col. David Hepburn, by Bethia, dau. and heiress of Graham,
  of Damside. M., July, 1820, Henrietta, dau. and heir of Sir Henry
  Poole, 5th and last bart., of Poole, co. Chester, and had issue.
  Attained rank of maj.-general, and d. 7th June, 1835.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards assumed the surname of Henderson in addition to that of
  Mercer. 3rd son of Lt.-col. George Mercer, by Jean, eldest dau. of Sir
  Robert Henderson, Bart. Served in the Pa. C.B. for Waterloo. Attained
  rank of Lt.-gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 68th Foot. M., 2nd Nov., 1820,
  Susan, 3rd dau. of Sir Wm. Rowley, Bart., and had issue. D. at Naples
  21st March, 1854.

Footnote 3:

  2nd son of Sir Henry Walter Dashwood, Bart., by Ellen, dau. of John
  Graham, of Kernock, Bart. Retd. before 1830. M., 1822, Caroline, 4th
  dau. of Sir Robert Barlow, Bart. D. 20th April, 1832.

Footnote 4:

  Gained distinction in the defence of Hougomont, and succeeded Col.
  Macdonell (who was wounded) in the command _within_ the building late
  in the afternoon of Waterloo Day.

Footnote 5:

  Only son of Admiral Bowater. Served in the Pa. Groom in Waiting to
  Queen Victoria. K.C.B. Col.-in-Chf. of 49th Foot, 1846. Gen. D. at
  Cannes 14th Dec., 1861.

Footnote 6:

  Son of Col. West of same regiment. Appointed ensign in his regt. 8th
  Nov., 1801. Served in Hanover, Denmark, Spain, and Portugal. Was
  severely wounded in the sortie from Bayonne and again at Waterloo.
  Quitted the service as col. 1829. D. in 1872.

Footnote 7:

  Made bt.-maj. for Waterloo. Served in the Pa. from 1809–12 and in the
  campaign in Holland, 1814, and was present at the bombardment of
  Antwerp, and storming of Bergen-op-Zoom. Attained rank of col. in
  1837. Living in 1855.

Footnote 8:

  2nd son of Robert Bamford Hesketh, of Bamford and Upton, co. Chester,
  by Frances, dau. and heir of Rev. John Lloyd, of Gwyrch Castle, co.
  Denbigh. Bt.-maj. 4th Dec., 1815. D. unm. before 1820 of a wound
  received at Waterloo.

Footnote 9:

  In 1830 this officer was still a lt. and capt., and many of his
  juniors had purchased over his head.

Footnote 10:

  “On baggage guard” at the village of Waterloo on 18th June, 1815. Out
  of the list in 1824.

Footnote 11:

  Promoted capt. and lt.-col. 26th Oct., 1821. Out of the list in 1830.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 65th Foot, 18th Nov., 1819.

Footnote 13:

  Out of the list in 1830.

Footnote 14:

  3rd son of John Evelyn, of Wotton, by Anne, dau. of Anthony Shee, of
  Castlebar. Quitted the service before 1824. M. Mary, dau. of J.H.
  Massey Dawson, M.P., of Ballynacourte, Ireland, and had issue. D. 15th
  Feb., 1829.

Footnote 15:

  3rd son of George, 6th Earl of Granard, by Selina, dau. of John, 1st
  Earl of Moira. Bn. 5th Dec., 1793.

Footnote 16:

  Promoted capt. and lt.-col. 16th Nov., 1826. D. in London in Nov.,
  1843. There were several of this family in the army. One of them,
  Capt. J.H. Elrington, held the appointment of “Major of the Tower,”
  being so appointed in 1816.

Footnote 17:

  Descended from a branch of the noble and historic house of Eglinton.
  2nd son of the Rev. Hugh Montgomerie, of Grey Abbey, by the Hon.
  Emilia Ward, youngest dau. of 1st Visct. Bangor. D. 2nd May, 1817,
  from the after effects of a wound received at Waterloo. A collateral
  ancestor, Sir Hugh Montgomerie, fell at the battle of Otterburne as
  far back as 1388. His death is thus recorded in the old ballad of
  Chevy Chase:

                   “He had a bow bent in his hand,
                     Made of a trusty tree;
                   An arrow of a cloth-yeard long
                     Unto the head drew he.

                   “Against Sir Hugh Montgomerie
                     So right his shaft he set,
                   The grey goose wing that was therein
                     In his heart-blood was set.”

Footnote 18:

  This officer’s name is given as _Crawford_ on the memorial tablet at
  Waterloo.

Footnote 19:

  The following _in memoriam_ verses were written soon after Waterloo.

            “Hail, youthful Ashton, in thy field of blood!
            Thou bloom of honour gathered in the bud!
            Thy prime career of martial life began
            With spirit fit to shine in glory’s van;
            Comrades who groan’d to see thee yield thy breath,
            Yet almost envied thy heroic death.
            Accept thy country’s praise! thy mother’s tears!
            Whose heavenly sorrow Heaven itself reveres!
            Kissing in agony affliction’s rod,
            She yields her pride unmurm’ring to her God.”

Footnote 20:

  Promoted lt. and capt. 2nd July, 1815. Out of the list before 1824.

Footnote 21:

  Acted as A.D.C. to Maj.-gen. Sir John Byng, at Waterloo. His name does
  not appear in the list of “staff officers in Flanders” in the _Army
  List_ for June, 1815. 2nd son of the 3rd Earl of Courtown by Lady Mary
  Scott, eldest dau. of 3rd Duke of Buccleuch. Capt. 3rd July, 1815.
  Adjt. 4th July, 1822. Capt. and lt.-col. 1826. M., 5th July, 1830,
  Horatia, only dau. of Thos. Lockwood, and widow of Richard Tibbits. D.
  5th July, 1840, leaving issue.

Footnote 22:

  3rd son of Charles Drummond (banker) by Frances, 2nd dau. of Rev.
  Edward Lockwood, of Portman Square. Attained the rank of gen. Groom in
  Waiting to the Queen. M., 5th April, 1832, Maria, dau. of Wm. Crosbie.
  D. s. p. 3rd May, 1860.

Footnote 23:

  D. as lt.-col. 16th Dec., 1840.

Footnote 24:

  Quitted the service as capt. before 1824. Afterwards Sir David Baird,
  2nd Bart. Succeeded his uncle, the famous general, in 1829. Severely
  wounded whilst defending Hougomont with his company. M., 10th August,
  1821, Mary Anne Kennedy, eldest dau. of Archibald, Marquis of Ailsa,
  and had issue. D. whilst hunting 20th Dec., 1851.

Footnote 25:

  H. p. 1819. D. at Lillebourne Rectory, Kent, 13th Oct., 1854.

Footnote 26:

  Lt. and capt. 17th April, 1817. H. p. as lieut. 47th Foot, 1st Feb.,
  1821.

Footnote 27:

  Afterwards maj.-gen. and M.P. for Staffordshire. 2nd son of 1st Visct.
  Anson, by Anne, dau. of Thos. Coke, of Holkham Hall, Norfolk. M., 30th
  Nov., 1830, Isabella, 3rd dau. of 1st Lord Forester, and had issue. D.
  27th May, 1857, at Kurnand, as Comr.-in-Chief in India.

Footnote 28:

  Afterwards lt.-col. D. at Tenby, 7th Nov., 1860.

Footnote 29:

  Placed on h. p. 25th Feb., 1819. 4th son of the Rev. Richard Butler,
  D.D., vicar of Burnchurch, co. Kilkenny. Bn. 1799. M., 1833,
  Elizabeth, 2nd dau. of John Payne Garnet, of Arch Hall, co. Meath, and
  had issue.

Footnote 30:

  2nd son of Adm. the Hon. Sir Alexander Cochrane, G.C.B., by Maria,
  dau. of David Shaw, and widow of Sir Jacob Wheate, Bart. Bn. 5th
  April, 1799. Placed on h. p. 14th Sept., 1820. M., 1835, the eldest
  dau. of Baron de Strack, col. in the Austrian service, and had issue.
  D. 22nd June, 1870.

Footnote 31:

  Lieut. and capt. 9th Aug., 1821. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 32:

  Afterwards Sir H.S. Blane, Bart., of Blanefield, co. Ayr. Son of Sir
  Gilbert Blane, M.D., by Eliz., only dau. of A. Gardiner. Lt. and capt.
  15th March, 1821. Retd. as lt.-col. M., 23rd Jan., 1832, Eliza, dau.
  of John Armit, of Dublin, and had issue. Succeeded as 2nd bart. in
  1834. D. 1869.

Footnote 33:

  The prefix of “Honourable” has been omitted before this officer’s name
  in the 1815 _Army List_. The Hon. Henry Robinson Montague was youngest
  son of Matthew, 4th Lord Rokeby. Fought at Quatre Bras and Waterloo.
  Attained the rank of gen. Commanded the 1st Division in the Crimea,
  and served at the siege of Sebastopol. Col.-in-Chf. Scots Gds. 1875.
  Succeeded his brother as 6th baron, 7th April, 1847. M., 18th Dec.,
  1826, Magdalen eld. dau. of Lt.-col. Huxley and widow of F. Croft.
  Left surviving female issue. D. 25th May, 1883.

Footnote 34:

  Out of the regt. in May, 1819.

Footnote 35:

  H. p. in 1845.

Footnote 36:

  Serving with the regt. in 1824.

Footnote 37:

  Retd. before 1st Jan., 1816.


             1ST (OR THE ROYAL SCOTS) REGIMENT OF FOOT.[F]

                           (_3rd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                 MAJOR.                   Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Colin Campbell, W.            27 Sept. 1810 │Lt.-Col., 17 Aug.
                                                   │1812

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [2] Lawrence Arguimbau, W.         9 Mar.  1809 │Maj., 11 Aug. 1814

   [3] Robert Macdonald, W.           8 Feb.  1810 │Maj., 21 Sept.
                                                   │1813

   [4] Wm. Buckley, K.               11 Oct.  1810 │

   [5] Hugh Massey, W.                9 May,  1811 │Maj., 4 June, 1811

   [6] Wm. Gordon                    16 Jan.  1812 │

   [7] Robert Dudgeon, W.            30 July, 1812 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [8] Archibald Morrison, W.        27 Oct.  1808 │3 Dec. 1806

       John Armstrong, K.            27 Apr.  1809 │

       John E. O’Neil, K.             8 June, 1809 │21 Apr. 1808

   [9] Wm. Jas. Rea, W.              22 June, 1809 │30 July, 1807

  [10] John Ingram, W.               12 July, 1809 │18 Oct. 1808

  [11] Wm. Clarke, W.                21 June, 1810 │

  [12] Thomas Gordon                 18 Feb.  1813 │2 July, 1812

  [13] Allen Cameron, Adjt., W.       1 July, 1813 │26 June, 1812

  [14] John Stoyte, W.                4 July, 1813 │

  [15] Robt. Horsman Scott, W.        8 July, 1813 │

  [16] George Lane, W.               26 July, 1813 │

  [17] Joseph Symes, W.              23 Sept. 1813 │

  [18] James Alstone, W.             23 Sept. 1813 │

       Wm. Young, K.                  4 Nov.  1813 │

  [19] James Mann                    18 Aug.  1814 │

  [20] Wm. Dobbs, W.                 29 Sept. 1814 │

  [21] John Fitzwilliam Miller,       6 Oct.  1814 │
       W.                                          │

  [22] George Stewart, W.             2 Dec.  1814 │

  [23] J.L. Black, W.                23 Feb.  1815 │10 Mar. 1814

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [24] Alexander Glen                21 Oct.  1813 │

  [25] Charles Mudie                  4 Nov.  1813 │

  [26] Jas. Grant Kennedy, K.        12 Apr.  1814 │

  [27] Charles Graham, W.            28 Sept. 1814 │9 June, 1813

  [28] Thomas Stevens, W.            29 Sept. 1814 │

  [29] Joseph M’Kay, W.               6 Oct.  1814 │

  [30] Alexander Robertson, K.       20 Oct.  1814 │

       Wm. Anderson, K.              27 Oct.  1814 │14 July, 1814

  [31] Leon M. Cooper, W.            14 Dec.  1814 │

  [32] Wm. Thomas                    15 Dec.  1814 │

  [33] Richard Blacklin                            │
       (Volunteer), W.                             │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [34] James Crooke Thomson           4 May,  1815 │31 Jan. 1811

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [35] Thomas Griffith, W.            4 Aug.  1814 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [36] Wm. Galliers                  20 Apr.  1809 │10 Sept. 1807

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [37] Wm. Finnie                    12 Nov.  1812 │

       Thos. Bolton                   9 Dec.  1813 │5 Mar. 1812

                     _Facings blue._  _Lace gold._

Footnote F:

  The 3rd Batt. of the Royal Scots, which was reduced in 1817,
  distinguished itself in a particular manner at Quatre Bras. “Being
  removed from the centre of the 5th Division, it charged and routed a
  column of the enemy. It was then formed in a square to receive the
  cavalry, and though repeated attacks were made, not the slightest
  impression was produced. Wherever the lancers and cuirassiers
  presented themselves they found a stern and undismayed front which
  they vainly endeavoured to penetrate.” Mudford’s _Historical Account
  of the Campaign in the Netherlands, in 1815_.

Footnote 1:

  Served throughout the Par. War and recd. the gold medal and one clasp
  for commanding his battalion at the battles of Vittoria and Salamanca.
  Severely wounded at Quatre Bras. Made C.B. for Waterloo. Appointed to
  a h. p. lt.-colonelcy under the War Office Regulations of 25th April,
  1826. D. at Inverary 1st Feb., 1833.

Footnote 2:

  A protégé of H.R.H. the Duke of Kent, the Col.-in-Chf. of the regt.
  Attained the rank of Lt.-gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 80th Foot. D. 18th
  Aug., 1854, at Port Mahon.

Footnote 3:

  Brother to Gen. Sir John Macdonald, Adjt.-Gen. of the British Army,
  and cousin to Etienne Macdonald, Duke of Tarentum and Marshal of
  France, whose father fought at Culloden in 1746. Robert Macdonald did
  good service in the Pa., and was present at five general actions. Was
  severely wounded at the assault on the Convent of St. Sebastian, “and,
  although suffering from the effects of his wounds, was present, and
  engaged, at the assault on town of St. Sebastian, where he commanded
  two companies ordered to the breach in advance of the 1st Bde. of the
  5th Division, and was at the surrender of the castle. Commanded the
  above regt. at Waterloo until disabled by wounds. C.B. and K.St.A. of
  Russia, Lt.-col. 44th Foot, 29th Aug., 1829. For many years was
  British Consul at Belize, Central America, where he was much esteemed.
  At his death, which occurred 14th Nov., 1860, a very eulogistic
  paragraph appeared in a Belize newspaper containing these words: “Col.
  Macdonald’s conversation was like reading a page of history.”

Footnote 4:

  Killed at Quatre Bras. Left a widow with four young children, the
  youngest of whom was born at Blackheath, three weeks after her
  husband’s death. A pension of £60 per annum was granted to Mrs. Mary
  Buckley.

Footnote 5:

  There have been “Hugh Masseys” for generations both in the noble Irish
  families of “Massey, Lord Clarina,” and “Massy, Lord Massy.” The above
  Hugh Massey was doubtless a cadet of the Limerick Masseys. He was
  promoted bt.-lt.-col., h. p. list 12th Aug., 1819. M. Mary, sister of
  Cornelius Rodes, of Barlboro’, co. Derby, and d. before 1855.

Footnote 6:

  Served with the Portuguese army in the Par. War, and was in command of
  the 24th Portuguese regt. at the siege of St. Sebastian, for which he
  recd. the British gold medal. Placed on h. p. 25th Dec., 1816. Living
  in 1830.

Footnote 7:

  Severely wounded at Quatre Bras. D. whilst serving in the island of
  Antigua, 28th Sept., 1827.

Footnote 8:

  Capt., 21st Sept., 1815. H. p. from York. Light Infantry 25th July,
  1816. Living in 1824.

Footnote 9:

  Capt. 60th Foot 22nd June, 1815. Out of said regt. before 1824.

Footnote 10:

  John Nelson Ingram served previously in the 15th Foot. Capt. 1st Foot
  7th April, 1825. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 11th March, 1819.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. in 1831. Out of the regt. before 1842.

Footnote 13:

  Reduced with the battalion.

Footnote 14:

  Fought at Badajoz and Salamanca. Capt. 24th Foot 19th May, 1825.
  Major, 8th Jan., 1841. Lt.-col. 17th Foot, 3rd April, 1846. D. at
  Bath, 13th Dec., 1854.

Footnote 15:

  Reduced with the battalion.

Footnote 16:

  Reduced with the battalion.

Footnote 17:

  Reduced with the battalion.

Footnote 18:

  Reduced with the battalion. D. 9th Nov., 1854.

Footnote 19:

  Reduced with the battalion.

Footnote 20:

  Reduced with the battalion.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 17th Apr., 1817. M., 27th Sept., 1817, at Limerick, Prudence,
  dau. of Edward Ferreter, R.N.

Footnote 22:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 23:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. John Lewis Black. Had previously served in the
  49th Foot, and was brought in from the h. p. list in Feb., 1815.
  Became maj. in the 53rd Foot in 1844 and served in the Sutlej campaign
  with that regiment. He d. 3rd Feb., 1859.

Footnote 24:

  Lieut. 41st Foot 17th Aug., 1826. Serving in 1830. The “W” is omitted
  before this officer’s name in several _Army Lists_.

Footnote 25:

  Lieut. 48th Foot 4th Oct., 1815. H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 26:

  Killed at Quatre Bras whilst carrying the colours. Age 16. 3rd son of
  Dr. Wm. Kennedy, physician at Inverness.

Footnote 27:

  Returned as “killed” in the _London Gazette_ of 3rd July. 1815. Placed
  on h. p., 27th Feb., 1817. Out of the list 1830.

Footnote 28:

  Lieut. 22nd Foot 3rd Feb., 1820. H. p. 7th Apr. same year. D. 19th
  Sept., 1849, as barrack-master, Sheerness.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 1st Aug., 1816.

Footnote 30:

  Brother to Lieut. John Robertson, of the 9th Foot, who died of wounds
  recd. at St. Sebastian. Pens. granted to his mother and two sisters in
  consideration of their distressed circumstances.

Footnote 31:

  Afterwards Lt.-col. Leonard Morse-Cooper, J.P. for Berks. Joined the
  Royal Scots in 1814 as a volunteer from the Rl. Military College. Was
  wounded in the sortie from Bayonne, and at Waterloo recd. five wounds.
  Promoted lieut. 23rd Jan., 1817. Exchanged to the 11th Lt. Dgns., and
  served with that regiment at the siege of Bhurtpore, in 1825-6, where
  he volunteered for the dismounted cavalry storming party. Maj. on the
  unattached h. p. list 10th Jan., 1840. Lt.-col. 1851. D. in Paris 24th
  March, 1862.

Footnote 32:

  Lieut. 5th Apr., 1820. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 33:

  A volunteer. Appointed ensign in this regt. 18th July, 1815. Lieut.
  13th July, 1820. Capt. 8th Aug., 1833. H. p. unattached 6th Feb.,
  1846. Col. 1st Nov, 1858. Living in 1860.

Footnote 34:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 35:

  Left the regt. in 1824.

Footnote 36:

  Surgeon 7th Sept., 1815. H. p. before 1824.

Footnote 37:

  Surgeon 25th March, 1836. H. p. D. at Glasgow, Jan., 1863.


              4TH (OR THE KING’S OWN) REGIMENT OF FOOT.[G]

                           (_1st Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Francis Brooke                14 Feb.  1811 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [2] Geo. David Wilson, W.          7 Aug.  1804 │Maj., 21 Sept.
                                                   │1813

   [3] Euseby Stratford Kirwan       11 Jan.  1810 │

   [4] Charles James Edgell, W.       5 Sept. 1805 │

   [5] John Browne, W.               25 May,  1815 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [6] Benjamin Martin               30 Oct.  1806 │3 June, 1802

   [7] G. Richardson, W.             26 May,  1809 │

   [8] Peter Bowlby                  31 May,  1809 │

   [9] Hygatt Boyd, W.               16 Aug.  1810 │

  [10] Geo. Henry Hearne             29 Oct.  1810 │

  [11] Benj. Marshall Collins, W.     1 Nov.  1810 │

  [12] Wm. Squire, W.                14 Feb.  1811 │

  [13] John Bushell                  12 May,  1812 │

  [14] Richard Mulholland            14 May,  1812 │

  [15] Wm. Lonsdale                  15 May,  1812 │

  [16] Edward Bowlby                 25 Feb.  1813 │

  [17] Wm. [Henry] Clarke            28 July, 1813 │

  [18] Wm. Richardson, Adjt.         20 Oct.  1813 │

       Fred. Feilde                  17 Nov.  1813 │

  [19] Arthur Gerard, W.             16 Mar.  1815 │

  [20] John L. Fernandez              3 May,  1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [21] Charles Levinge               18 Nov.  1813 │

  [22] Wm. Taylor                     9 Dec.  1813 │22 July, 1813

  [23] Wm. M’Donald Matthews, W.      9 Dec.  1813 │

  [24] Thos. E.H. Holland             9 Dec.  1813 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [25] James Lonsdale                20 Dec.  1798 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [26] Francis Burton                 9 Sept. 1813 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [27] Wm. Morragh                   25 Jan.  1810 │

                     _Facings blue._  _Lace gold._

Footnote G:

  This regt. had just returned from active service in America and landed
  at Ostend a few days before Waterloo was fought. In fact, Gen.
  Lambert’s brigade only reached Waterloo by a forced march just as the
  battle was commencing. Several captains of the 1st Batt. 4th Foot had
  been killed in the attack on New Orleans—hence the small number of
  captains present at Waterloo. Siborne gives the names of six
  additional captains as present with this regt. at Waterloo, but as the
  official _Army List_ for 1817 does not credit them with having the
  Waterloo medal, the Editor has been reluctantly compelled to omit
  their names.

Footnote 1:

  Served throughout the Par. War and recd. the gold cross for the
  battles of Badajoz, Salamanca, Vittoria, and siege of St. Sebastian.
  C.B. for Waterloo. 2nd son of Francis Brooke, of Colebrooke, by
  Hannah, dau. of Henry Prittie, of Dunally, co. Tipperary. M. Jane,
  dau. of George Burdett, M.P., and d. s. p.

Footnote 2:

  Served with the above regt. on the expedition to the Helder, in 1799.
  At siege of Copenhagen in 1807. Wounded in the retreat from Corunna.
  With his regiment in the Walcheren expedition, 1809. Returned to the
  Pa. and was severely wounded at the storming of Badajoz in leading the
  advance of the storming party of the 5th Division to the escalade of
  the St. Vicante bastion, for which he recd. the gold medal, although
  not a field officer. A.D.C. to Gen. Sir W. Pringle in 1812. C.B. for
  Waterloo and bt. of lt.-col. Placed on h. p. 21st March, 1822.
  Lt.-col. unattached list in Dec., 1828. M., 1st July, 1828, Frances,
  eldest dau. of E. Jud, of Eastbury Lodge, Essex. D. at Romford, Essex,
  11th Jan., 1863. His proper name was “George Davis Willson.”

Footnote 3:

  2nd son of John Kirwan, K.C., by Anne, only child of Euseby Stratford,
  elder brother of 1st Earl of Aldborough. Entered the Army in 1804 and
  joined 4th Foot, 1st Batt.; served in the Pa. and was engaged in the
  Battles of Corunna, the disastrous Walcheren Expedition, Ciudad
  Rodrigo, Badajoz, Salamanca, St. Sebastian, Nive, Bladensburg, New
  Orleans, and Waterloo. After the Peace was appointed to the West India
  Rangers, but never joined the regt. Received the Par. and Waterloo
  medals. Md. twice; d. in 1852, leaving issue.

Footnote 4:

  D. in 1821 on passage to Barbados.

Footnote 5:

  Badly wounded at the assault of Badajoz. “At Waterloo, whilst at the
  head of his company, Capt. Browne received a fearful wound from a
  bullet, just over the ear, and fell senseless. He was left on the
  field for dead and was reported killed. His family in Ireland went
  into mourning for him. However, he recovered by trepanning, and was
  made Maj. 92nd Highlanders. Received two pensions for wounds, and d.
  21st Nov., 1849.”

Footnote 6:

  H. p. 35th Foot 11th Nov., 1818.

Footnote 7:

  Serving in 1817.

Footnote 8:

  Serving in 1824.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 22nd Aug., 1816.

Footnote 10:

  H. p. 29th Aug., 1816.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 30th Dec., 1818. D. Dec., 1854.

Footnote 12:

  D. before 1st Jan., 1816.

Footnote 13:

  H. p. from 5th West India Regt. 31st Dec., 1818.]

Footnote 14:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 15:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 25th March, 1823.

Footnote 17:

  Capt. 3rd Aug., 1830.

Footnote 18:

  Ret. f. p. 10th Rl. Garrison Bat. before 1824.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 25th Feb., 1816.

Footnote 20:

  H. p. 25th Feb., 1816.

Footnote 21:

  2nd son of Sir Charles Levinge, Bart., by Eliz., only dau. of Nicholas
  Reynell, of Reynella, co. Westmeath. Bn. 20th March, 1796. Promoted
  capt. 24th Oct., 1821. Exchanged to 52nd L.I., 1823. Maj. 71st
  Highland L.I. 15th Jan., 1829. Quitted the service before 1842. M.,
  2nd June. 1825, Barbara, dau. of Hugh Johnstone, of St. John’s, New
  Brunswick, and had issue. K.H. D. 1843.

Footnote 22:

  Afterwards Lieut. in 37th Foot. Quitted the service before 1824.

Footnote 23:

  H. p. 62nd Foot 1826. D. Jan., 1856.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 83rd Foot, 14th Jan., 1819.

Footnote 25:

  H. p. 25th Jan., 1819.

Footnote 26:

  Surgeon 66th Foot 16th Dec., 1819. Out of said regt. in 1826.

Footnote 27:

  Reduced in 1818.


                 14TH (OR THE BUCKINGHAMSHIRE) REGIMENT
                              OF FOOT.[H]

                           (_3rd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                MAJORS.                   Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Francis Skelly Tidy           10 Sept. 1807 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1813

   [2] John Keightley                13 Jan.  1814 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] George Marlay                 14 June, 1814 │Maj., 21 June,
                                                   │1813

   [4] Thos. Ramsay                  18 Oct.  1810 │17 May, 1810

   [5] Wm. Turnor                    15 Aug.  1811 │

   [6] Wm. Ross                      24 Dec.  1813 │16 Dec. 1813

   [7] Richard Adams                 13 Jan.  1814 │

   [8] Christian Wilson               4 Nov.  1814 │

   [9] J.L. White                     5 Nov.  1814 │

  [10] Wm. Hewett                    13 Apr.  1815 │24 Nov. 1814

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [11] Wm. Akenside                   6 Aug.  1807 │2 Jan. 1807

  [12] Charles Myler Brannan          3 Dec.  1807 │

  [13] Samuel Beachcroft             28 Nov.  1811 │

  [14] Wm. Buckle, Adjt.              3 Nov.  1812 │

  [15] George Baldwin                 9 Nov.  1814 │

  [16] John Nickelson                 5 Apr.  1815 │

  [17] Lyttleton Westwood             6 Apr.  1815 │

  [18] Henry Boldero                 13 Apr.  1815 │

  [19] Jas. Campbell Hartley         24 May,  1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [20] Wm. Reed                      13 Jan.  1814 │

  [21] George Mackenzie              22 Jan.  1814 │

  [22] Robert B. Newenham            27 Jan.  1814 │

  [23] C. Fraser                     10 Feb.  1814 │

  [24] Aug. Fred. F. Adamson          3 Mar.  1814 │

  [25] Wm. Keowen                    21 Apr.  1814 │

  [26] John Manley Wood              19 May,  1814 │

  [27] Arthur Ormsby                  2 June, 1814 │

  [28] James Ramsay Smith            13 Oct.  1814 │

  [29] Alfred Cooper, W.              1 Nov.  1814 │

  [30] Joseph Bowlby                  2 Nov.  1814 │

  [31] John Powell Matthews           3 Nov.  1814 │

  [32] Richard John Stacpoole         8 Nov.  1814 │

  [33] Richard Birt Holmes           10 Nov.  1814 │

  [34] Hon. George Thos. Keppel       4 Apr.  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [35] Robert Mitton                 17 Feb.  1814 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [36] Alexander Ross                20 Jan.  1814 │

               VOLUNTEER.                          │

  [37] Montague Burrows                            │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [38] Alexander Shannon             27 Jan.  1814 │

  [39] Henry Terry                   21 Mar.  1814 │

                    _Facings buff._  _Lace silver._

Footnote H:

  At the close of the Par. War the British Army was reduced to a peace
  footing. The 3rd Batt. of the 14th Foot survived this general
  reduction until the spring of 1815, when the dreaded order for its
  disbanding arrived. Before this became an accomplished fact the escape
  of Napoleon from Elba, and the consequent war with France, put a stop
  to further reductions. The 3rd Batt. 14th was ordered to Belgium.
  Being composed chiefly of very young recruits, the 14th were ordered
  to Antwerp to join the garrison there, but through their colonel’s
  personal application to Gen. Lord Hill, this order was countermanded
  by Wellington himself, who inspected the regt. from the window of his
  hotel at Brussels. “They are a very pretty little battalion,” said he
  to Lord Hill; “tell them they may join the grand division as they
  wish.” And so it came to pass that the “peasants,” as the battalion of
  _young bucks_ were waggishly styled, took part in the “combat of
  giants.”

Footnote 1:

  Youngest son of the Rev. Thomas Holmes Tidy, chaplain to H.M. 26th
  Foot, and afterwards rector of Red Marshall, co. Durham, by Henrietta
  Augusta, dau. of the Rev. Wm. Skelly, by Lady Betty Gordon, dau. of
  Alexander, Duke of Gordon. If “fighting blood” is hereditary, then
  must “Frank Tidy,” as he was always called, have had a good share, for
  he was maternally descended from Charles Mordaunt, the “fighting” Earl
  of Peterborough, and had for his uncle the gallant Francis Skelly,
  maj. in the 71st Highlanders, who gained renown at the siege of
  Seringapatam. Joined the 43rd Regt. in Ireland as a volunteer at the
  age of 16, and was soon gazetted an ensign. When serving with his
  regt. in the West Indies “a mortality of from ten to thirteen men a
  day reduced the 43rd to 96 rank and file, and Guadaloupe being
  disputed inch by inch, the 43rd, at the time of its capture at
  Berville, did not contain more than two officers and twenty men fit
  for duty.” Tidy was confined for 15 months on board a hulk, subject to
  the tyranny and cruelty of Victor Hughes, thence sent to France, and
  eventually allowed to return to England on parole. Appointed adjt. of
  the 43rd. Promoted capt. 1st West India Regt. 1798; in 1799 exchanged
  to the Royal Scots. A.D.C. to Sir George Beckwith in the West Indies.
  Maj. 8th W.I. Regt., and transferred to the 14th Foot 1807. Served in
  Spain in 1808; Walcheren expedition 1809. Horse shot at Waterloo. C.B.
  Served in Burmese War with 1st Batt. Lt.-col. 44th Regt. 1825. D. at
  Kingston, Canada, while in command of the 24th Regt., 9th October,
  1835, leaving issue, several sons and daughters. An interesting memoir
  of Col. Tidy was published in 1849 (written by his dau., Mrs. Ward)
  entitled: _Recollections of an Old Soldier_.

Footnote 2:

  Bt.-lt.-col. for Waterloo. Was at the taking of St. Lucia in 1796 and
  served at Walcheren in 1809. Appointed maj. 23rd Fusiliers 25th July,
  1816, and lt.-col. of 11th Foot 2nd June, 1825. Afterwards lt.-col. of
  35th Foot and Resdt. Gov. of Santa Maura and Zante. D. at Pickhill
  Hall, near Wrexham, 6th Sept. 1852, aged 74.

Footnote 3:

  Son of maj. George Marlay, of Twickenham, Mdx., by Lady Catherine
  Butler, dau. of the Earl of Lanesborough. Bn. 1791. Served in the Pa.
  as A.A.G., and recd. the gold cross for Nivelle, Nive, Orthes, and
  Toulouse. C.B. for Waterloo. Placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816. M.,
  1828, Catherine, dau. of Jas. Tisdall, of Bawn, co. Louth, and had
  issue. D. 8th June, 1830.

Footnote 4:

  Served with the 52nd at the siege of Copenhagen and battle of Kioge.
  In the Pa. from 1808–9 and again from 1810–11 with 47th Regt. Placed
  on h. p. 25th March, 1816. Living 1855.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Wm. Turnor. Served in Hanover with the 14th in
  1805–6 and in the Pa., including battle of Corunna. Was also in the
  Walcheren expedition. D. 12th Dec., 1860.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards maj. 23rd Fusiliers. Lt.-col. unattached 1837. Living 1846.

Footnote 7:

  Placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816. Bn. 1780. Served in Egypt. At
  capture of Copenhagen, 1807. Eldest son of Samuel Adams, by Eliz.,
  dau. of Alex. Leslie. M., 1805, Louisa, dau. of N. Peers, and had
  issue. D. 11th Feb. 1836.

Footnote 8:

  Exchanged as capt. to 38th Foot, in 1822. Out of the army before 1829.

Footnote 9:

  Placed on h. p. 5th April, 1816. Afterwards Capt. J.L. White, late of
  the Ionian Islands Militia, a Military Knight of Windsor (Royal
  Foundation). Served with the expedition to the Elbe and Weser, under
  Lord Cathcart, and in numerous battles in the Pa., including Almeida,
  Ciudad Rodrigo, storming of Badajoz, Salamanca, capture of Madrid.
  Also served in Flanders and France; was present at the attack on
  Merxem, the bombardment of Antwerp, and the siege of Bergen-op-Zoom,
  the storming of Cambray, and capture of Paris. Living 1874.

Footnote 10:

  3rd son of the Rt. Hon. Sir George Hewett, Bart., of Nethersall, co.
  Leicester, by Julia, dau. of the late John Johnson, of Blackheath,
  Kent. Bn. 1791. Exchanged as capt. to Rifle Brigade 14th Aug., 1823.
  Retd. as maj. from latter regt. 19th Aug., 1828. Lt.-col. unattached
  list same date. M. in June, 1826, Sarah, 2nd dau. of Gen. Sir James
  Duff. D. at his residence, Southampton, in Oct., 1891. He was the last
  of the Waterloo commissioned officers.

Footnote 11:

  Capt. 6th Sept., 1821. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 12:

  Reduced with the battalion in 1816.

Footnote 13:

  Reduced with the battalion in 1816.

Footnote 14:

  Reduced with the battalion in 1816.

Footnote 15:

  Lieut. 31st Foot 18th March, 1822. Capt. 11th June, 1833. Major 23rd
  Dec., 1842. Out of the regt. before 1850.

Footnote 16:

  Lieut. John _Nicholson_ was placed on h. p. 25th March, 1816. Living
  1846.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 18:

  H. p. from 27th Foot 25th June, 1818. Living 1846.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 20:

  Lieut. 26th June, 1815. Lieut. 48th Foot 18th July, 1816. Capt. 8th
  June, 1825. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 22:

  Robert Burton Newenham quitted the service before 1823. He appears to
  have been a grandson of Sir Edward Newenham, knt., who m. Grace, dau.
  of Sir Charles Burton, Bart.

Footnote 23:

  A certain Charles Fraser, who had served at Waterloo, was appointed
  Ens. and Lieut. in 3rd Foot Guards, 3rd July, 1815, and was promoted
  Lieut. and Capt. 25th Feb., 1819.

Footnote 24:

  Ret. before 1st Jan. 1816.

Footnote 25:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 26:

  Capt. h. p. 67th Foot 10th Sept., 1825. Bt.-major 28th June, 1838.
  Major 14th Foot 28th Aug., 1840. H. p. 3rd Apr. 1846. Living 1855.

Footnote 27:

  Wounded at the taking of Cambray. Lieut. 27th Jan., 1823. Capt. h. p.
  1838. D. in 1851.

Footnote 28:

  Living in 1874 as Lt. J.R. Smith, h. p. 38th Foot. Entered the army in
  1814. Was present at the storming of Cambray, and afterwards at the
  capture of Hattras, in the East Indies. Also served in the Deccan
  campaign of 1817–18. His commissions are dated: Ensign, Oct. 13th,
  1814; lt., March 20th, 1824.

Footnote 29:

  The only officer of the 14th Foot wounded at Waterloo, and he, strange
  to say, “was the shortest man in the regiment” (Lord Albemarle’s
  account of the battle.) A brother ensign, Arthur Ormsby, was wounded
  at Cambray six days later.

Footnote 30:

  Capt. 90th Foot 26th Dec., 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 31:

  1st Lieut. Rl. Welsh Fusiliers 7th Apr. 1825. Ret. h. p. 10th Foot
  31st Dec., 1830. Living 1846.

Footnote 32:

  H. p. 24th Feb., 1818.

Footnote 33:

  H. p. 9th May, 1818.

Footnote 34:

  The 6th Earl of Albemarle, gen. in the army, unattached. Bn. 13th
  June, 1799. 2nd son of Wm. Charles 4th Earl of Albemarle, by his first
  wife, the hon. Eliz. Southwell, dau. of Edward Lord de Clifford.
  England may thank Wm. III. for having given us the Keppels 200 years
  ago. It was this monarch who brought over Arnold Joost Van Keppel
  (descended from Walter Van Keppel, Lord of Keppel, 1179) as a page in
  1688, and who raised him from one high post to another until he became
  Earl of Albemarle, a Knight of the Garter, and gen. of the Dutch
  forces in 1702. This nobleman fought under Marlborough in the wars of
  Queen Anne, and our last Stuart monarch stood sponsor to Lord
  Albemarle’s eldest son, who succeeded his father as William Anne 2nd
  Earl—a general officer and British ambassador to Paris. The two eldest
  sons of the 2nd earl were equally distinguished in their respective
  professions—the army and navy. Viscount Bury was A.D.C. to the Duke of
  Cumberland at Fontenoy and Culloden. He subsequently attained the rank
  of lt.-gen. and was com.-in-chf. at the reduction of the Havannah,
  which brought him much renown. His brother Augustus became famous as
  Adm. Keppel, and for his eminent services was created Visct. Keppel,
  of Elvedon, Suffolk (extinct). Gen. Visct. Bury succeeded as 3rd Earl,
  and it was his grandson, the sixth earl, who joined the 3rd Batt. 14th
  Foot six weeks before Waterloo. The following Waterloo anecdote is
  given by Mrs. Ward in her memoir of Col. Tidy (already referred to),
  and is corroborated by Lord Albemarle himself in his interesting
  autobiography published in 1876:—

  “Mr. Keppel was sitting on a drum just in front of my father’s mare
  when she was shot—he was even stroking the poor thing’s face at the
  time that the ball struck her down, broke the bit of the bridle and
  knocked him head over heels, drum and all. The animal plunging in her
  agony, threw the square into great confusion, and her misery was
  speedily put an end to by the soldiers’ bayonets.” On the 25th May,
  1820, Ensign Keppel (then in 22nd Foot) was promoted lieut. Exchanged
  to 20th Foot, 1821; Capt. 62nd Foot, 1825; and in 1827 was promoted to
  an unattached majority. Lt.-Col., 1841; Col., 1854; M.-Gen., 1858;
  Lieut.-Gen., 1866; and Gen. 1874. M. 4th Aug., 1831, Susan, dau. of
  Sir Coutts Trotter, Bart., and by her (who d. 3rd Aug., 1885) had
  issue. D. 21st Feb., 1891.

Footnote 35:

  Paymaster 47th Foot 2nd May, 1816. Serving in 1824.

Footnote 36:

  “For some time after the firing had begun,” writes Lord Albemarle in
  his account of Waterloo, “Mrs. Ross, our quartermaster’s wife,
  remained with the regt. She was no stranger to a battle-field, and had
  received a severe wound in Whitelock’s disastrous retreat from Buenos
  Ayres (1807) at the time her husband was a sergt. in the 95th. She was
  at length persuaded to withdraw, and retired to the belfry of Waterloo
  Church.”

Footnote 37:

  Commissioned ensign 14th Foot 27th June, 1815. Out of the regt. before
  1st Jan., 1817.

Footnote 38:

  Out of the regt. in 1816.

Footnote 39:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.


                 23RD REGIMENT OF FOOT (OR ROYAL WELSH
                              FUSILIERS).

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir Henry Walton Ellis,       23 Apr.  1807 │Col., 4 June, 1814
       K.C.B., W.                                  │

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] Thomas Dalmer                 10 Dec.  1807 │Lt.-Col., 17 Aug.,
                                                   │1812

   [3] J. Humph. Edw. Hill, W.       12 Mar.  1812 │Lt.-Col., 21
                                                   │Sept., 1813

               CAPTAINS.                           │

       Joseph Hawtyn, K.             11 Sept. 1806 │Maj., 17 Aug. 1812

   [4] Francis Dalmer                10 Dec.  1807 │Maj., 26 Aug. 1813

   [5] Thomas Strangeways             6 Apr.  1809 │

       _Wm. Campbell_                15 June, 1809 │Maj., 12 Apr. 1814

   [6] Charles Jolliffe, K.          18 June, 1811 │

       Thos. Farmer, K.              16 Apr.  1812 │

   [7] Henry Johnson, W.             14 May,  1812 │

       _Henry S. Blanckley_           6 Apr.  1815 │21 May, 1812

           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [8] Francis O’Flaherty             6 Aug.  1807 │

   [9] James Milne                   21 Oct.  1807 │

  [10] Wm. Walley                    10 Dec.  1807 │

  [11] Evan M. Brown                 20 Apr.  1809 │

       G. Fensham, K.                 4 Jan.  1810 │

  [12] Ralph Smith                   22 Mar.  1810 │

  [13] Harry Palmer                  11 Apr.  1811 │

  [14] Isaac Watkins Harris          20 June, 1811 │

  [15] J. Enoch, Adjt.               15 Aug.  1811 │

  [16] Gismond Phillips (_sic_)       5 Sept. 1811 │

  [17] John Macdonald                11 Oct.  1811 │

  [18] George Fielding                7 Nov.  1811 │

  [19] Robt. Pattison Holmes         12 Dec.  1811 │

  [20] Charles Fryer                  7 May,  1812 │

  [21] W.A. Griffiths, W.            13 May,  1812 │

  [22] John Clyde, W.                14 May,  1812 │

  [23] Alexander A. Brice            21 May,  1812 │

  [24] Anthony G. Sidley             16 July, 1812 │

  [25] Alexander Clayhills           17 Sept. 1812 │

  [26] Edward Methold                23 Mar.  1815 │

          SECOND LIEUTENANTS.                      │

  [27] Thomas Lilly                   1 Oct.  1812 │

  [28] George Dunn                   15 Apr.  1813 │

  [29] George Stainforth             29 July, 1813 │

  [30] Gerald FitzGibbon             26 Aug.  1813 │

       Wm. Leebody, K.                9 Sept. 1813 │

  [31] Edward Thomas Ellis                         │
       (Volunteer)                                 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [32] George Sidley                 14 Apr.  1808 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [33] John Dunn                     10 Sept. 1803 │9 July, 1803

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [34] Thomas Smith                   2 July, 1812 │

  [35] John Williams                 13 May,  1813 │

  [36] John Monro                    26 May,  1814 │

                     _Facings blue._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Was sev. wnded. at Waterloo, in the breast, by a shot from a carbine.
  On his way to the rear he was thrown from his horse, whilst attempting
  to jump a ditch, and one of his men carried him to a small outhouse,
  where his wound was dressed. On the night of 19th June the hovel took
  fire, and he was with difficulty rescued by Assistant-Surgeon Munro,
  of above regt. He d. next day. This gallant and universally lamented
  officer was son of Maj.-Gen. John Joyner Ellis, and was a native of
  Worcester. He had served in Holland, Egypt, America, the West Indies,
  Spain, Portugal, and France. M.I. in Worcester Cathedral. Bd. at
  Braine l’Alleud, within a few hundred yards of the place where he
  fell.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards Lt.-Gen. T. Dalmer, C.B., Col-in-Chf. 47th Foot. Horse shot
  under him at Waterloo. D. 25th Aug., 1854.

Footnote 3:

  Commanded a Portuguese regt. during the Par. War, and received the
  gold cross for four general actions. C.B. for Waterloo. Exchanged as
  maj. to 49th Regt., 2nd Oct., 1823. Out of the list 1829.

Footnote 4:

  Brother to above T. Dalmer. Bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. Attained rank
  of col. and d. 2nd Oct., 1855.

Footnote 5:

  Retd. on f. p. as capt. in 9th Rl. Veteran Battalion. D. 15th Jan.,
  1838, at Richmond Place, Dublin. Bro. of Col. Strangeways, of
  Shapwick, Somerset.

Footnote 6:

  Youngest son of T.S. Jolliffe, of Ammerdown, co. Somerset, formerly
  M.P. for the borough of Petersfield, by his 2nd wife, Mary, dau. and
  heir of Samuel Holden. Served at Copenhagen, in North America, and the
  West Indies. Served several campaigns in the Pa. Sev. wnded at Orthes.
  Had not entirely recovered from this wound when the tocsin of war once
  more summoned him to the field of battle.

Footnote 7:

  Afterwards Maj. H. Cavendish Johnson. Served at Copenhagen in 1807;
  the West Indies, and the Pa. At the siege of Badajoz, Johnson fell
  from the breach pierced with gunshot wounds, which prevented his doing
  any regimental duty until 1815, when he served at Waterloo and was
  again wounded. D. in Ireland, 19th Feb., 1853, aged 78.

Footnote 8:

  Capt. 17th July, 1815. H. p., 15th Foot 3rd Aug., 1820.

Footnote 9:

  Capt. 18th July, 1815. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 10:

  Capt. 19th July, 1815. H. p. 14th Foot, 6th Apr., 1820.

Footnote 11:

  Capt. 20th July, 1815. Paymaster to his regt. 23rd Oct., 1817. H. p.
  16th Oct., 1828.

Footnote 12:

  H. p. 53rd Foot, 8th May, 1823.

Footnote 13:

  Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 14:

  Capt. 7th Apr., 1825. H. p. 9th Apr., 1826. Living 1846.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. 22nd July, 1830. Maj. 14th Apr., 1846. Lt.-col. unattached 1st
  Feb., 1851. A.Q.M.G. same date. Col. 28th Nov., 1854. D. in London,
  13th July, 1855. He had the Par. medal with four clasps—Badajoz,
  Ciudad Rodrigo, Albuera, Salamanca.

Footnote 16:

  _Grismond Philipps._ 3rd son of George Philipps, of Cwmgaili,
  Caermarthenshire, who was M.P. for the borough. Served at Albuera,
  Nivelle, Nive, Orthes, and Toulouse (medal with five clasps). Bn.
  1792. M. Catherine, dau. of —— Warlow, Esq., and niece of Sir Thos.
  Picton. H. p. 26th Aug., 1819. D. in 1850. His elder bro., John
  George, was a midshipman on board H.M.S. _Minotaur_ at the battle of
  the Nile. Communicated by Lieut. Griffith Philipps, R.N.

Footnote 17:

  Capt. 28th Aug., 1827. Paymaster 16th Oct., 1828. Out of the regt. in
  March, 1831.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 6th June, 1822. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 19:

  Capt. 4th Sept., 1823. Maj. 17th Dec., 1830. D. at Quebec, 23rd July,
  1849, as col. comg. reserve batt. Rl. Welsh Fusiliers.

Footnote 20:

  H. p. 17th July, 1817.

Footnote 21:

  Serving in 1830.

Footnote 22:

  D. from his wounds.

Footnote 23:

  H. p. 5th Oct., 1820.

Footnote 24:

  Lt. Anthony Gardiner Sidley (or Sedley), aftds. of 3rd W.I. Regt.
  Entered the service in 1811. Served in the Pa. and in the Burmese War.
  Lt.-col. 63rd Foot 16th Sept., 1845. Living in 1874 as a lt.-col.
  retd. list and a military Knight of Windsor.

Footnote 25:

  Placed on h. p. as lt. 67th Regt., 30th May, 1822. 2nd son of James
  Menzies-Clayhills, of Invergowrie, co. Forfar. M. Elizabeth, dau. of
  Gen. Hunter, of Burnside, and d. s. p. 18th June, 1865.

Footnote 26:

  Afterwards capt. on h. p. list of 3rd D.G.

Footnote 27:

  Capt. in Ceylon Rifles 1839. Distinguished himself in the Kandian
  Insurrection of 1848, and commanded the only European troops employed
  on this occasion. Received the special thanks of Lord Torrington, Gov.
  of Ceylon, for his gallantry. D. as lt.-col. April, 1862.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. 16th Apr., 1817.

Footnote 29:

  Placed on h. p. as 1st lt. 25th March, 1817. Of Hutton, co. York. D.
  at Nivelle, Belgium, 27th April, 1860.

Footnote 30:

  Afterwards sub-inspector of the Constabulary in Ireland. D. at
  Plymouth, 7th Sept., 1844.

Footnote 31:

  Nephew to Sir Henry Walton Ellis, col. of this regt., who fell at
  Waterloo. Mentioned in Lord Albemarle’s autobiography. In the regt. in
  1830.

Footnote 32:

  Retd. f. p. 1827. D. 1839.

Footnote 33:

  Out of the regt. 13th July, 1826.

Footnote 34:

  Afterwards Surgeon-Major Thomas Smith, M.D., h. p. Joined the service
  in 1812; served in the campaigns of 1813, 1814, and 1815; was present
  at Vittoria, the Pyrenees, Nivelle, Orthes, and Toulouse. His
  commissions are dated: Hospital Assistant, March 29, 1812;
  Assist.-Surgeon, July 2, 1812; Surgeon, July 13, 1826; Surgeon-Major,
  Jan. 4, 1839. Living in 1874.

Footnote 35:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 36:

  D. in Apr., 1841, at Glasgow, as Surgeon 58th Foot.


              27TH (OR INNISKILLING) REGIMENT OF FOOT.[I]

                           (_1st Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

               CAPTAINS.                  Regiment.│Army.

   [1] John Hare, W.                  9 Sept. 1805 │Maj., 17 June,
                                                   │1813

       George Holmes, K.             30 Apr.  1807 │

   [2] John Tucker, W.                3 Mar.  1808 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [3] George M’Donnell (_sic_)      25 July, 1806 │
       W.                                          │

   [4] Wm. Henderson, W.              8 Oct.  1806 │

   [5] Richard Handcock, W.           5 Nov.  1806 │

   [6] Wm. Faithful Fortescue, W.     4 Dec.  1806 │

   [7] Thomas Craddock, W.            7 May,  1807 │

   [8] Wm. Talbot                     7 Feb.  1808 │

   [9] E.W. Drewe, W.                 9 Feb.  1808 │

  [10] Charles Manley, W.            28 July, 1808 │

  [11] John Millar, W.               11 Sept. 1808 │

  [12] John Betty                     7 Mar.  1810 │

  [13] Andrew Gardner                30 Sept. 1813 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [14] Wm. Kater, W.                 22 Apr.  1813 │

  [15] John Ditmas, W.                3 June, 1813 │

  [16] Thos. Smith, W.               24 June, 1813 │

       Samuel Ireland, K.            25 Aug.  1815 │

  [17] Tobias Handcock, W.            4 May,  1815 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [18] Thomas Taylor                 26 Sept. 1805 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [19] Gerald Fitzgerald             25 Apr.  1811 │

  [20] Thomas Mostyn                 19 Dec.  1811 │

                     _Facings buff._  _Lace gold._

Footnote I:

  This regt. had just returned from active service in America. Out of
  698 men, this regt. lost 480 at Waterloo, having been almost blown to
  pieces when standing in square above the sandpit on the Charleroi
  road.

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Hare, C.B. and K.H., Gov. of the Eastern District
  of the Cape of Good Hope. Began his military career as ensign in the
  Tarbet Fencibles, when he volunteered with 300 men into the regulars,
  and joined 69th Regt. Embarked for the Helder, and served in that
  campaign under the Duke of York. Served under Abercromby in Egypt.
  Also in Naples, Sicily, Calabria, and the Pa. Bt. lt.-col. for
  Waterloo. Lt.-col. of this regt. 31st March, 1825. D. on his passage
  home from the Cape in March, 1847.

Footnote 2:

  His full name was John Montmorency Tucker. Exchanged as capt. to 8th
  Foot, 23rd May, 1816. Quitted the service before 1824. D. at Huggens’s
  Military Asylum, Northfleet, Kent, 22nd Feb., 1852.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards Gen. George _Macdonald_, Col.-in-Chf. 16th Foot, who lived
  to be “Father of the British Army.” Entered the army in 1805; joined
  the Expedition to Hanover in 1805; the Army in Sicily in 1806; the
  Expedition to Naples in 1810, and was present at the capture of Ischia
  and Procida; returned to Sicily in 1811; was subsequently employed in
  Spain, and was present at the battle of Castalla and siege of
  Tarragona; afterwards served in Canada. He was wounded no less than
  three times at Waterloo. Commissions dated: Ensign, Sept. 5, 1805;
  Lt., July 25, 1806; Capt., August 17, 1815; Maj., 31st Aug., 1830;
  Lt.-Col., 1837; Col., 1851; Maj.-Gen., 1855; Lt.-Gen., 1863; Gen.,
  1871.

Footnote 4:

  Placed on h. p. 25th April, 1816. Living 1830.

Footnote 5:

  Capt. 46th Foot, 17th Feb., 1837. Bt.-major same year. Living 1846.

Footnote 6:

  D. from wounds received at Waterloo. 2nd son of John Fortescue, of
  24th Foot, who was at the taking of Quebec. The above m., 1798,
  Honoria Oliver, and had issue.

Footnote 7:

  7th son of Wm. Cradock, of Loughborough, co. Leicester. Bn. 6th Oct.,
  1786. Served throughout the Par. War with the 27th Foot. At siege of
  Badajoz Lt. Cradock entered the town in command of his regt. Served at
  the attack on New Orleans in 1815. At Waterloo a bullet passed right
  through his cheeks carrying away the roof of his mouth. Appointed a
  Knight of Windsor in 1842. Retd. as major 73rd Foot. D. 5th April,
  1851.

Footnote 8:

  The “W” is omitted before this officer’s name in the _Army List_ for
  1824.

Footnote 9:

  Capt. 7th Jan., 1824. Capt. 95th Foot 19th May, 1825. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 10:

  Had a bullet through his thigh at Waterloo. Had served in the Pa.
  Capt. same regt. 10th Sept., 1829. D. in an apoplectic fit, 5th Nov.,
  1839, on board the ss. _Barretta, jun._, when 17 days’ sail from Cape
  of Good Hope.

Footnote 11:

  Adjt. 25th Foot 6th November, 1823. H. p. capt. 13th March, 1827. D.
  about 1840.

Footnote 12:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 13:

  Living in 1874 as lt. half pay 27th Foot. Entered the Army in 1811.
  His commissions are dated: Ensign, 14th Nov., 1811; Lt., 30th Sept.,
  1813.

Footnote 14:

  Lieut. 17th Aug., 1815. Out of the regt. before 1st Jan., 1817.

Footnote 15:

  Lieut. 9th Nov., 1815. Lieut. 25th Foot 21st May, 1818. Son of
  Lt.-Col. Harry Ditmas, of the Garrison Batt. of Invalids.

Footnote 16:

  Thos. Charlton Smith. Entered the Army in 1813. Served in the Pa., and
  was present at the affair of Ordal. He was sev. wnded. at Waterloo.
  Previously to entering the Army he served for a brief period in the
  Navy, and was three times wounded. His commissions are dated: Ensign,
  24th June, 1813; Lt., 5th Aug., 1819; Capt., 27th March, 1835; Maj.,
  30th Sept., 1842; Lt.-col., 15th Sept., 1848; Col., 28th Nov., 1854;
  Maj.-gen., 21st Dec., 1862; Lt.-gen., 25th Oct., 1871.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 26th March, 1816.

Footnote 18:

  Left the regt. in 1816.

Footnote 19:

  Surgeon 69th Foot 7th Sept., 1815.

Footnote 20:

  Hospital assistant 9th Nov., 1810. Surgeon 6th Oct., 1825. Serving in
  1855. This veteran had the Par. medal with eight clasps, and had also
  served at the battle of Plattsburg, in America.


              28TH (OR THE NORTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE) REGIMENT
                              OF FOOT.[J]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir Charles P. Belson,        23 Nov.  1804 │Col., 4 June, 1812
       K.C.B.                                      │

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Robert Nixon, W.              15 Dec.  1804 │Lt.-Col., 30 May,
                                                   │1811

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Wm. Prescott Meacham, K.       9 July, 1803 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [4] Wm. Irving, W.                 9 July, 1803 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [5] Richard Llewellyn, W.         28 Feb.  1805 │Maj., 23 Apr. 1812

   [6] Charles Caddell                9 Mar.  1809 │

   [7] Richard Kelly, W.             13 Apr.  1809 │

   [8] John Bowles, W.               28 July, 1809 │

   [9] Thomas English, W.            31 Jan.  1810 │

  [10] Charles Teulon, W.            27 Sept. 1810 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [11] Jas. Henry Crummer             2 July, 1807 │

  [12] John Fred. Wilkinson, W.       8 Sept. 1808 │

  [13] Matthew Semple                 6 Oct.  1808 │

  [14] Roger P. Gilbert, W.          27 Apr.  1809 │

  [15] Robert Prescott Eason, W.     17 May,  1809 │

  [16] Wm. Irwin, W.                 20 July, 1809 │

  [17] Henry Hilliard, W.            16 Nov.  1809 │

  [18] Samuel Moore                  28 Jan.  1810 │

  [19] John Coen, W.                 29 Jan.  1810 │

  [20] Charles B. Carruthers         30 Jan.  1810 │

  [21] J.P. Clarke, K.                1 Mar.  1810 │

  [22] J. Wm. Shelton, W.            22 Mar.  1810 │

  [23] James Deares                  25 Apr.  1811 │

  [24] George Ingram, K.              6 Aug.  1812 │

  [25] T. Bridgeland, Adjt., W.      15 Apr.  1813 │

  [26] Edward Embury Hill             9 Sept. 1813 │

  [27] Thos. Wm. Colleton            25 Nov.  1813 │

  [28] James Parry                   27 Jan.  1814 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [29] Robert Thomson Stuart          5 Aug.  1813 │

  [30] Wm. Serjeantson               26 Aug.  1813 │

  [31] Richard Martin                 8 Sept. 1813 │

  [32] James Simkins                  9 Sept. 1813 │

  [33] Wm. Mountsteven, W.           25 Nov.  1813 │

  [34] W. Lynam                      31 Mar.  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [35] John Dewes                    20 June, 1799 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [36] Richard Reynolds               9 Mar.  1809 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

  [37] Patrick H. Lavens             24 Oct.  1811 │

                   _Facings yellow._  _Lace silver._

Footnote J:

  This regt. was for many years known as the “Slashers.” This name is
  said to have been first given in the early part of the American War,
  when the regt. had swords, which they used to some purpose. The 28th
  might have been appropriately called “Prescott’s Own,” as the
  Col.-in-Chf., Gen. Robert Prescott, had been closely associated with
  this regt. for 50 years or longer, and was lt.-col. commanding for
  about 12 years. From 1789 until his death in Dec., 1815, he was
  col.-in-chf., and took the deepest interest in all that concerned his
  old corps. He had more than one godson in the regt., whose fathers had
  fought under him in America, whom he advanced in their military career
  by his own personal interest. And the 28th were equally attached to
  their old colonel, who had seen much service in America and the West
  Indies, where he held high commands. Like many others, before and
  since, who have filled responsible situations in countries where the
  native or “barbarian” element is largely represented, Gen. Prescott
  was fully imbued with the idea of his own great importance. An amusing
  instance of this is found in an order issued by him when commanding
  the troops in Canada:—

                    LIEUT.-GENERAL PRESCOTT’S ORDERS.

                                        “St. Pierres, 16th _June_, 1794.

  “Whereas Vice-Adm. Sir John Jervis has given orders, I am told,
  frequently here on shore, and particularly by note dated off Point
  Petre, June 11th, 1794, which must have arisen from great ignorance or
  great presumption and arrogance.

  “If from ignorance, poor man! he is to be pitied, but if from
  presumption and arrogance, he is to be checked.

  “It is, therefore, Lt.-General Prescott’s orders that in future no
  attention whatever is to be given to such notes or orders, and his
  signature to such to be as little regarded as that of John Oakes or
  Peter Styles.”

  A martinet he lived and a martinet he died. His last whisper on his
  death-bed was an inquiry as to whether there was a Hessian sentry at
  his door. Although he did not die in harness the veteran “Slasher”
  died under the colours of the 28th, as on the death of the late Robert
  Prescott (grandson of the above) the old colours of the 28th were
  found among his effects and returned to the regt. They had doubtless
  been worked by the fair fingers of the old general’s wife.

Footnote 1:

  Succeeded to the command of the 8th Brigade after Quatre Bras.
  Lt.-Col. 56th Regt. 9th May, 1816. Had served throughout the Par. War
  with above regt., and received the gold cross with two clasps.
  Maj.-Gen. 1819. D. at Blackheath 5th Nov., 1830, aged 57.

Footnote 2:

  7th son of Alexander Nixon, of Mullynesker, High Sheriff of Fermanagh
  1761, by Mary, dau. of Alex. Montgomery. Served in Egypt and in the
  Pa. C.B. for Waterloo. Quitted the service 1816. D. s. p.

Footnote 3:

  This officer had fought in Egypt and in the Pa. His father had been
  regimental paymaster.

Footnote 4:

  Distinguished himself in the Pa., and had a musket-ball through his
  right arm at Quatre Bras. Bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. Quitted the
  service in 1826. Both his arms had been nearly disabled by wounds. D.
  14th Jan., 1834.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir Richard Lluellyn, K.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 39th Regt.
  Entered the army with temporary rank as capt. in the 52nd, and served
  in the Mediterranean. In 1801 was placed on h. p. but when the war
  recommenced he re-entered the army and purchased a company in the 28th
  Foot in 1805. Fought at Busaco and Albuera, and other actions in the
  Pa. Was an excellent horseman, and on one occasion in the Pa., when
  employed on staff duty, he was galloping after the retreating French
  when he came on an open portmanteau, in which he espied some silver
  spoons and forks of an antique pattern. As he galloped past he bent in
  the saddle and made a grab with his right hand at the glittering
  contents. His dexterity was rewarded with several specimens of old
  French plate. This anecdote is given on the authority of a relative of
  the Editor, who used to meet the old general in society, who told the
  story himself. Made bt. lt.-col. and C.B. for his gallantry at
  Waterloo. He was son of Richard Lluellyn, of South Witham, co.
  Lincoln, by a dau. of Warren Maude, of Sunnyside, Northumberland. M.,
  1831, Eliz., dau. of Lt.-Gen. Raymond. D. 7th Dec., 1867.

Footnote 6:

  5th son of John Cadell, of Cockenzie and Tranent, co. Haddington. Bn.
  1786. M., 1829, Isabella, dau. of Macdonald of Boisdale. K.H. Promoted
  major 28th Foot, 1826. Author of _Narrative of the Campaigns of the
  28th Regiment since their Return from Egypt_, from which book the
  Editor has culled several notes. Served throughout the Par. War. At
  the close of Waterloo Day commanded the 28th. D. s. p. as lt. col. on
  retd. list, 1866.

Footnote 7:

  Quitted the service before 1830, after being a capt. in this regt. for
  about 20 years.

Footnote 8:

  Wounded at Quatre Bras. Placed on h. p. in 1817.

Footnote 9:

  Served in the Pa., and was wounded at Waterloo. Quitted the service
  before 1824. Believed to have belonged to an Armagh family of this
  surname.

Footnote 10:

  Maj. in this regt. 7th Oct., 1819. H. p. 4th Aug., 1825.

Footnote 11:

  Was severely wounded in the left leg at Albuera. In 1832, when serving
  as senior capt. in this regt., the old wound broke out afresh and
  caused much suffering. Applied for a pension for wounds to which he
  had been entitled, but it was refused on the ground of the lapse of
  years since the said wound was received.

Footnote 12:

  Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 13:

  Capt. 38th Foot, 24th Oct., 1823. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 14:

  Distinguished himself at the passage of the Douro. 12th May, 1807, in
  the brigade under the command of Sir Edward Paget. 5th son of the Rev.
  Edmund Gilbert, vicar of Constantine, co. Cornwall, by Anne, dau. of
  Henry Garnett, of Bristol. Bn. 1790. Attained rank of maj. unattached
  19th Sept. 1826. Living in 1830.

Footnote 15:

  Distinguished himself at the passage of the Douro. Capt. same regt.
  1825. Living 1830.

Footnote 16:

  “The strongest man in the regt.” Several anecdotes of this officer’s
  prowess are given in Col. Cadell’s book, referred to above. Wounded at
  Quatre Bras. Promoted capt. 9th May, 1816. In the regt. 1840, in which
  year he retd., and d. at Sydney, N.S.W. in 1841.

Footnote 17:

  Afterwards Paymaster H. Hilliard, h. p., late lt. 68th Foot. Entered
  the army 1808, served in the Pa., and was present at several
  engagements, including Busaco, Albuera, and the 1st siege of Badajoz;
  was also at Quatre Bras. His commissions are dated: Ensign, Feb. 25th,
  1808; lt., Nov. 16th, 1809; paymaster, March 22nd, 1821. Living in
  1874.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 14th Dec., 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 19:

  Serving as lieut. in 1824. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 20:

  Serving as lieut. in 1830.

Footnote 21:

  Had served in the Pa.

Footnote 22:

  John Willington Shelton was son and heir of John Shelton, of Rossmore
  House, Limerick. Served in the Pa. Was four times wounded at Waterloo.
  Placed on h.p. 1817. M., 14th Aug., 1817, Mary, dau. of John Richards,
  of Blackdown House, Southampton, and had issue. D. 19th July, 1847.

Footnote 23:

  Called “Deans” in Col. Cadell’s book. This zealous officer accompanied
  the cavalry on foot in the pursuit of the enemy, and attacked every
  Frenchman who came in his way. He was taken prisoner and stripped of
  all his clothes except his shirt, in which state he joined the regt.
  next day, severely wounded into the bargain. Quitted the service
  before 1824.

Footnote 24:

  Distinguished himself at the battle of Albuera. Had his leg amputated
  after Waterloo; the tourniquet shifted in the night, and he bled to
  death. M.I. at Waterloo.

Footnote 25:

  Had served in the ranks, and was promoted from sergt.-maj. to be adjt.
  and ensign.

Footnote 26:

  Capt. 7th March, 1822. H. p. 17th Aug., 1822.

Footnote 27:

  2nd son of Sir James Nassau Colleton, 6th Bart., of Ash Park, co.
  Herts, by Susanna, dau. of William Nixon, of Lincoln. Afterwards lt.
  in Rl. Staff Corps.

Footnote 28:

  Living in 1874 as a lt. h. p. 28th Foot.

Footnote 29:

  Lieut. 18th July, 1815. H. p. 25th March, 1817. Living in 1846.

Footnote 30:

  Afterwards lt. 40th Foot. Capt. 17th Dec., 1829. Of Hanlith, Tasmania.
  Eldest son of Robert Serjeantson (a blood relative of Gen. Prescott’s
  wife), by Isabella, dau. of Wm. Dorman, of Harbour Hill, Kinsale. M.
  Marion, dau. of Richard Willis. Was murdered at Hobart Town, Tasmania,
  30th Nov., 1835.

Footnote 31:

  Lieut. 4th Oct., 1815. H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 32:

  Serving in 1817.

Footnote 33:

  Lieut. 25th Oct., 1820; capt. 25th June, 1835. Paymaster 79th
  Highlanders 10th June, 1836. H. p. 1847. Attained rank of
  major-general retd. list. His full name was Thos. Wm. Blewett
  Mountsteven.

Footnote 34:

  Serving in 1817. H. p. 2nd April, 1818.

Footnote 35:

  H. p. 22nd Aug., 1816.

Footnote 36:

  Placed on h. p as 2nd lt. from 1st W.I.R. 12th Feb., 1824.

Footnote 37:

  Surgeon 14th Lt. Dragoons 13th Nov. 1828. Serving in 1842. Out of said
  regt. 21st July, 1843.


             30TH (OR THE CAMBRIDGESHIRE) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Alexander Hamilton, W.        25 July, 1811 │4 June, 1811

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] Morris Wm. Bailey, W.         26 Dec.  1808 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

   [3] Charles A. Vigoreux            4 June, 1813 │Lt.-Col, 21 June,
       (_sic_), W.                                 │1813

               CAPTAINS.                           │

       Thos. Walker Chambers, K.      2 Apr.  1807 │Maj., 16 Feb. 1815

   [4] Alex. MʻNabb, K.              11 May,  1809 │

   [5] Robert Howard                  1 Sept. 1813 │

   [6] Arthur Gore, W.               11 Feb.  1814 │14 July, 1808

   [7] Matthew Ryan                  26 May,  1814 │Maj., 4 June, 1813

   [8] Donald Sinclair                7 July, 1814 │

   [9] James Finucane                 2 Mar.  1815 │15 Aug., 1811

  [10] Richard Heaviside             15 June, 1815 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [11] Benj. Walter Nicholson        15 Apr.  1806 │

  [12] John Gowan                     8 May,  1806 │

  [13] Richard Mayne, W.              8 June, 1809 │

  [14] Matthias Andrews, Adjt.,      19 Sept. 1809 │
       W.                                          │

  [15] Richard Chas. Elliott, W.     23 June, 1811 │

  [16] A.W. Freear                   24 June, 1811 │

  [17] John Rumley, W.               25 June, 1811 │

  [18] Andrew Baillie                27 June, 1811 │

  [19] Robert Daniel, W.             15 July, 1811 │

  [20] Parke Percy Neville           17 July, 1811 │

  [21] John Roe, W.                  18 July, 1811 │

  [22] Theophilus O’Halloran          8 Aug.  1811 │

  [23] Richard Harrison, W.          11 Sept. 1811 │

  [24] Robert Hughes, W.             29 Oct.  1812 │

  [25] Purefoy Lockwood, W.          22 Apr.  1813 │

  [26] John Pratt, W.                 6 May,  1813 │

       Henry Beere, K.                7 Sept. 1814 │

  [27] Francis Tincombe               8 Sept. 1814 │

       Edmund Prendergast, K.        23 Nov.  1814 │

  [28] Wm. Ouseley Warren, W.        24 Nov.  1814 │

  [29] Thomas Moneypenny (_sic_),    23 Mar.  1815 │
       W.                                          │

  [30] David Latouche                25 May,  1815 │

  [31] Robert Naylor Rogers          14 June, 1815 │

  [32] Edward Drake                  15 June, 1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

       John James, K.                 2 Sept. 1813 │

  [33] Edw. Nevil Macready            8 Sept. 1814 │

       James Bullen, K.              23 Nov.  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [34] Hugh Boyd Wray                 9 Aug.  1806 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [35] John Williamson               27 Oct.  1814 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [36] J.G. Elkington                11 Mar.  1813 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [37] John Evans                    22 Aug.  1811 │

  [38] Patrick Clarke                25 June, 1812 │

                 _Facings pale yellow._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  This gallant officer received the thanks of Sir Thomas Picton for his
  services at Quatre Bras where he (Hamilton) was sev. wnded. After the
  battle it was thought necessary to amputate his leg; and three times
  had the tourniquet encircled his limb, preparatory to amputation, when
  each time the surgeon was called elsewhere. It was then decided to let
  the leg take its chance, and Hamilton eventually recovered. C.B. for
  Waterloo. Quitted the service in 1829 with rank of Col. All his
  service had been spent in “the old three tens,” as the 30th were
  called, and he had fought with them in Egypt and in the Pa. Had the
  gold medal for Salamanca. D. at Woolwich, 4th June, 1838. In his
  obituary notice, given in the _United Service Journal_, it is stated
  that he was nearly related to the noble house of Lothian. Whatever
  family he may have belonged to, he did it credit. He left a widow and
  two sons.

Footnote 2:

  C.B. for Waterloo. Aftds. lt.-col. of 64th Regt. Retd. before 1824. D.
  at Bath, 28th Nov., 1845.

Footnote 3:

  Lt.-Col. _Vigoureux_ was sev. wnded. at Waterloo. C.B. Lt.-Col. of the
  45th Regt., 20th Dec., 1826. D. as col. on retd. list, 24th Dec.,
  1841.

Footnote 4:

  It appears that this officer acted as an additional A.D.C. to Gen. Sir
  T. Picton, at Waterloo. At the second funeral of Picton in St. Paul’s
  Cathedral one of the mourners was the Rev. Dr. MʻNabb, from Canada,
  nephew of the above. The antiquity of the MʻNabb is delightfully
  illustrated by the well-known remark of one of their clan that “at the
  flood they did not need to take refuge in Noah’s Ark, as the MʻNabbs
  had a boat of their own!”

Footnote 5:

  Made bt.-maj. for Waterloo. Promoted maj. on unattached list, 1826,
  Lt.-col. 1837. D. at Wigfair, St. Asaph, 22nd Sept., 1856.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards Lt.-Gen. Arthur Gore, K.H. Son of the Hon. Richard Gore,
  M.P. for Donegal. D. 23rd June, 1869.

Footnote 7:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 8:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 10:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 12:

  H. p. 1818.

Footnote 13:

  D. in 1827.

Footnote 14:

  Capt. 16th Sept., 1827. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 15:

  H. p. 1817. Capt. unattached 28th Aug., 1827. Living in 1874.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 17:

  D. 1819.

Footnote 18:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 1819, 59th Foot.

Footnote 20:

  Served in the Pa., and was twice wounded, when leading the ladder
  party in the escalade of the St. Vincent Bastion, at the siege of
  Badajoz. Sev. wnded. at the siege of Burgos, when acting as Assistant
  Engineer in the storm of the first line of the Castle, 4th Oct., 1812.
  At the bombardment of Antwerp, and assault on Bergen-op-Zoom. Served
  in the Mahratta War of 1817–18, and was present at battle of
  Maheidpore and siege of Asserghur. Commanded the left wing of the 63rd
  Regt. in India for some years as maj. and bt. lt.-col. Received the
  Legion of Honour for services rendered on board the French ship
  _Benguile_, on passage from India to Europe in August, 1831. He was
  also presented with the Freedom of the City of Dublin. Joined the
  corps of Gentlemen-at-Arms, 1st Aug., 1847, and was subsequently made
  a Knight of Windsor. D. at Windsor Castle, 6th Feb., 1865, aged 72.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 1823.

Footnote 22:

  H. p. 1818.

Footnote 23:

  D. 1819.

Footnote 24:

  Maj., 1st West India Regt., 3rd March, 1843, and lt.-col. of same
  regt., 1st March, 1848, Col 1854. Received the Par. War medal with 4
  clasps. D. in Sept., 1855.

Footnote 25:

  Belonged to the Grenadier company. Ensign (aftds. Major) Macready in
  his interesting journal of the campaign of 1815 (printed in
  _Historical Records of the XXX Regt._, says: “Lockwood of ours had
  gone home with a silver plate in his skull, on which was engraved
  ‘bomb proof.’” H. p. 25th Aug., 1816. Living in 1846.

Footnote 26:

  Exchanged to 28th Foot, 9th Dec., 1819. Major 27th Foot 22nd March,
  1827. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 27:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 29:

  Thomas Gybbon-_Monypenny_ was descended from the ancient Scotch family
  of Monypenny, of Pitmillie, co. Fife; but his ancestor, Capt. James
  Monypenny, R.N., settled in Kent about 1714, since which date this
  branch of the family has chiefly resided in Kent. His father was Thos.
  Monypenny, of Rye, Sussex. Placed on h. p. 1817. M., 8th Jan., 1818,
  Silvestra Rose, eldest dau. of Robert Monypenny, of Merrington Place,
  Rolvenden, Kent, and had issue. Lt.-col. of the West Kent Militia.
  M.P. for Rye, 1837–41. D. 16th Jan., 1854.

Footnote 30:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 31:

  H. p. 19th Feb., 1818. Staff officer of pensioners at Amherstburg,
  Canada West, before 1836. Drowned while fishing in the Detroit river
  5th May, 1854.

Footnote 32:

  H. p. 1816 from 28th Foot.

Footnote 33:

  Brother to the great tragedian. Joined the 2nd Batt. 30th Foot, as a
  volunteer, in 1814, at the age of 16. Served under Lord Lynedoch in
  Holland. At Waterloo, when only an ensign, commanded the light company
  towards the close of the battle. His private journal, in which he
  gives his experiences at Waterloo, is quoted from in Sir H. Havelock’s
  military work, entitled _Three Main Questions of the Day_ (published
  in 1867) in order to show how the bravest cavalry failed again and
  again, at Waterloo, in breaking through the infantry squares when
  those squares were well provided with ammunition in addition to their
  bayonets. “Here come these fools again,” growled the 30th rank and
  file as they prepared to pour a destructive fire on the advancing
  French cuirassiers, which invariably emptied many saddles and sent the
  remainder from whence they came. Served at the siege of Asseerghur,
  and was aftds. milit. sec. to Sir John Wilson in Ceylon. Was promoted
  maj. h. p. unattached, 22nd Nov., 1839. Wrote the _Life of Marshal
  Suvarow_, which was published after his death. D. at Clevedon, 4th
  Nov., 1848.

Footnote 34:

  H. p. 1831.

Footnote 35:

  An amusing anecdote relative to this officer is given in the _United
  Service Journal_ for 1838. Col. A. Hamilton of this regt., had a very
  valuable charger at Waterloo, and knowing that if it was shot in the
  battle he would only get the Government price of £20 for another
  charger, he exchanged horses, before going into action at Quatre Bras,
  with his steady old quartermaster, who, being a non-combatant, was to
  remain in the rear. The quartermaster’s horse was what is called a
  “safe convenience,” but the colonel’s charger was very high-spirited
  and fresh. Unaccustomed to the quietude of his position in the rear of
  the army, he fretted and fumed at being kept back from the excitement
  going on in front. His rider had a bad time of it, and was a source of
  much amusement to the idlers and “non-effectives” in the rearward. The
  narrator of this incident says that on the evening of the 16th June,
  1815, Sir W. Ponsonby sent his A.D.C. to offer to buy Hamilton’s fine
  charger (his owner being wounded), but the bargain hung fire in some
  way, and the gallant Ponsonby lost his life on the 18th June, as we
  have seen, from being badly mounted.

Footnote 36:

  Appointed assistant-surgeon 24th July, 1808. Taken prisoner at
  Talavera and sent to France. Exchanged. Rejoined in Portugal, after
  Busaco. Served at Fuentes d’Onor, Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, Salamanca,
  and capture of Madrid. Taken prisoner after siege of Burgos when in
  charge of the wounded. H. p. 1817. Surgeon 1st Batt. 1st Royals in
  July, 1821. Transferred to 17th Lancers in Sept., 1828. Surgeon
  R.H.M.S. Dublin, 1814. D. there in 1853. Interred at Arbour Hill,
  Dublin.

Footnote 37:

  Out of the regt. in 1821.

Footnote 38:

  H. p. 82nd Foot 12th Jan., 1816.


                32ND (OR THE CORNWALL) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                MAJORS.                   Regiment.│Army.

   [1] John Hicks                     3 Aug.  1804 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1811

   [2] Felix Calvert                 11 May,  1815 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Charles Hames                 25 May,  1803 │Maj., 1 Jan. 1812

   [4] Henry Ross-Lewin               6 Aug.  1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [5] Wm. H. Toole, W.               7 Sept. 1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [6] John Crowe, W.                30 May,  1805 │

       Jaques Boyse, K.              17 Mar.  1808 │7 Aug. 1806

   [7] Thos. Cassan, K.              14 Sept. 1809 │16 Apr. 1807

   [8] Edward Whitty, K.             17 May,  1810 │

   [9] Hugh Harrison, W.             19 Jan.  1815 │11 June, 1812

  [10] Charles Wallett, W.           23 Mar.  1815 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [11] Henry Wm. Brookes, W.         14 May,  1807 │

  [12] David Davies, Adjt.            6 Nov.  1807 │18 June, 1807

  [13] George Barr, W.                7 Nov.  1807 │

  [14] Michael Wm. Meighan, W.        9 Nov.  1807 │

  [15] Sam. Hill Lawrence, W.        10 Nov.  1807 │

  [16] Theobald Butler               28 Apr.  1808 │

  [17] John Boase, W.                 9 June, 1808 │

  [18] Thos. Ross-Lewin, W.          15 Dec.  1808 │

  [19] John Shaw M‘Cullock           10 Aug.  1809 │

  [20] Jas. Robt. Colthurst, W.      13 Oct.  1809 │

  [21] James Robinson, W.            17 May,  1810 │

  [22] Robt. Tresilian Belcher       17 Jan.  1811 │

  [23] James Fitzgerald, W.          11 July, 1811 │

  [24] Thos. J. Horan, W.            11 June, 1812 │

  [25] Edward Stephens, W.           10 Sept. 1812 │

  [26] Henry Quill, W.               17 Dec.  1812 │

  [27] Jonathan Jagoe, W.             9 Feb.  1815 │10 June, 1813

  [28] George Small                  23 Mar.  1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [29] Jasper Lucas                   6 Jan.  1813 │

  [30] James MʻConchy                 7 Jan.  1813 │

  [31] Henry Metcalfe, W.            18 Mar.  1813 │

  [32] John Birtwhistle, W.          14 Apr.  1813 │

  [33] Alexander Stewart, W.         15 Apr.  1813 │

  [34] George Brown                  10 June, 1813 │

  [35] Wm. Bennett, W.               16 Mar.  1815 │14 Jan. 1813

  [36] Chas. R.K. Dallas, W.         23 Mar.  1815 │18 Nov. 1813

               PAYMASTER.                          │

       Thomas Hart                   26 July, 1810 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

       Wm. Stevens                   19 Sept. 1804 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       Wm. Buchanan                  17 Mar.  1804 │9 July, 1803

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       Rynd Lawder                   25 May,  1809 │

       Hugh MʻClintock                5 Nov.  1812 │

                     _Facings white._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  C.B., and K.St.A. for Waterloo. Served in the Pa., and received the
  gold cross for four general actions. Quitted the service 1828 as col.
  D. 18th May, 1838.

Footnote 2:

  Made bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. Son of Nicholson Calvert, of Hunsdon,
  by Frances, dau. of Edmund Sexton Pery, Viscount Pery. Attained rank
  of lt.-gen., and d. in 1862.

Footnote 3:

  Quitted the service before 1821. D. at Brighton, 23rd Feb., 1860.

Footnote 4:

  Of Ross Hill, Kildysart, co. Clare. Son of George Ross-Lewin, of Ross
  Hill, by Anne, dau. of Thomas Lewin, of Cloghans, co. Mayo. Bn. 1778.
  Served in the Pa., and was wounded in the last charge at Salamanca. M.
  Anne, dau. of Wm. Burnett, of Eyrescourt, and had issue. Quitted the
  service before 1824. D. 27th April, 1843. Wrote his autobiography,
  which gives a good account of Waterloo.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards on f. p., retd. list, 4th Rl. Veteran Batt. D. 17th Aug.,
  1831.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards lt.-col. and K.H. D. at Fairlea Villa, Bideford, in March,
  1860.

Footnote 7:

  Son of Capt. John Cassan, 56th Foot. Killed at Quatre Bras. A pension
  was granted to his widow.

Footnote 8:

  Killed at Quatre Bras.

Footnote 9:

  Retd. on h. p. 16th May, 1822. Living 1855.

Footnote 10:

  Exchanged to the 61st Regt. in 1828. Retd. as capt. and bt.-maj. from
  the Ceylon Rifles. Living 1846.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 3rd Dec., 1818.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 19th July, 1815. H. p. 1828. D. at Walworth, 6th Oct., 1854.

Footnote 13:

  Capt. 20th July, 1815. Serving in 1817.

Footnote 14:

  Capt. 30th Sept., 1819. H. p. 25th Oct., 1822.

Footnote 15:

  Adjt. 27th July, 1815. Capt. 7th Apr., 1825. H. p. 15th Dec., 1825.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 14th Foot 22nd June, 1820.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 94th Foot 19th June, 1817. D. 11th Sept., 1854, at Pendennis
  Castle, where he was barrack-master.

Footnote 18:

  Younger brother to above Maj. H. Ross-Lewin. Served in the Pa., and in
  1848 recd. the silver war medal with eight clasps. Quitted the service
  as lieut. M. Frances, dau. of Daniel O’Grady, and d. s. p. 1857.

Footnote 19:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 20:

  Afterwards appointed Sub-inspector of Militia in North America. Retd.
  on h. p. as capt. in 1830. Bt.-maj. 21st July, 1854. Out of the _Army
  List_ 1855.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 20th March, 1823.

Footnote 22:

  Siborne makes the following mention of this officer in his
  history:—“The ensign carrying the regimental colour of the 32nd was
  sev. wnded. Lt. Belcher, who commanded the left centre sub-division,
  took it from him. In the next moment it was seized by a French officer
  whose horse had just been shot under him. A struggle ensued between
  him and Lt. Belcher; but while the former was attempting to draw his
  sword, the covering colour-sergt. (named Switzer) gave him a thrust in
  the breast with his halbert, and the right-hand man of the
  sub-division (named Lacy) shot him.”

Footnote 23:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 25:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 26:

  Retd. f. p., 9th Rl. Veteran Batt., before 1824.

Footnote 27:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 30:

  Lieut. 20th July, 1815. Lieut. 48th Foot 26th March, 1824. Serving in
  1830.

Footnote 31:

  3rd son of the Rev. Francis Metcalfe, Rector of Kirkbride, Cumberland,
  and Vicar of Rudston, co. York, by Harriet dau. of John Clough, of
  York. Sev. wnded. at Waterloo. Promoted lieut. 27th July, 1815. Placed
  on h. p. 25th March, 1817. D. 1828.

Footnote 32:

  Carried the regtal. colour at Waterloo until sev. wnded. Attained the
  rank of maj.-gen. D. at Cheltenham, 6th Oct., 1867.

Footnote 33:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 34:

  Lieut. 30th Sept., 1819. Capt. 10th Feb., 1832. Bt.-major 15th June,
  1838. Serving in same regt. in 1846.

Footnote 35:

  Ensign 68th Foot 30th Dec., 1819. Serving in 1824.

Footnote 36:

  2nd son of Charles Stuart Dallas, by Susan King. Was sev. wnded. at
  Waterloo. Placed on h. p. as ensign in 1820. Quitted the service some
  years after, and entered the Church, and in 1842 was curate of
  Micheldever, Whitchurch, Hants. M. his cousin, Julia Maria Dallas, and
  had issue. D. 1860.


                33RD (OR THE 1ST YORKSHIRE WEST RIDING)
                          REGIMENT OF FOOT.[K]

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Wm. Keith Elphinstone         30 Sept. 1813 │
                 MAJOR.                            │
   [2] Edward Parkinson, W.          17 Mar.  1813 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [3] Wm. MʻIntyre, W.               3 Dec.  1810 │
   [4] Charles Knight, W.            26 Dec.  1811 │30 Aug. 1810
       John Haigh, K.                 6 Aug.  1812 │
   [5] J.M. Harty, W.                11 Mar.  1813 │
   [6] Ralph Gore                    28 July, 1814 │
   [7] John Longden                   8 Sept. 1814 │
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
   [8] Thomas Reid, W.               20 July, 1806 │
       _Peter Barailler_              7 Sept. 1809 │21 Mar. 1807
   [9] George Barrs                  14 Nov.  1809 │
       Henry Rishton Buck, K.        16 Nov.  1809 │
  [10] Arthur Hill Trevor             1 Jan.  1810 │
       John Boyce, K.                 1 Jan.  1811 │
       J. Hart, K.                   25 Apr.  1811 │
  [11] James Murkland, W.             1 June, 1811 │
  [12] Fred. Hope Pattison           24 Sept. 1812 │
  [13] Arthur Gore, K.               11 Mar.  1813 │
  [14] Richard Westmore, W.           1 Apr.  1813 │
       Thos. D. Haigh, K.            29 July, 1813 │28 Jan. 1813
  [15] Jas. Gordon Ogle, W.          17 Mar.  1814 │
  [16] Sam. Alex. Pagan, W.           7 Apr.  1814 │
  [17] Edward Clabon                 18 Aug.  1814 │
  [18] Joseph Lynam                   8 Sept. 1814 │
  [19] John Archbold                 27 Oct.  1814 │
       John Cameron, K.               9 Feb.  1815 │
                ENSIGNS.                           │
  [20] Henry Bain, W.                15 Oct.  1812 │
  [21] James Forlong, W.             11 Mar.  1813 │
  [22] John Alderson, W.             21 Apr.  1813 │
  [23] Wm. Bain                      22 Apr.  1813 │
  [24] Jas. Arnot Howard              6 May,  1813 │
  [25] Wm. Thain, Adjt., W.          13 May,  1813 │
  [26] Andrew Watson                 10 June, 1813 │
  [27] Charles Smith                 24 June, 1813 │
  [28] Wm. Hodgson                   21 Apr.  1814 │
  [29] Gerald Blackall               12 May,  1814 │
  [30] George Drury, W.               9 Feb.  1815 │
               PAYMASTER.                          │
  [31] Edward Stoddart                2 Apr.  1807 │
             QUARTERMASTER.                        │
  [32] James Fazarckerley (_sic_)    25 Sept. 1808 │
                SURGEON.                           │
       Robert Leaver                 31 Mar.  1814 │
          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │
       Wm. D. Fry                    12 Nov.  1812 │
       D. Finlayson                  31 Mar.  1814 │
                     _Facings red._  _Lace silver._

Footnote K:

  In 1793 the Hon. Arthur Wellesley was appointed lt.-col. of this regt.
  and commanded it for nearly ten eventful years. Wellington never
  forgot his old regiment, and it is recorded that he honoured Sir Colin
  Halkett’s brigade with several visits on Waterloo Day. In one visit
  late in the afternoon of that eventful day, he inquired “How they
  were?” The answer was that two-thirds of their number were down, and
  that the rest were so exhausted that leave to retire, even for a short
  time, was most desirable, some of the foreign corps, who had not
  suffered, to take their place. Gen. Halkett was told that the issue of
  the battle depended on the unflinching front of the British troops,
  and that even a change of place was hazardous in the extreme. Halkett
  impressively said, “Enough, my lord; we stand here until the last man
  falls.”

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. W. Keith Elphinstone, C.B., Com.-in-Chf. in
  Bengal. 3rd son of the Hon. Wm. Fullerton Elphinstone, and grandson of
  the 10th Baron Elphinstone. C.B. and K.S.A. for Waterloo. Served in
  Afghanistan, and in the retreat from Cabul was taken captive by Akhbar
  Khan, and fell a sacrifice to bodily fatigue, 23rd April, 1842.

Footnote 2:

  Made bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. Served with the 33rd in India, and was
  on the staff of the expedition which captured the island of Bourbon.
  Served in the campaign in Holland in 1814. Was severely wounded at
  Quatre Bras. Attained rank of lt.-gen. and col.-in-chf. 93rd
  Highlanders. C.B. D. 14th Jan., 1858.

Footnote 3:

  Promoted maj. 30th Dec., 1818. Exchanged to 1st W.I. Regt. 15th Feb.,
  1821. D. 23rd April, 1828.

Footnote 4:

  A native of Charleville. Succeeded to the command of the above regt.
  after 1830, and d. 21st July, 1841, on board the ss. _Pandora_, at St.
  Thomas’s, on his way home from Barbados.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards Col. Joseph M. Harty, K.H., retired f. p. Entered the army
  in 1807. He served at the capture of Bourbon and the Isle of France
  (1810), the campaigns in Germany and Holland, including the attacks on
  Merxem and the assault of Bergen-op-Zoom (1813–14). His commissions
  are dated: Ensign, April 23rd, 1807; Lt., May 1st, 1807; Capt., March
  11th, 1813; Maj., Dec. 20th, 1827; Lt.-Col., July 22nd, 1841; Col.,
  Nov. 28th, 1854. Living 1874.

Footnote 6:

  Quitted the service as capt. in this regt.

Footnote 7:

  Bt.-major 1st Nov., 1821. H. p. unattached, 1st May, 1827.

Footnote 8:

  Capt. 16th June, 1815. Retd. f. p. 10th Jan., 1837. Living in 1846.

Footnote 9:

  Capt. 7th April, 1825. H. p. 25th May, 1826.

Footnote 10:

  Afterwards K.H. and lt.-col. of 59th Regt. Inspecting Field Officer
  Recruiting Staff, 1855. Maj.-Gen. 1858. Living 1860.

Footnote 11:

  Left the regt. in 1817.

Footnote 12:

  Placed on h. p. as lt. 18th May, 1821. Fifty years later he published
  for private circulation a short account of his Waterloo experiences,
  which the Editor had the pleasure of perusing a few years ago when
  staying at Oban, N.B., where the Veteran’s son resided on his own
  property.

Footnote 13:

  Eldest son of Lt.-Col. Ralph Gore, of the 33rd, by Sarah, dau. of
  George Wynne, Mayor of Plymouth, 1791.

Footnote 14:

  Became major in this regt. 1840, and retired on f. p. in 1842 with
  rank of lt.-col. Living in 1865.

Footnote 15:

  Belonged to an Irish family. D. as lt. in the regt., at Hull, 12th
  Sept., 1817, aged 26, and was buried with military honours in Trinity
  Church, Hull.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 55th Foot, 14th Feb., 1822.

Footnote 17:

  Capt. 19th Sept., 1821. Exchanged to 58th Foot, 30th Jan., 1823. Out
  of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 18:

  Lieut. 54th Foot 27th Nov. 1822. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 20:

  This officer’s Waterloo medal was many years in the Editor’s
  collection of war-medals. Lieut. 11th Aug., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 21:

  Major 43rd L.I. 1st July, 1828. Lt.-col. 7th May, 1841. Retd. 17th
  Oct. 1851. K.H. D. at Toronto.

Footnote 22:

  Lieut. 13th Aug., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 23:

  Lieut. 14th Aug., 1815. H. p. 1817. D. in Feb., 1860.

Footnote 24:

  Lieut. 10th Aug., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 25:

  Capt. 17th Nov., 1825. Exchanged to 21st Foot, and was promoted
  bt.-major in 1838. Serving in 1842.

Footnote 26:

  Lieut. 24th Foot, 18th June, 1818. H. p. 1823. Living in 1879.

Footnote 27:

  Lieut. 14th Aug., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 28:

  Lieut. 19th Aug., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 29:

  D. or left the regt. in 1816.

Footnote 30:

  Lieut. 23rd Nov., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 31:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 32:

  _Fazackerley._ Lieut. 1st Rl. Veteran Batt. 19th Oct., 1815. Retd. f.
  p. 1816.


             40TH (OR 2ND SOMERSETSHIRE) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                           (_1st Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                MAJORS.                   Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Arthur Rowley Heyland, K.     10 Nov.  1814 │26 Aug. 1813
   [2] Fielding Browne               19 Jan.  1815 │
               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [3] Sempronius Stretton           11 Sept. 1806 │Maj., 22 Nov. 1813
   [4] Conyngham Ellis, W.           30 Nov.  1809 │
   [5] John Henry Barnett, W.        13 June, 1811 │
   [6] Robert Phillips               25 July, 1811 │
   [7] Wm. Fisher, K.                19 Sept. 1811 │
   [8] Edward Cole Bowen              7 Nov.  1811 │
   [9] Peter Bishop                  12 Mar.  1812 │
  [10] Thos. Decimus Franklyn        10 Nov.  1814 │
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
  [11] John Thoreau                  28 May,  1807 │
  [12] Robert Moore, W.              14 Apr.  1808 │
  [13] Wm. Oliver Sandwith           25 May,  1809 │2 Oct. 1805
  [14] Wm. Manning, Adjt.            14 Sept. 1809 │
  [15] Henry Millar                   5 Sept. 1810 │
  [16] John Richardson                6 Sept. 1810 │
  [17] James Anthony, W.             16 May,  1811 │
  [18] James Mill, W.                18 Sept. 1811 │
  [19] Andrew Eugene Glynne, W.      19 Sept. 1811 │
  [20] Wm. Neilly                    26 Sept. 1811 │
  [21] Richard Hudson                 7 Nov.  1811 │
  [22] Henry Wilkinson               12 May,  1812 │
  [23] John Foulkes                  14 May,  1812 │
  [24] Thos. Campbell, W.             3 Sept. 1812 │
  [25] Hugh Boyd Wray                10 Sept. 1812 │
  [26] Richard Jones                  8 Oct.  1812 │
  [27] Hon. Michael Browne, W.       10 Dec.  1812 │
  [28] Illay Robb, W.                23 Dec.  1812 │
  [29] Donald Macdonald               7 June, 1815 │
  [30] Frederick Ford, K.                          │
  [31] George Hibbert                14 June, 1815 │
  [32] Richard Rudd                  15 June, 1815 │
                ENSIGNS.                           │
  [33] Henry Hemsley, W.             25 Apr.  1813 │
  [34] J.L. Wall                     25 Aug.  1813 │
  [35] Pharaoh Harley                26 Aug.  1813 │
  [36] Henry Glyn                    25 Nov.  1813 │
  [37] Wm. Aldworth Clarke, W.        6 Jan.  1814 │
  [38] Richard Thornhill, W.          7 June, 1815 │
  [39] James Murphy                   8 June, 1815 │
               PAYMASTER.                          │
       Fred. Holland Durand          10 Mar.  1814 │
                SURGEON.                           │
  [40] Wm. Jones                      3 Sept. 1812 │
          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │
       Wm. Barry                      4 Jan.  1810 │
       George Scott                   9 Sept. 1813 │
                     _Facings buff._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Eldest son of Rowland Heyland, of Castle Roe, co. Derry, by his 2nd
  wife (_née_ MacDonald). M. Mary Kyffin, and had issue. His eldest son
  distinguished himself in the Crimea, and the youngest lost an arm at
  the battle of the Alma.

Footnote 2:

  C.B. and bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo, where he commanded his regt.
  during the latter part of the battle. Promoted major in Rifle Brigade.
  Placed on h. p. 1820. Col. 1837. Served throughout the Par. War, and
  commanded the regt. at the assault of Badajoz, for which he received
  the gold medal. In 1848 he received the silver war medal with 7
  clasps. Served also at New Orleans. For some years he held the
  appointment of barrack-master at the Regent’s Park Barracks, and d. in
  London 22nd July, 1864.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. S. Stretton, C.B., of Lenton Priory, Notts.
  Lt.-col. 21st June, 1817. Retired on h. p. 1824. M., 3rd March, 1821,
  the Hon. Catherine Massey, dau. of Nathaniel, 2nd Baron Clarina. (She
  d. 3rd July same year.) D. 6th Feb., 1842. M.I. in Athlone parish
  church. The tablet gives Col. Stretton’s services in the Pa. as
  follows:—“He was present in the following battles, in several of which
  he had the honour to command the above distinguished corps, viz.,
  Vittoria, Pampeluna, Roncevalles, the several actions in the Pyrenees
  [gold medal] heights of St. Antonio, the passage of the Bidassoa, and
  heights above Vera in Spain. The battle of Sara and passage of the
  Nivelle, Bayonne, and passage of the Nive, Orthes, and Toulouse.”

Footnote 4:

  Made bt.-major for Waterloo. D. 1817.

Footnote 5:

  Serving as senior capt. in 1830.

Footnote 6:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 7:

  This officer had his head taken off by a cannon ball in the afternoon
  of Waterloo Day, when standing near the colours. “There goes my best
  friend,” exclaimed a private of Capt. Fisher’s company. “I will be as
  good a friend to you,” said the subaltern, who immediately took the
  deceased’s place in the square. This produced a grim laugh among the
  men, as they knew what the subaltern did not—that the private had
  spoken ironically, for he was an old offender, and had constantly been
  punished by Capt. Fisher.—(_Autobiography of Sergt. W. Lawrence._)

Footnote 8:

  Retd. in 1823.

Footnote 9:

  Of Bishop’s Court, Waterford. Major 7th Sept., 1828. Unattached list
  1829. K.H. M., 7th Sept., 1815, Julia, dau. of Wm. Talbot, of Castle
  Talbot, and had issue. Living 1830.

Footnote 10:

  Retired on h. p. 19th Sept., 1823. Served at Monte Video, Buenos
  Ayres, and in the Pa. D. at Thorpe-le-Soken 3rd Nov., 1857.

Footnote 11:

  Capt. 19th July 1815. Exchanged to 37th Foot 3rd May, 1821. Bt.-major
  in 1837. Serving in 1842.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 20th July, 1815. Paymaster 10th June. 1824. D. in 1845.

Footnote 13:

  H. p., 27th Foot, 28th June, 1821.

Footnote 14:

  H. p., 21st Foot, 30th May, 1822.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. 25th June, 1827. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 16:

  Capt. 17th Nov., 1831. Exchanged to 83rd Foot in 1833. Retd. in 1840.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 18th Nov., 1819.

Footnote 18:

  Was struck by a spent ball in his right eye, which was seriously
  impaired for life. (Pension.) Major 8th Apr., 1826. H. p. 7th May,
  1829.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 1816. This officer lived to receive the Par. medal with nine
  clasps in 1849.

Footnote 20:

  Capt. 63rd Foot 16th Aug., 1831. Sold out 1833. D. 1864. He recd. the
  Par. medal with nine clasps.

Footnote 21:

  H. p., 22nd Foot, 21st March, 1822. D. in 1827.

Footnote 22:

  H. p. 1818. D. in 1861.

Footnote 23:

  H. p., 58th Foot, 26th Oct., 1820.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 25:

  H. p. 1817. D. 10th Feb., 1854.

Footnote 26:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 27:

  H. p. 1816. 4th son of Valentine, 5th Visct. Kenmare. D. 1825.

Footnote 28:

  Superseded soon after Waterloo.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 25th Feb., 1816.

Footnote 30:

  Shot through the spine, but lived a few hours.

Footnote 31:

  Capt. 6th March, 1823. Major 13th Nov., 1835. C.O. during first Afghan
  War. (C.B., bt. lt.-col. and medal). Lt.-col. 22nd July, 1845. D. 12th
  Nov., 1847.

Footnote 32:

  H. p. 25th Feb., 1816.

Footnote 33:

  H. p. 28th Foot, 1822. D. at Chapel House, Ealing, 6th March, 1855.

Footnote 34:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 35:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 36:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 37:

  Lieut. 1st March, 1821. H. p. 25th Oct., 1821.

Footnote 38:

  Served as a volunteer at Waterloo. Lieut. 15th Aug., 1822. Serving in
  1825.

Footnote 39:

  Served as a volunteer at Waterloo. Ens. 47th Foot 26th July, 1820.
  Lieut. 60th Rifles 1827.

Footnote 40:

  D. in Aug., 1862, at Burton on Trent.


             42ND (OR THE ROYAL HIGHLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir Robert Macara, K.C.B.,    16 Apr.  1812 │1 Jan. 1812
       K.                                          │

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Robert Henry Dick, W.         14 July, 1808 │Lt.-Col., 8 Oct.,
                                                   │1812

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Archibald Menzies, W.          5 June, 1805 │

   [4] George Davidson, W.           25 Sept. 1807 │Maj., 4 June, 1813

   [5] John Campbell                  3 Dec.  1807 │Maj., 12 Apr. 1814

   [6] Mungo Macpherson, W.           9 Feb.  1809 │

   [7] Donald McDonald, W.           25 Jan.  1810 │

   [8] Daniel McIntosh, W.            2 May,  1811 │

   [9] Robert Boyle, W.              11 July, 1811 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] Donald Chisholm, W.           10 Oct.  1805 │

  [11] Duncan Stewart, W.             1 Jan.  1807 │

  [12] Donald McKenzie, W.           23 July, 1807 │3 Dec. 1806

  [13] James Young, Adjt., W.        25 May,  1808 │

  [14] Hugh Andrew Fraser, W.         8 Feb.  1809 │

  [15] John Malcolm                  14 Dec.  1809 │

  [16] Alexander Dunbar, W.          25 Jan.  1810 │

  [17] James Brander, W.              2 May,  1811 │

  [18] Roger Stewart                 11 July, 1811 │

  [19] Robert Gordon, K.             29 Aug.  1811 │

  [20] James Robertson               10 Oct.  1811 │

  [21] Kenneth McDougall             12 Feb.  1812 │

  [22] Donald McKay                  28 May,  1812 │

  [23] Alexander Innes               15 Oct.  1812 │

  [24] John Grant                    18 Feb.  1813 │

  [25] John Orr, W.                  29 Apr.  1813 │

  [26] George Gunn Munro, W.         10 June, 1813 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [27] George Gerard, K.             29 Apr.  1813 │

  [28] Wm. Fraser, W.                10 June, 1813 │

  [29] A.L. Fraser, W.               23 Sept. 1813 │16 Sept. 1813

  [30] Alexander Brown               25 Dec.  1813 │

  [31] Alexander Cumming             17 Feb.  1814 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [32] Donald McIntosh, W.            9 July, 1803 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [33] Swinton McLeod                 9 July, 1803 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [34] Donald Macpherson              1 June, 1809 │

  [35] John Stewart                  20 July, 1809 │4 May, 1809

                     _Facings blue._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  The death of Sir R. Macara at Quatre Bras was inexpressibly sad. “He
  was wounded about the middle of the engagement, and was in the act of
  being carried off the field by four of his men, when a party of French
  unexpectedly surrounded and made them prisoners. Perceiving by the
  colonel’s decorations that he was an officer of rank they immediately
  cut him down with his attendants.” His relations obtained Macara’s
  Waterloo medal, which was for long in the Tancred Collection. A
  touching poem to Robert Macara’s memory is to be found in the
  _Waterloo Memoirs_; the following are the last three verses of a pæan
  of praise sung by the Goddess of Fame:—

                   “Here the Goddess ceased her lay;
                   Weak, her wings refused to fly;
                   Faint, her voice forbore to say
                   How Macara dared to die.

                   “Be it, then, to friendship giv’n
                   Such a warrior’s name to save,
                   While ’tis borne on breeze of heav’n
                   That he found a soldier’s grave.

                   “By unequal hosts oppos’d,
                   Still he proved his valour true;
                   For his bright career was clos’d
                   On the plains of Waterloo!”

Footnote 2:

  Succeeded to the command after Macara’s death. C.B. for Waterloo. Had
  served in the Pa., and received the gold medal and one clasp for
  Fuentes d’Onor and Salamanca. A.D.C. to George IV., 1825. H. p.
  unattached list, 1825; maj.-gen., 1837. K.C.B. and K.C.H. Col.-in-Chf.
  73rd Regt. 1845. Killed at the battle of Sobraon, 10th Feb., 1846, at
  the moment of victory. He had m., 11th April, 1818, Eliza., dau. of J.
  Macnabb, of Arthurstone, Perth.

Footnote 3:

  In Capt. George Jones’s _Waterloo Memoirs_ is to be found an
  interesting letter regarding Major Menzies of the 42nd, who was
  dangerously wounded at Quatre Bras. The major’s name is omitted in
  this letter:—“On the 16th June, Major ——, of the 42nd, preferring to
  fight on foot, in front of his men, had given his horse to hold to a
  little drummer-boy. After severe fighting he fell wounded near a brave
  private, Donald Mackintosh. The drummer left the horse to assist his
  friend Donald. A French lancer attempted to seize the horse, on which
  the prostrate Donald exclaimed, ‘Hoot man, ye mauna tak that beast, ’t
  belangs to our captain here!’ The lancer, little heeding, seized the
  horse. Donald, with a last expiring effort, loaded his musket and shot
  the lancer dead. A French cavalry officer, seeing the major bestirring
  himself, rode up and attempted to dispatch him with his sword. As he
  stooped from his saddle, the major seized his leg, and managed to pull
  him off his horse upon him. Another lancer, observing this struggle,
  galloped up and tried to spear the major and relieve his officer; but
  the former, by a sudden jerk and desperate exertion, placed the French
  officer uppermost, who received the mortal thrust below his cuirass
  and continued lying upon the major’s body for near ten minutes, sword
  in hand. A pause in the battle permitted some men of the 42nd to carry
  their officer into the square of the 92nd, where he was found to have
  received sixteen wounds.” Acted as major after Sir R. Macara’s death
  at Quatre Bras until wounded himself. Promoted maj. 18th June, 1815.
  Left the regt. in 1828. D. in 1854. This gallant officer’s claymore
  (an Andrea Ferrara) is in the possession of his grand-daughters, the
  Misses Murray Menzies.

Footnote 4:

  D. from his wounds at Brussels. Pension of £100 per ann. to his widow.

Footnote 5:

  Brother of Sir Guy Campbell, Bart. Made C.B. and bt. lt.-col. after
  Waterloo. Had the gold medal for Orthes. M., 10th March, 1831, Louise,
  Gabrielle Clementine Bernie, of Paris, and had issue. D. 31st March,
  1841, at Marseilles.

Footnote 6:

  Retd. as major 1826. D. at Hastings in Nov., 1844.

Footnote 7:

  H. p. 1819. D. at Musselburgh, 1865.

Footnote 8:

  Retd. 1821. D. at Hamilton, 13th March, 1830.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 1821. D. in London, 11th July, same year.

Footnote 10:

  Capt. Rl. Vet. Batt. 1815. Retd. f. p. 1821. D. at Edinburgh in 1853.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 25th March 1817.

Footnote 12:

  Retd. 1821. D. at Edinburgh, 5th Dec., 1838.

Footnote 13:

  H. p. 1819. D. at Edinburgh, 15th June, 1846.

Footnote 14:

  Capt. 12th Dec., 1822. Maj. 3rd Dec., 1829. H. p. 4th May, 1832. D. at
  Maidstone, as bt. lt.-col., in Jan., 1855.

Footnote 15:

  Afterwards capt. and bt.-maj. same regt. D. 1829.

Footnote 16:

  Quitted the service as lieut. in 1825, and d. at Inverness, 15th Feb.,
  1832.

Footnote 17:

  Afterwards maj. in same regt. Promoted lt.-col. on unattached list
  15th Aug., 1826. Eldest son of John Brander, of Pitgavenny House,
  Elgin, by Margaret, dau. of Alexander Brander, Provost of Elgin. M.,
  Jan., 1834, Margaret Browne. J.P. and D.L. for co. Elgin. D. s. p.,
  1854, at Pitgavenny.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. h. p. 1827. D. in 1833, while serving with the Rl. African
  Corps.

Footnote 19:

  Killed at Quatre Bras. Son of the Rev. John Gordon, of Duffus, N.B.

Footnote 20:

  Adjt. 14th Sept., 1815. Capt. h. p. 13th Feb., 1827. D. as capt. 48th
  Foot, at Chatham, Apr., 1833.

Footnote 21:

  Retd. 1826. D. in Skye, 1827.

Footnote 22:

  Capt. 3rd Dec., 1829. D. at Sterling 13th Feb., 1832.

Footnote 23:

  D. as lieut. h. p. unattached, 1875, as a military Knight of Windsor.

Footnote 24:

  Retired on h. p. 25th Oct., 1821. D. at Stratford, Essex, 13th June,
  1827.

Footnote 25:

  Bn. 3rd April, 1790, at Greenock. His father was a merchant, and his
  mother, Margaret MacGregor, a descendant of the Glengyle family.
  Entered the army from the militia. Accompanied the 1st Batt. 42nd
  Highlanders to the Pa.; was present at Salamanca, the siege of Burgos,
  storming of St. Michael, the retreat to Portugal, and at all the
  actions in the Pyrenees. Was wounded at Burgos, and again severely at
  Waterloo. On the reduction of the army after Waterloo, he joined the
  94th (the old Scots Brigade), and, on a further reduction, was
  appointed to the 8th Rl. Veteran Batt. Capt. Orr was Superintendent of
  the late Scottish Naval and Military Academy for thirty years. M. in
  1816, Jane, 2nd dau. of Alex. Rollock, of Glasgow, and had issue. D.
  7th Dec., 1879.

Footnote 26:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 27:

  Killed at Quatre Bras. Eldest son of George Gerard, jun., of
  Midstrath, N.B.

Footnote 28:

  Of Balmakewan. Attained rank of lt.-col. h. p., and d. in Oct., 1851.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 1825. D. at Edinburgh, 1835.

Footnote 30:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 31:

  H. p. 26th Aug., 1819. D. 1852.

Footnote 32:

  Left the regt. in 1818. D. at Perth in July, 1829.

Footnote 33:

  H. p. 1829. D. in London, 27th Dec., 1847.

Footnote 34:

  H. p. 1835. D. at Chatham, 1839.

Footnote 35:

  H. p. 1818. D. at Perth, 2nd Jan., 1837.


               44TH (OR THE EAST ESSEX) REGIMENT OF FOOT.
                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] John M. Hamerton, W.          31 Mar.  1814 │4 June, 1811

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] George O’Malley               27 Apr.  1815 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1813

               CAPTAINS.                           │

       _John Jessop_                 15 June, 1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [3] Adam Brugh, W.                11 June, 1807 │

   [4] David Power, W.               31 Dec.  1807 │

   [5] Wm. Burney, W.                 2 June, 1814 │

   [6] Mildmay Fane, W.              30 Mar.  1815 │28 July, 1814

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [7] Robert Russell, W.            14 July, 1808 │

   [8] Ralph J. Twinberrow           30 Mar.  1809 │

   [9] Robert Grier                  13 May,  1812 │

       Wm. Tomkins, K.               20 May,  1813 │

  [10] W.B. Strong                   16 Dec.  1813 │

  [11] John Campbell, W.             28 Mar.  1814 │

  [12] Nich. Toler Kingsley          29 Mar.  1814 │

  [13] James Burke                   30 Mar.  1814 │

  [14] Henry Martin                  31 Mar.  1814 │

  [15] Wm. Marcus Hearn               7 July, 1814 │

  [16] Alexander Reddock              2 Feb.  1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [17] James Christie, W.            26 Nov.  1812 │

  [18] Benjamin Whitney, W.          25 Feb.  1813 │

  [19] Gillespie Dunlevie            20 May,  1813 │

  [20] Peter Cooke, K.               18 Nov.  1813 │

  [21] Thomas McCann, Adjt., W.      31 Mar.  1814 │

  [22] James Carnegie Webster, W.    21 Apr.  1814 │

  [23] Alexander Wilson, W.          19 May,  1814 │

  [24] Thos. Aubrey Sinclair          4 May,  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [25] James Williams                 4 Oct.  1810 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [26] Henry Jones                    9 July, 1803 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       Oliver Halpin                 29 Apr.  1813 │11 Apr. 1811

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       John Collins                   1 Dec.  1808 │

       Wm. Newton                    27 Dec.  1810 │

                   _Facings yellow._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Gen. John Millett Hamerton, C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 55th Regt.
  The following obituary notice appeared in the _Illustrated London
  News_ in Feb., 1855:—“This highly-distinguished officer died on the
  27th ult., at Orchardstown, his country residence in Tipperary, after
  a short illness. He was a soldier from his youth, and obtained his
  first commission of cornet at the early age of fifteen, in 1792. In
  1794 he served under the Duke of York; in 1795 embarked for the West
  Indies; in 1796 assisted at the capture of St. Lucia; and, in 1801,
  fought with distinction in Egypt. Subsequently he took part in the Pa.
  campaigns, in command of the 1st Batt. of the 44th. At Waterloo he
  bravely led on the 2nd Batt. of the same gallant regiment, and was
  left for dead on that bloody field, having received several severe
  wounds in the head and thigh. Owing to the attachment of a faithful
  non-commissioned officer, Sergeant Ryan, who brought his wounded and
  insensible commander under the care of skilful medical treatment, he
  slowly recovered, and with his devoted follower returned home. A
  chivalric soldier, an honourable and most amiable gentleman, General
  Hamerton is deeply lamented by all who came within the influence of
  his high and endearing qualities.” He m. Mrs. Hennessy (_née_
  Sullivan), and had issue.

Footnote 2:

  Was twice wounded at Waterloo and had two horses shot under him. C.B.
  Previous to entering the army had served as a volunteer with the
  militia, and did good service during the Irish Rebellion. In 1825
  succeeded to the command of the Connaught Rangers. He was 5th son of
  George O’Malley, of Gornsay, Castlebar, co. Mayo. D. in London, 16th
  May, 1843. M.I. at Castlebar.

Footnote 3:

  Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. D. 1825.

Footnote 4:

  Serving in 1817.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards Col. W. Burney, K.H., retired full pay. Entered the army in
  1808. He served at the capture of Ischia and Procida in 1809; defence
  of Cadiz (1810); Sabugal, Fuentes d’Onor, and the retreat from Burgos;
  subsequently in the campaign in Holland (1814); Quatre Bras, where he
  was twice wounded; and the Burmese war. Commissions dated: Ensign,
  April 28th, 1808; Lieut. May 1st, 1810; Capt. June 2nd, 1814; Maj.
  Sept. 6th, 1827; Lt.-col. Nov. 23rd, 1841; Col. Nov. 28th, 1854.
  Living in 1876.

Footnote 6:

  5th son of the Hon. Henry Fane, M.P., by Anne, dau. of Edward Buckley
  Batson. Served in the Pa., and was present at Vittoria, capture of San
  Sebastian, and Nive. Severely wounded at Quatre Bras. Attained rank of
  Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 54th Regt. D. 12th March, 1868.

Footnote 7:

  Retd. as lieut. f. p. 10th Rl. Veteran Batt. in 1821.

Footnote 8:

  D. 1823 as lieut.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 10:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 11:

  Serving in 1816. Out of the regt. in Jan., 1817.

Footnote 12:

  Serving in 1816. Out of the regt. in Jan., 1817.

Footnote 13:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 14:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 15:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 17:

  Siborne immortalises the name of this officer, in his history of the
  battle of Quatre Bras, as follows:—“A French lancer gallantly charged
  at the colours of the 44th, and severely wounded Ensign Christie, who
  carried one of them, by a thrust of his lance, which, entering the
  left eye, penetrated to the lower jaw. The Frenchman then endeavoured
  to seize the standard, but the brave Christie, notwithstanding the
  agony of his wound, with a presence of mind almost unequalled, flung
  himself upon it—not to save himself, but to preserve the honour of his
  regiment. As the colour fluttered in its fall, the Frenchman tore off
  a portion of the silk with the point of his lance; but he was not
  permitted to bear the fragment beyond the ranks. Both shot and
  bayoneted by the nearest of the soldiers of the 44th, he was borne to
  the earth, paying with the sacrifice of his life for his display of
  unavailing bravery.” Promoted lieut. 26th Oct., 1815. Placed on h. p.
  25th March, 1816. Living 1827.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 28th Apr., 1825. Exchanged to 14th Foot 16th Sept., 1826. Retd.
  as major 1840. D. 1862.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 65th Foot 13th March, 1823.

Footnote 20:

  Killed at Quatre Bras whilst carrying the King’s colours. Bn. 17th
  May, 1789. 4th son of Richard Cooke, of Stourbridge, co. Tipperary, by
  Mary, dau. of Jeremiah Laylor, of Barnagrotty, King’s county.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 24th Feb., 1816.

Footnote 22:

  Aftds. Lt.-Col. Jas. Carnegie Webster, h. p. unattached. Severely
  wounded at Quatre Bras. Living in 1876.

Footnote 23:

  Lieut. 31st May, 1821. Serving 1830.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 25th March, 1816.

Footnote 25:

  H. p. 25th Apr., 1816. D. Dec., 1853.

Footnote 26:

  Qr.-Mr. 92nd Highrs. 3rd Sept., 1830.


                51ST (OR THE 2ND YORKSHIRE WEST RIDING)
                 REGIMENT OF FOOT (LIGHT INFANTRY).[L]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Hugh Henry Mitchell           13 June, 1811 │4 June, 1813

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Samuel Rice                   13 July, 1809 │Lt.-Col., 22 Nov.
                                                   │1813

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] John Thos. Keyt               24 June, 1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [4] James Campbell                 1 Aug.  1805 │

   [5] William Thwaites               2 Jan.  1807 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [6] Richard Storer                13 July, 1809 │

   [7] Jas Henry Phelps              21 Sept. 1809 │

   [8] James Ross                    12 Dec.  1811 │

   [9] John Ross                     15 Apr.  1813 │

  [10] Sam. Beardsley, W.            16 Sept. 1813 │

  [11] Edward Frederick              28 Apr.  1814 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [12] Benjamin B. Hawley            10 May,  1809 │

  [13] Thos. Brook                   18 May,  1809 │

  [14] Francis Minchin               12 July, 1809 │

  [15] Walter George Mahon           13 July, 1809 │

  [16] Wm. Henry Hare                20 July, 1809 │

  [17] Oliver Ainsworth              26 July, 1810 │

  [18] Henry Read                    20 Feb.  1811 │

  [19] Francis Kennedy               21 Feb.  1811 │

  [20] Joseph Dyas                   11 July, 1811 │

  [21] John Flamanck                 12 Dec.  1811 │

  [22] Wm. Henry Elliott             13 Aug.  1812 │

  [23] Wm. Davidson Simpson           3 Dec.  1812 │

  [24] Frederick Mainwaring          15 Apr.  1813 │

  [25] Wm. Jones, Adjt.              16 Apr.  1813 │

  [26] Chas. Wm. Tyndale, W.          3 June, 1813 │

  [27] Henry Martin                  21 Oct.  1813 │

  [28] Harry Hervis Roberts           7 Jan.  1814 │

  [29] Egerton C.H. Isaacson         14 July, 1814 │

  [30] Thos. Troward                 29 Sept. 1814 │

  [31] John Lintott                  25 Dec.  1814 │22 Apr. 1813

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [32] G.F. Berkeley St. John         3 June, 1813 │

  [33] Henry Krause                  21 Oct.  1813 │

  [34] W. Johnstone                   6 Jan.  1814 │25 Oct. 1813

  [35] Alexander Fraser              21 Apr.  1814 │

  [36] John Blair                    14 July, 1814 │18 May, 1814

  [37] Henry Lock                    13 Oct.  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [38] John Gibbs                    15 Feb.  1810 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [39] Thos. Askey                   18 Mar.  1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [40] Richard Webster               14 July, 1808 │26 Oct. 1804

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [41] John F. Clarke                25 June, 1812 │

  [42] Percy FitzPatrick             11 Mar.  1813 │

                  _Facings grass green._  _Lace gold._

Footnote L:

  On the morning of 18th June, 1815, the 51st was composed of 2 field
  officers, 9 captains, 26 subalterns, 6 staff officers, 39 sergts., 18
  drummers, and 521 privates.

Footnote 1:

  Served under Sir Eyre Coote in Egypt, and was present at the taking of
  Alexandria. Commanded the 4th British Brigade at Waterloo. C.B. and K.
  St. Vladimir. M. in 1804, Lady Harriet Somerset, youngest dau. of the
  5th Duke of Beaufort, and had issue. D. in London, 20th April, 1817,
  aged 45.

Footnote 2:

  Served in the Pa., and had the gold medal for Nivelle. Commanded the
  51st at Waterloo. C.B. Lt.-col. of this regt. 1817. D. 7th March,
  1840. He belonged to an old family in Carmarthenshire, and was brother
  to Ralph Rice, Judge at Bombay, who d. 1850.

Footnote 3:

  At Waterloo, Maj. Keyt was appointed by Col. Mitchell to command the
  light companies of the 51st, 14th, and 23rd regts. (which three regts.
  were under Col. Mitchell’s command), and for this command he was made
  bt. lt.-col. and C.B., after Waterloo. Was appointed Lt.-col. of the
  84th Regt. in 1828, and d. in Jamaica in 1835.

Footnote 4:

  Promoted maj. in this regt., 17th May, 1821; lt.-col. in 1881; and
  retired on h. p. 1838. K.H. M.-Gen. 1854. Served in the Pa., and in
  1848 received the silver war medal with five clasps. D. at
  Breslington, 8th May, 1856.

Footnote 5:

  Major 22nd June, 1815. Quitted the service before 1824.

Footnote 6:

  Retd. as capt. 1823. D. at Egham, 1844.

Footnote 7:

  Lt.-col. 1837. D. at Sydney, 1842.

Footnote 8:

  Retd. 1824.

Footnote 9:

  Maj. in this regt., 5th Nov., 1825. Lt.-col. on unattached list 1836,
  served in the Pa. and in the Walcheren expedition. Was severely
  wounded at Waterloo, and is said, “to have lost five brothers in this
  battle.” D. at Hardway, Herts, 16th Sept., 1851, aged 61.

Footnote 10:

  Retd. 1820 as capt.

Footnote 11:

  Edward Henry Frederick was 5th son of Sir John Frederick, Bart., by
  Mary, youngest dau. and co-heir of Richard Garth, of Morden, Surrey.
  Bn. 6th Aug., 1788. Retired on h. p. as capt. 7th April, 1826. D.
  1846.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 7th Apr. 1825. Retd. 1835.

Footnote 13:

  H. p. 1825. D. 21st Dec., 1845 at Askham Bryan, Yorkshire.

Footnote 14:

  Capt. 22nd June, 1815. Out of the regt. before 1824. Barrack-master at
  Sheffield, 1854. D. a military Knight of Windsor, 1865.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. 91st Foot 1830. Retd. same year.

Footnote 16:

  Capt. 18th Nov., 1819. H. p. 25th July, 1822. Living 1846.

Footnote 17:

  Capt. 14th Aug., 1828. Retd. 1843. D. 3rd Dec., 1859, at Launceston,
  Australia.

Footnote 18:

  Paymaster 68th Foot 8th Oct., 1818. Out of the army, 1836.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 1824. D. at Lincoln, 1857.

Footnote 20:

  One of the greatest heroes of the Par. War. Led the Forlorn Hope on
  two successive occasions during the siege of Badajoz, in 1811, when
  Fort San Christoval was assaulted by the British. The second assault,
  on the night of 9th June, is graphically described in _Reminiscences
  of a Subaltern_:—“At ten o’clock at night, 200 men moved forward to
  the assault, Dyas leading the advance. He made a circuit until he came
  exactly opposite to the breach instead of entering the ditch as
  before; a sheep-path, which he remembered in the evening while he and
  Major MacGeechy made their observations, served to guide them to the
  part of the glacis in front of the breach. Arrived at this spot, the
  detachment descended the ditch, and found themselves at the foot of
  the breach; but here an unlooked-for event stopped their further
  progress, and would have been in itself sufficient to have caused the
  failure of the attack. The ladders were entrusted to a party composed
  of a foreign corps in our pay, called ‘the Chasseurs Britanniques’;
  these men, the moment they reached the glacis, glad to rid themselves
  of their load, flung the ladders into the ditch, instead of sliding
  them between the palisadoes; they fell across them, and so stuck fast,
  and being made of heavy green wood, it was next to impossible to
  _move_, much less place them upright against the breach, and almost
  all the storming party were massacred in the attempt. Placed in a
  situation so frightful, it required a man of the most determined
  character to continue the attack. Every officer of the detachment had
  fallen, Major MacGeechy one of the first; and at this moment Dyas and
  about five-and-twenty men were all that remained of the 200.
  Undismayed by these circumstances, the soldiers persevered, and Dyas,
  although wounded and bleeding, succeeded in disentangling one ladder,
  and placing it against what was considered to be the breach, it was
  speedily mounted, but upon arriving at the top of the ladder, instead
  of the _breach_, it was found to be a _stone wall_ that had been
  constructed in the night, and which completely cut off all
  communication between the ditch and the bastion, so that when the men
  reached the top of this wall, they were, in effect, as far from the
  breach as if they had been in their own batteries. From this faithful
  detail it is evident that the soldiers did as much as possible to
  ensure success, and that failure was owing to a combination of
  untoward circumstances over which the troops had no control. Nineteen
  men were all that escaped.” The gallantry of Ensign Joseph Dyas was
  proclaimed to the world in Wellington’s account of the two assaults of
  San Christoval, but for all that a grateful War Office allowed him to
  remain a subaltern for ten years longer!

             “I know a man of whom ’tis truly said
             He bravely twice a storming party led,
             And volunteered both times; now here’s the rub,
             The gallant fellow still remains a sub.”

  In Dec. 1820, owing to the representations of Col. Gurwood and Sir H.
  Torrens, the Duke of York promoted Dyas a capt. in the 2nd Ceylon
  Regt., but impaired health obliged him to retire on h. p. 9th Aug.,
  1821. D. 28th Apr., 1850 at Ballymuir, Ireland.

Footnote 21:

  Major 16th Dec., 1836. H. p. 30th June, 1837. Retd. 1849 as bt.-col.
  unattached.

Footnote 22:

  Commanded the above regiment for many years. Was son of Capt. John
  Elliott, R.N., one of Capt. Cook’s circumnavigators. Attained the rank
  of Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 51st Regt. G.C.B. and K.H. M. in 1831 a dau.
  of W. Adams, of Ipswich. D. in London, 27th Feb., 1874.

Footnote 23:

  Retd. 1821. D. April, 1855.

Footnote 24:

  Afterwards maj. in same regt. Promoted lt.-col. unattached list 1849.
  Served in the Pa. with the 51st. M. Mary, dau. of Lt.-Col. Popham, and
  had issue. D. in Jersey, 25th Sept., 1858. He was 4th son of Edward
  Mainwaring, and grandson of Edward Mainwaring, of Whitmore Hall, co.
  Stafford—a family co-existent with the Norman Conquest.

Footnote 25:

  H. p. 60th Rifles 25th Feb., 1819.

Footnote 26:

  Son of Col. Tyndale of 1st Life Guards. He represented the younger
  branch of an ancient Gloucestershire family which resided at
  Stanchcombe in that county. Retired on h. p. as capt. in 1837, and was
  aftds. maj. on unattached list. For a short time held the post of
  military sec. to Gen. Sir A. Woodford at Gibraltar. M. in 1845 his
  cousin, a dau. of Samuel Phelps. D. s. p. at Gosport, 23rd Dec., 1854.

Footnote 27:

  H. p. 1818. D. 1840.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. 1818. Retd. 1840.

Footnote 29:

  Served in the Pa. Retired on h. p. as lieut. 1823. For some years
  previous to that date he was lieut. to the garrison company in the
  Bahamas. Was subsequently adjt. to the Brecknock Militia. D. at his
  residence, Upper Nutwell, co. Devon, 29th Dec., 1860.

Footnote 30:

  H. p. 1818. Retd. 1829. D. 17th June, 1859.

Footnote 31:

  Capt. 29th May, 1817. Exchanged to 13th Foot, 9 Apr., 1825. D. at
  Dinapore, 9th Aug., 1829.

Footnote 32:

  Second son (by a second wife) of Gen. the Hon. Frederick St. John (son
  of 3rd Visct. Bolingbroke). Acted as orderly officer to Sir H. Clinton
  at Waterloo. Aftds. maj. in the 52nd L.I. Retd. 1840. M. in Jan.,
  1836, Henrietta, third dau. of the Rev. John Jephson, and had issue. A
  Knight of Windsor. D. 24th July, 1866.

Footnote 33:

  H. p. 1818. Retd. 1825. Took Holy Orders and settled in Dublin.

Footnote 34:

  Eldest son of the Rev. H. Johnston, of Malherry, co. Dublin. H. p.
  25th Dec., 1818. M. 2nd July, 1831, Sarah, dau. of Wm. Mills, of
  Cordoxtown, co. Kildare, and granddaughter of Sir John Dillon, Bart.
  D. 1836 at Dublin.

Footnote 35:

  Lieut. 47th Foot, 14th Sept., 1820. Capt. 1833. Retd. 1839.

Footnote 36:

  Lieut. 15th Foot, 8th Apr., 1825. D. at Montreal, 25th May, 1833.

Footnote 37:

  H. p. 60th Foot, 30th Sept., 1819. D. at Mominabad, East Indies, 16th
  May, 1824.

Footnote 38:

  H. p. 1846. D. same year.

Footnote 39:

  H. p. 97th Foot 18th Feb., 1819. Retd. 1830.

Footnote 40:

  Surgeon 4th D.G. 3rd Aug., 1826. D. at Piershill Barracks, Edinburgh,
  14th Feb., 1831.

Footnote 41:

  Inspector-Gen. of Hospitals, 1843. H. p. 1847. D. 29th Oct., 1848.

Footnote 42:

  H. p. 1818.


               52ND (OR THE OXFORDSHIRE) REGIMENT OF FOOT
                           (LIGHT INFANTRY).
                           (_1st Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir John Colborne, K.C.B.     18 July, 1811 │Col., 4 June, 1814

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Charles Rowan, W.              9 May,  1811 │Lt.-Col., 27 Apr.
                                                   │1812

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Patrick Campbell              16 Aug.  1804 │Maj., 21 June,
                                                   │1813

   [4] Wm. Chalmers                  27 Aug.  1807 │Maj., 26 Aug. 1813

   [5] Wm. Rowan, W.                 19 Oct.  1808 │Maj., 3 Mar. 1814

   [6] Charles Diggle, W.            24 May,  1810 │

   [7] John Shedden                   9 May,  1811 │

   [8] James Fred. Love, W.          11 July, 1811 │Maj.,16 Mar. 1815

   [9] James McNair                  11 May,  1812 │

  [10] Edward Langton                12 May,  1812 │

  [11] John Cross                    31 Dec.  1812 │

       _Charles, Earl of March_       8 Apr.  1813 │9 July, 1812

       _Charles Yorke_               24 Dec.  1813 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [12] John Winterbottom, Adjt.,     28 Feb.  1810 │
       W.                                          │

  [13] Charles Dawson, W.            21 June, 1810 │

  [14] Mathew Anderson, W.           19 July, 1810 │12 Oct. 1809

  [15] Charles Kenny                 13 Sept. 1810 │

  [16] George Harley Love            18 Apr.  1811 │

  [17] Wm. Ripley                     2 May,  1811 │

  [18] J.C. Barrett                   9 May,  1811 │

  [19] Wm. Henry Clerke              19 Sept. 1811 │29 July, 1811

  [20] George Hall                    9 May,  1812 │

  [21] Wm. Richmond Nixon            11 May,  1812 │

  [22] George Gawler                 12 May,  1812 │

  [23] George Whichcote               8 July, 1812 │

  [24] Wm. Ogilvy                    17 Sept. 1812 │

  [25] Edward Richard Northey         1 Oct.  1812 │

  [26] Hon. Wm. Browne               26 Nov.  1812 │

  [27] Edward Scoones                24 Dec.  1812 │

  [28] George Campbell, W.           25 Feb.  1813 │

  [29] Wm. Austin                     6 Apr.  1813 │

  [30] John J. Snodgrass              7 Apr.  1813 │

  [31] Jas. Stewart Cargill           8 Apr.  1813 │

  [32] Wm. Crawley Yonge             29 Apr.  1813 │

  [33] Thos. Cottingham, W.           5 Aug.  1813 │

  [34] Charles Holman                11 Nov.  1813 │

  [35] George Moore                   6 Dec.  1813 │

  [36] Edward Mitchell                8 Dec.  1813 │

  [37] Charles Shaw                   9 Dec.  1813 │

  [38] John Hart                     20 Jan.  1814 │

  [39] Geo. Ewing Scott              10 Feb.  1814 │

  [40] Henry Thos. Oakes             11 Feb.  1814 │

  [41] John Rogers Griffiths         12 Apr.  1815 │

  [42] John Burnet                    8 May,  1815 │

  [43] Ronald Stewart                 9 May,  1815 │

  [44] George Robson                 10 May,  1815 │

  [45] Fred. Wm. Love                11 May,  1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [46] Joseph Jackson                 7 Dec.  1813 │

  [47] Thos. Massie                   8 Dec.  1813 │

  [48] Wm. Nettles, K.                9 Dec.  1813 │

  [49] Duncan Macnab                 16 Dec.  1813 │

  [50] John Montague                 10 Feb.  1814 │

  [51] James Frere May               28 Apr.  1814 │

  [52] Eaton Monins                   1 Dec.  1814 │

  [53] Wm. Leeke                      4 May,  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

       James Clark                   17 Apr.  1814 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

       Benjamin Sweeten              22 Apr.  1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       J.B. Gibson                   20 Dec.  1810 │7 Dec. 1809

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       Pryce Jones                   20 Apr.  1809 │

       Wm. Macartney                  3 Sept. 1812 │

  [54] Thos. Brisbane                 3 June, 1813 │

                    _Facings buff._   _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards F.-M. Lord Seaton, G.C.B., G.C.H., &c., and Col.-in-Chf.
  2nd Life Guards. Only son of Samuel Colborne, of Lyndhurst, Hants, by
  Cordelia, dau. of John Garstin, of Castle Leiragh, co. Westmeath. Bn.
  16th Feb., 1778. Educated at Christ’s Hospital and Winchester College.
  Ensign 20th Foot, 1794. Served in Egypt and at the battle of Maida.
  Was military sec. to Sir John Moore. Commanded a brigade in Portugal,
  Spain, and France (gold cross and three clasps). “Of his own accord he
  led the forward movement at Waterloo which determined the fortune of
  the day. When the column of the Imperial Guard was gaining the summit
  of the British position, and was forcing back one of the companies of
  the 95th, Colborne, seeing his left endangered, started the 52nd on
  its advance. Wellington saw the movement, and instantly sent to desire
  him to continue it.” Col. Chesney, the able author of _Waterloo
  Lectures_ in commenting on the steadfast manner in which the British
  Guards faced the advancing Imperial Guards on the summit of the hill,
  says: “While on their left, Colborne, peerless among all the brave men
  who led Wellington’s battalions, coolly formed in line the 52nd, and
  without other prompting than that of his own genius for battle,
  advanced against their flank.” Created Baron Seaton, of Seaton, Devon,
  14th Dec., 1839. F.-M. in 1860. M. 21st June, 1814, Eliz., eld. dau.
  of Rev. James Yonge, rector of Newton Ferrers, and had issue. D. 17th
  April, 1863.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards Sir Charles Rowan, K.C.B. Chief Commissioner of the
  Metropolitan Police. Served as A.A.G. to the Light Division in the Pa.
  (gold medal and two clasps). 5th son of Robert Rowan, of Mullans, co.
  Antrim, by Eliza, dau. of Hill Wilson, of Purdysburn, co. Down. C.B.
  for Waterloo. Retired as bt. lt.-col. D. s. p. 8th May, 1852.

Footnote 3:

  Commanded the 52nd at Nive (gold medal). Placed on h. p. 4th May 1818;
  lt.-col. h. p. 1830. C.B. Living 1842.

Footnote 4:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir W. Chalmers. C.B. and K.C.H. Col.-in-Chf. 78th
  Highlanders. Served in Sicily, in the Walcheren expedition, and
  throughout the Par. War; being present at seventeen engagements.
  Commanded a wing of the 52nd at Waterloo and had three horses shot
  under him. Bt. lt.-col., 18th June, 1815. Eldest son of Wm. Chalmers,
  of Glenericht, Perthshire. Bn. 1787. D. at Dundee, 2nd June, 1860.

Footnote 5:

  Younger brother to Sir Charles Rowan. Aftds. F.-M. Sir Wm. Rowan,
  G.C.B., and Col.-in-Chf. 52nd L.I. Saw much active service all over
  Europe, and was a highly distinguished officer. M., 1811, Martha, dau.
  of John Spong, of Mill Hall, Kent, and d. s. p. at Bath, 26th Sept.,
  1879.

Footnote 6:

  Saw much service in the Pa. Severely wounded at Waterloo. Bt. maj.
  Aftds. maj.-gen., and K.H. D. at Cheltenham, 18th Sept., 1862.

Footnote 7:

  Probably son of Lt.-Col. John Shedden, h. p. 114th Regt. Quitted the
  service before 1824 as bt. maj.

Footnote 8:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir James Love. K.C.B. and K.H. Inspector-Gen. of
  Infantry and Col.-in-Chf. 57th Regt. Served in Sweden, Spain,
  Portugal, and America, and received four severe wounds at Waterloo.
  Aftds. British Resident at Zante, and Lt.-Gov. of Jersey. Bn. 1789.
  Son of James Love by Mary Wyse. M., 1825, Mary, dau. of Thos.
  Heavyside. D. 13th Jan., 1866.

Footnote 9:

  Maj. in same regt. 1822. Lt.-Col. of 73rd Regt., 1830. K.H. Of
  Greenfield, near Glasgow. D. there, 15th April, 1836.

Footnote 10:

  Elder son of Wm. Gore Langton, of Combe Hay, by Jacintha, only child
  of Henry Powell Collins. Bn. 1789. Served at Corunna. H. p. 1817. D.
  3rd March, 1860, at Stapleton Park, Bristol.

Footnote 11:

  Bn. 1787, son of Wm. Cross, of Dartan, co. Armagh, by Mrs. Mary
  Stratford (_née_ Irwin). Served with the 52nd in Sweden, Spain, and
  Portugal (medal with ten clasps). Subsequently commanded the 68th
  Regt., and retired as col. in 1843. K.H. Lt.-Gov. comg. forces in
  Jamaica. D. 27th Sept. 1850.

Footnote 12:

  Bn. in the parish of Saddleworth, Yorkshire, in 1781. Previous to
  enlisting in the 52nd, in 1799, worked as a cloth weaver. Corporal,
  1801; sergt., 1803; sergt.-major, 1805; ensign and adjt., 1808; lieut.
  and adjt., 1810; paymaster, 1821. D. of yellow fever at St. Anne’s,
  Barbados, 26th Nov., 1838. Served all through the Par. War, and was
  wounded on several occasions.

Footnote 13:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 14:

  Retd. 1821.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. 19th Foot 10th Jan., 1834. Out of the said regt. before 1842.

Footnote 16:

  Adjt. 29th May, 1823. Out of said regt. in 1829.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 1st Aug., 1816.

Footnote 18:

  H. p. 18th Feb., 1819.

Footnote 19:

  Eldest son of the Rev. Sir W.H. Clerke, Bart., rector of Bury, in
  Lancashire, by Byzantia, eldest dau. of Thos. Cartwright, of Aynho,
  co. Northampton. Succeeded 1818. M., 1820, Mary, dau. of Geo. Kenrick,
  of Mertyn, co. Flint, and had issue. D. 1861.

Footnote 20:

  Afterwards Maj. 72nd Regt. Living 1830.

Footnote 21:

  H.p. 1819.

Footnote 22:

  Son. of Capt. Samuel Gawler, 73rd Regt., who was killed at the
  storming of Fort Muggerall, 24th Dec., 1804. Bn. 21st July, 1795.
  Educated at R.M. College, Great Marlow. A commission was given to him
  in 1810 in recognition of his father’s services. Served in the Pa.,
  and led the ladder party of the stormers of the 52nd at Badajoz. An
  extract from his journal is given in Moorsom’s _Records of the 52nd
  Regiment_, and graphically describes _the_ crisis of Waterloo. If Col.
  Gawler claims the whole credit for the 52nd, he is at one with the
  rest of the officers of that gallant regt. The truth seems to be that
  there were two distinct columns of Napoleon’s Guards launched against
  our troops at the close of Waterloo, and that whilst one was met and
  routed by our Guards in the centre, the other was attacked in flank by
  the 52nd and hurled back. Promoted from the 52nd to an unattached
  lt.-colonelcy, 12th Aug, 1834. K.H. Col. 1846. Appointed Governor and
  Resident Commissioner of South Australia, April, 1838. Superseded,
  15th May, 1841. M., 21st Sept., 1820, Maria, eldest dau. of John Cox,
  of Derby, and had issue. D. 7th May, 1869. Bd. at Southsea,
  Portsmouth. Miss Gawler (daughter of Col. Gawler) supplied part of the
  above information.

Footnote 23:

  Ensign 10th Jan., 1811. Bn. 21st Dec., 1794. 4th son of Sir Thos.
  Whichcote, Bart., by Diana, dau. of Edward Turnor, of Stoke Rochford,
  co. Lincoln. Whichcote joined the 52nd as a volunteer in Dec., 1810,
  and served with the regt. in the Pa., France, and Flanders, and was
  present in the actions of Sabugal, El Bodon, and Alfayetes, siege and
  storm of Ciudad Rodrigo and of Badajoz, battle of Salamanca, retreat
  from Burgos, battle of Vittoria, action at Vera, battles of the
  Pyrenees, Nivelle, the Nive, Orthes, Tarbes, and Toulouse (medal with
  nine clasps). Capt. 22nd June, 1818. Exchanged to 4th D.G. 25th July,
  1822. Attained the rank of General 5th Dec., 1871. At the time of his
  death, which occurred 26th Aug., 1891, he was “Father of the British
  Army.”

Footnote 24:

  Afterwards the Hon. Wm. Ogilvy, of Loyal, Perthshire. 4th son of
  Walter Ogilvy, _de jure_ Earl of Airlie, by Jane, dau. of John Ogilvy,
  of Murkle. Saw much service in the Pa. Previous to entering the army
  served in the navy. Capt. 5th Oct., 1815. Exchanged to the Cape Corps.
  H. p. 1816. His eldest brother, in 1826, was, by Act of Parliament,
  recognised as Earl of Airlie with the other dignities appertaining to
  that title. M.P. for St. Andrews and the eastern burghs. D. in April,
  1871.

Footnote 25:

  Afterwards in the 3rd Foot Guards. Served in the Pa. and the South of
  France. Of Woodcote House, Epsom, Surrey. Bn. 8th Feb., 1795. Eldest
  son of the Rev. Edward Northey, Canon of Windsor, by Charlotte Taylor
  (sister of Gen. Sir Herbert Taylor). High Sheriff for Surrey, 1856.
  Was twice md., and by his wife (Charlotte, dau. of Gen. Sir George
  Anson, G.C.B.) had issue. D. in Dec., 1878.

Footnote 26:

  3rd son of Valentine, 5th Viscount Kenmare. M., 26th April, 1826,
  Anne, dau. of Thos. Segrave. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 27:

  Afterwards Maj. 81st Regt. Quitted the service with that rank. Living
  1876.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. 49th Foot 7th Aug., 1823.

Footnote 29:

  Served at the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo. Lieut. 97th Foot 25th March,
  1824. Capt. 51st Foot 26th Sept., 1834. Retd. on h. p. as major 42nd
  Highlanders 25th July, 1845.

Footnote 30:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. Snodgrass. M. Maria, dau. of Maj.-Gen. Sir
  Archibald Campbell, Bart. D. in Nova Scotia, April, 1841, whilst
  holding the appointment of D.Q.M.G. in that colony.

Footnote 31:

  H. p. 25th July, 1816.

Footnote 32:

  Afterwards Colonial Sec. at Cape of Good Hope. Son of the Rev. Duke
  Yonge. Served in the Pa. Retired on h. p. as lieut. in 1823. D. 26th
  Feb., 1854.

Footnote 33:

  Placed on h. p. 1818. Served in the Pa., and in 1848 received the war
  medal with eight clasps. D. in Apr., 1861.

Footnote 34:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 35:

  Lieut. 32nd Foot 29th Sept., 1817. Paymaster, 19th Oct., 1826. Serving
  in 1846.

Footnote 36:

  H. p. 1816. Lieut. 47th Foot, 10th Apr., 1818.

Footnote 37:

  Afterwards Sir Charles Shaw, K.T.S. Served in the Pa. In 1831 joined
  the Liberation Army of Portugal, in the Azores, as Col. of Marines on
  board the fleet of Sir George Sartorius, and commanded a regt.
  throughout the civil war in Portugal. Served in the Spanish Legion
  from 1835. 3rd son of Charles Shaw, of Ayr, North Berwick. M. Louisa,
  only dau. of Major Martin Curry, 67th Regt. D. at Homburg in 1871, and
  was buried there with military honours.

Footnote 38:

  Lieut. 4th Lt. Dns., 5th July, 1821. Capt. 16th June, 1825. H. p.
  1827.

Footnote 39:

  Lieut. 25th Foot 13th Dec., 1821. Serving 1824.

Footnote 40:

  Placed on h. p. 1817. Eldest son of Sir Henry Oakes, Bart., by
  Dorothea, dau. of George Bowles, of Mount Prospect, co. Cork. M., 1st
  May, 1817, Frances, 5th dau. of Wm. Douglas, of Teddington, Middlesex,
  and had issue. Succeeded his father in 1827. D. 30th Sept., 1850.

Footnote 41:

  Adjt. to the 52nd after the battle of Waterloo, _vice_ Winterbottom
  wounded. H. p. 1816. Living 1830.

Footnote 42:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 43:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 44:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 45:

  H. p. 1816. D. 1829.

Footnote 46:

  Retd. before 1st Jan., 1816.

Footnote 47:

  Lieut. 28th Sept., 1815. Retd. before 1st Jan., 1817.

Footnote 48:

  One of the five sons of Capt. Robert Nettles, of Nettleville, co.
  Cork, by Esther, dau. of John Conran, of Dublin. Killed whilst
  carrying the King’s colours, which were aftds. found under his body on
  the field of battle.

Footnote 49:

  Lieut. 17th July, 1817. H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 50:

  The following creditable conduct of this young officer is narrated by
  Capt. Moorsom in the _History of the 52nd_:—“Ensign John Montague was
  ordered to the rear with a detachment of invalids a few days before
  Waterloo, and had gone back a day’s march, when he met a party
  proceeding to the front to join the 52nd. As an engagement was daily
  expected he asked the date of commission of the young officer
  proceeding to Waterloo, and, finding himself the senior, assumed
  command of the whole—directed the junior to proceed with the invalids,
  while he (Montague) returned to his regt. By so doing he was able to
  be present at the great conflict.” Capt. in 40th Regt. 7th Aug., 1823.
  Living 1830.

Footnote 51:

  Younger bro. of Sir John May, R.A. Bn. 31st March, 1898. Lieut. 29th
  Jan., 1818. Capt. 57th Foot, 1st Aug., 1826. Exchanged to 41st Foot
  10th Aug. same year. Major of last-named regt. at time of his death,
  which occurred on board the _Orontes_, near the Cape of Good Hope, 2nd
  June, 1837.

Footnote 52:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Eaton Monins, younger brother to Wm. Monins of
  18th Hussars. D. at Walmer 16th June, 1861.

Footnote 53:

  Son of Samuel Leeke, of Havant, Hants. Promoted lieut. 20th Nov.,
  1823. Quitted the service 1824. Entered as fellow commoner at Queen’s
  College, Cambridge, 1825. Ordained Jan., 1829, to curacy of West Ham,
  Pevensey. Curate of Brailsford, Derby, 1831. Incumbent of Holbrooke,
  co. Derby, 1840. M., in Oct., 1828, to Mary Anne, dau. of John Cox, of
  Derby. D. at Holbrooke 6th June, 1879. (Communicated by Miss Gawler.)
  Mr. Leeke wrote and published _Lord Seaton’s Regiment at Waterloo_, a
  book that attracted considerable attention at the time.

Footnote 54:

  H. p. 1830. D. 1855.


               69TH (OR THE SOUTH LINCOLNSHIRE) REGIMENT
                                OF FOOT.
                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Charles Morice, K.             4 June, 1813 │Col. 4 June, 1814

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] George Muttlebury             28 Nov.  1811 │Lt.-Col., 17 Mar.
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] J. Lewis Watson                9 July, 1803 │Maj., 4 June, 1813

   [4] Henry Lindsay, W.              9 July, 1803 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

       _Hon. Wm. Curzon_, K.         17 Dec.  1812 │

   [5] Geo. Sackville Cotter          3 June, 1813 │

   [6] Charles Cuyler                10 June, 1813 │

   [7] Benjamin Hobhouse, K.         12 Aug.  1813 │

   [8] George Ulrick Barlow          30 Dec.  1813 │

   [9] Robert Blackwood, K.           8 Nov.  1813 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] Wm. Harrison                  27 Jan.  1808 │

  [11] Roger Franklyn                18 Apr.  1810 │

  [12] Stephen Parker                11 Apr.  1811 │

  [13] Brooke Pigot, W.               9 May,  1811 │

  [14] Christopher Busteed, W.       25 Jan.  1813 │15 Jan. 1813

  [15] Neil Roy                       1 July, 1813 │

  [16] Chas. Wm. Ingle                1 Feb.  1814 │

  [17] Joseph Hill                    2 Feb.  1814 │

  [18] Henry Oldershaw, Adjt.         3 Feb.  1814 │

  [19] Charles Lenox Dickson         21 Apr.  1814 │

  [20] Edm. Martin Wightwick, K.      5 May,  1814 │

  [21] John Stewart, W.              10 Nov.  1814 │

  [22] Henry Anderson, W.            15 June, 1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [23] Edward Hodder, W.             29 July, 1813 │

  [24] Wm. Bartlett                   3 Feb.  1814 │

  [25] Charles Seward                24 Feb.  1814 │

  [26] Henry Duncan Keith            21 Apr.  1814 │

  [27] Geo. S.H. Ainslie             10 Nov.  1814 │

  [28] Christopher Clarke, W.                      │
       (Volunteer).                                │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [29] Philip Vyvian                 28 Jan.  1813 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [30] Matthew Stevens                6 Dec.  1810 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       Clement Banks                  5 June, 1806 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

       James Bartlett                16 July, 1812 │

                     _Facings green._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Had been wounded in the previous year in the night attack on
  Bergen-op-Zoom. Killed at Quatre Bras. His death, and that of many of
  the men of the 69th, was entirely due to the inexperience of the
  Prince of Orange, who stopped Col. Morice from forming square, and
  ordered him to re-form column.

Footnote 2:

  C.B. for Waterloo. “Section after section of the 69th was swept off by
  the enemy’s artillery at Waterloo, whilst the French cavalry
  repeatedly surrounded the devoted regt.; but whenever the smoke
  cleared off, there it stood firm and undaunted.” Lt.-Col. of this
  regt. in July, 1817. M., 31st October, 1828, Mrs. Brown, of Cavendish
  Place, Bath. D. 11th Jan., 1854.

Footnote 3:

  Bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. Maj. 71st Highlanders, 1819. Retd. on h.
  p., 1829. D. at Leasingham Hall, Lincoln, 12th April, 1842.

Footnote 4:

  Severely wounded at Quatre Bras in defending the colours. H. p. 16th
  Dec., 1819. His name disappeared from the _Army List_ after 1827.

Footnote 5:

  2nd son of the Rev. George Sackville Cotter, by Margaret, dau. of
  Bayly Rogers, of Cork. Placed on h. p. 1st Dec., 1816. Aftds. settled
  in Canada, where he held the rank of col. in the volunteers. His
  experiences at Quatre Bras and Waterloo are given in Capt. (aftds.
  Gen. Sir Wm.) Butler’s _Historical Events Connected with the 69th
  Regiment_. D. in Canada, 9th April, 1869, leaving issue by his wife,
  Jane, dau. and co-heir of Wm. Crofts, of Danesfort, co. Cork.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards Sir Charles Cuyler, Bart. Eldest son of Gen. Sir Cornelius
  Cuyler, Bart., by Anne, dau. of Maj. Grant. M., 6th Feb., 1823,
  Catherine, dau. of the Rev. Fitzwilliam Halifax, and had issue.
  Lt.-Col. 69th Regt., 1826. D. 23rd July, 1862.

Footnote 7:

  2nd son of Sir Benjamin Hobhouse, Bart., by his first wife, Charlotte,
  dau. and heir of Samuel Cam, of Chantry House, Wilts. Acted as orderly
  officer to Sir Colin Halkett at Waterloo, and being a conspicuous
  figure on a fine horse, was a mark for the enemy’s bullets.

Footnote 8:

  Eldest son of Sir George Barlow, Bart., of Fort William, Bengal, by
  Eliz., dau. of Burton Smith. Bn. 8th Oct., 1791. Exchanged to the 4th
  Lt. Dns., 5th April, 1821. M., 27th Feb., 1817, Hilare, 3rd dau. of
  Capt. Sir R. Barlow, R.N., K.C.B. D. s. p. in India, 1824. His widow
  remarried, 1829, Wm., Earl Nelson.

Footnote 9:

  Eldest son of the Hon. and Rev. Hans Blackwood, who succeeded his
  brother, in 1836, as Baron Dufferin. Bn. 13th July, 1788. Buried in
  the orchard at Hougomont.

Footnote 10:

  Capt. 13th Aug., 1815. H. p. 25th Nov., 1816.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 25th March, 1826.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 62nd Foot, 25th June, 1830. D. at Pau in May, 1853.

Footnote 13:

  Capt. 29th Aug., 1826. Retd. f. p. Nov., 1840.

Footnote 14:

  D. at Mullingar as lieut. in above regt., 4th Nov., 1828. His Waterloo
  medal was formerly in the Tancred collection.

Footnote 15:

  Serving in 1824. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 25th April, 1826.

Footnote 17:

  Retd. 1835 as capt.

Footnote 18:

  Qr.-mr. 33rd Foot 3rd Aug., 1832. Serving 1842.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. 7th Sept., 1826. D. May, 1860.

Footnote 20:

  D. 17th June, 1815, from wounds received at Quatre Bras; 5th son of
  Wm. Wightwick, of New Romney, Kent.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 22:

  “Bn. in co. Kilkenny. Obtained his ensigncy through the interest of
  the Marquis of Ormonde. Served at the bombardment of Antwerp and at
  Bergen-op-Zoom. Slightly wounded at Quatre Bras by a ricochetting
  bullet; served as a lieut. of the light company at Waterloo, and near
  the close of the battle was shot through the left lung, the ball
  making its exit at the back, breaking the scapula. He aftds. served in
  the 75th Foot. Was for 26 years commandant of the Invalid Depôt at
  Chatham, and d. in 1860, having attained the rank of colonel.”
  Communicated by above officer’s son Major-Gen. E.A. Anderson.

Footnote 23:

  7th son of Geo. Hodder, of Fountainstown, co. Cork. H. p. lieut.,
  1826. Living in 1855.

Footnote 24:

  Lieut. 10th Aug., 1815. H. p. 25th April, 1826.

Footnote 25:

  Lieut. 11th Aug., 1815. H. p. 25th Nov., 1816.

Footnote 26:

  Lieut. 14th Aug., 1815. Exchanged to 2nd Foot, 25th Jan., 1825.
  Serving 1830.

Footnote 27:

  Afterwards served in the 1st Dragoons. Assumed the surname of
  Harcourt. Placed on h. p. as cornet, 1822. D. at Bedford, 29th Dec.,
  1867, aged 72.

Footnote 28:

  A cadet from the Military College. Greatly distinguished himself at
  Quatre Bras, where the 69th was badly cut up by Kellermann’s
  Cuirassiers. He killed three cuirassiers before he himself fell
  covered with 22 sabre cuts. Recovered from his wounds, and was
  rewarded with an ensigncy in the 42nd Highlanders. He d. in 1831 as a
  subaltern in 33rd Foot. Sir W. Butler’s _Records of 69th Regt._
  (London, 1870).

Footnote 29:

  Assumed the surname of Robinson. H. p. 88th Foot, 28th June, 1827.

Footnote 30:

  This was “the same man who, eighteen years before, at St. Vincent, had
  broken the stern galley window of the _San Nicholas_, and led the way
  for Nelson to the quarter-deck of the Spanish vessel.” He appears to
  have been a Scotchman, with a keen sense of humour, as, when a man was
  killed by his side, by a long shot from the enemy, on the morning of
  Waterloo Day, he quietly remarked, “Aweel, it is time for a
  respectable non-combatant to gang awa’!”—Sir W. Butler’s _Records of
  69th Regt._ D. as Qr.-mr. 69th Foot, at Cannanore, India, 1821.


           71ST (HIGHLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT (LIGHT INFANTRY).

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Thomas Reynell, W.             5 Aug.  1813 │Col., 4 June, 1813

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] Arthur Jones, W.              22 June, 1809 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

   [3] Leslie Walker                  2 Sept. 1813 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [4] Samuel Reed                   29 Sept. 1808 │29 Nov. 1806

   [5] Joseph T. Pidgeon              1 Dec.  1808 │

   [6] Archibald Armstrong           10 May,  1809 │

   [7] Donald Campbell, W.           22 June, 1809 │

       _Edmund L’Estrange_, K.        6 July, 1809 │Maj., 12 Apr. 1814

   [8] Wm. Alex. Grant, W.           12 Oct.  1809 │

   [9] James Henderson, W.           19 Oct.  1809 │

  [10] Augustus J. MʻIntyre          17 May,  1810 │

  [11] Charles Johnstone, W.         10 Dec.  1812 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

  [12] Alexander Grant               15 Apr.  1813 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [13] Joseph Barailler, W.           7 Feb.  1808 │

  [14] Loftus Richards               21 Apr.  1808 │

  [15] John Raleigh Elwes, W.        12 May,  1808 │

  [16] Charles Stewart               29 Dec.  1808 │

  [17] Robert Baldwin                11 May,  1809 │

  [18] Wm. Crosbie Hanson             6 July, 1809 │

  [19] Robert Lind, W.               10 Oct.  1809 │

  [20] John Roberts, W.              12 Oct.  1809 │

  [21] James Coates, W.              13 Oct.  1809 │

  [22] John Fraser                   17 Oct.  1809 │

  [23] Edward Gilborne               18 Oct.  1809 │

  [24] John Witney                   19 Oct.  1809 │

  [25] William Long                  14 June, 1810 │

  [26] Robert Law, W.                27 May,  1811 │

  [27] Charles T. Cox                29 May,  1811 │

  [28] Carique Lewin, W.             27 June, 1811 │

  [29] Wm. Woolcombe                  9 Sept. 1811 │

  [30] Wm. Torriano                  12 Dec.  1811 │

  [31] George Wm. Horton             23 Jan.  1812 │25 July, 1811

  [32] John Coote, W.                27 May,  1812 │

  [33] Wm. Anderson, Adjt., W.        7 Aug.  1812 │

  [34] Chas. Moorhead                 3 Sept. 1812 │

  [35] David Soutar                  24 Sept. 1812 │

  [36] Norman Campbell               14 Apr.  1814 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [37] Abraham Moffatt                5 Aug.  1813 │

  [38] Wm. Smith                      1 Sept. 1813 │

  [39] Henry Walker Thompson         16 Sept. 1813 │

       John Todd, K.                 18 Nov.  1813 │

  [40] John Barnett                  25 Nov.  1813 │

  [41] Archibald M. Henderson        25 Dec.  1813 │

  [42] John Spalding                 28 Jan.  1814 │

  [43] John Impett                   14 Apr.  1814 │

  [44] Anthony R. L’Estrange          7 Dec.  1814 │

  [45] Rob. Copley (Volunteer)                     │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [46] Hugh Mackenzie                 8 Nov.  1798 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

       Wm. Gavin                      2 Apr.  1812 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [47] Arthur Stewart                 3 Sept. 1812 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       John Winterscale               8 Feb.  1810 │

       Samuel Hill                   22 Mar.  1810 │

                    _Facings buff._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir T. Reynell, Bart., K.C.B., Col.-in-Chf. 71st L.I.
  3rd son of Thomas Reynell (who was killed at the battle of Saratoga,
  in America, in 1777), by Anne, dau. of Samuel Coutty, of Kinsale.
  Served in Egypt in 1801. Recd. the orders of St. George of Russia and
  Maria Theresa of Austria for his services at Waterloo, in addition to
  the C.B. Commanded a division at the siege of Bhurtpore, and received
  the thanks of both Houses of Parliament. M., 12th Feb., 1831, Lady
  Eliz. Pack, widow of Maj.-Gen. Sir Denis Pack, and d. s. p.

Footnote 2:

  The following memoir of Col. Jones’s services appeared in the _United
  Service Journal_ for 1837:—“Nov. 12th, on Lake Erie, Upper Canada,
  Lt.-Col. Arthur Jones, C.B., late of the 71st Highland L.I. This
  officer was appointed Ensign 36th Foot, 1st Jan., 1795; Lt. 71st Foot
  5th Oct., 1795; Capt., 24th March, 1803; Maj., 22nd June, 1809; and
  Bt. Lt.-Col., 4th June, 1814. He served at Madras from his first
  appointment to October, 1797, when his regiment embarked for Europe.
  In August, 1805, he sailed, with the expedition under Lt. Gen. Sir D.
  Baird, for the Cape of Good Hope; he was present with the regt. at the
  action on the 8th Jan., 1806; and also at the surrender of the town
  and castle of Cape Town on the 10th. He embarked at the Cape in April
  following, with his regt., on the expedition to South America, under
  Gen. Beresford. On the 25th June, the landing of this small force was
  effected at the point of Quilmes, up the River Plate, without
  opposition. He was present in the affairs of the 26th and 27th, which
  terminated in the surrender of the city of Buenos Ayres to the
  British; and was with the troops employed in dispersing the enemy from
  the vicinity of the city, on the 1st August; at the defending of the
  city on the 10th, 11th, and 12th, when the British were obliged to
  capitulate, and become prisoners of war; and was marched, as such, a
  considerable distance into the interior of the country. He next served
  with the army in Portugal, and was present at the action of Roleia,
  and battle of Vimiero. He served under the late Sir John Moore in
  Spain; was present the whole of that campaign, and at the battle of
  Corunna. He embarked in July, 1809, on the expedition to the Scheldt,
  and was present at the siege of Flushing; he returned with his regt.
  to England in December, and in May, 1810, was ordered to join the 2nd
  batt. in Scotland; and shortly after the command of the batt. devolved
  on him. In Jan., 1814, he proceeded to join the 1st batt. in Spain,
  landed at St. Sebastian, and marched in charge of a detachment for the
  2nd division of the army, which he joined in Aire on the 10th of
  March, and served with it in the different operations that took place
  against the enemy from that period until a short time after the battle
  of Toulouse, 10th April, 1814. In Feb., 1815, he embarked with the
  71st Light Infantry for North America, but was countermanded, and they
  proceeded in April to Belgium, and he was present with it at the
  battle of Waterloo. He remained with the regt., which formed part of
  the Army of Occupation, until October, 1818, when he embarked with it
  for England, and for Ireland in May, 1822. The command of the regt.
  devolved on him in May, 1824, when he embarked with it for North
  America, and was promoted lt.-col., 2nd June, 1825; he remained in
  command of the regt. till June, 1831. Lt.-Col. Jones was wounded when
  capt. at the battle of Vimiero; and wounded severely when bt. lt.-col.
  at the battle of Waterloo, late in the evening. For his services, and
  particularly for his conduct at Waterloo, stated by Maj.-Gen. Sir F.
  Adam (then Commander of the 3rd British Light Brigade) in a letter to
  the Duke of Wellington, and from his Grace’s recommendation in
  consequence, Lt.-Col. Jones was appointed a Companion of the Bath.”

Footnote 3:

  C.B. for Waterloo. Exchanged in 1819 to 54th Regt. Bt. lt.-col., 31st
  Aug., 1815. Lt.-col., unattached, 1st July, 1828. Living 1830.

Footnote 4:

  Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. Retd. on h. p. 1821. Lt.-col., h. p. 1837. D.
  13th July, 1842.

Footnote 5:

  Retd. as lt.-col. in 1841 by the sale of his commission. He held the
  Par. medal with 8 clasps. D. in Oct., 1850.

Footnote 6:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 7:

  Retd. f. p. 2nd Rl. Veteran Batt., 1821.

Footnote 8:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 9:

  Serving as senior capt. in 1830. Out of the regt. before 1842.

Footnote 10:

  H. p. 56th Foot 31st Dec., 1818.

Footnote 11:

  Capt. and bt.-major h. p. Rifle Brigade, 6th Apr., 1820.

Footnote 12:

  Serving in 1830. Out of the regt. before 1842.

Footnote 13:

  Capt. in 37th Foot in 1820. Living 1825.

Footnote 14:

  Belonged to the family of “Richards of Macmine,” co. Wexford. Placed
  on h. p. 25th Feb., 1816. Living 1825.

Footnote 15:

  D. a few days after Waterloo from his wounds. Youngest son of Col.
  Elwes, and brother of Sir W. Elwes, Bart. He had been only ten months
  married to a dau. of Col. Aird, Rl. Waggon Train.

Footnote 16:

  Capt. 27th July, 1820. Major 24th May, 1836. H. p. 24th Apr., 1838. D.
  24th Dec., 1851, as lt.-col.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 7th Fusiliers, 6th June, 1816.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 16th May, 1822. Serving 1830.

Footnote 19:

  Belonged to a respectable family in the county of Antrim. “He received
  a grape shot at Waterloo, weighing 10 oz., which he kept as a relic,
  hooped in silver. The shot entered at the breast, and was cut out at
  the shoulder three days after.” D. at Waterloo Cottage, Cookstown, co.
  Antrim, 3rd July, 1851, aged 70.

Footnote 20:

  Capt. 7th Apr., 1825. H. p. 6th June, 1827. D. as bt.-major 16th Jan.,
  1854.

Footnote 21:

  Was fifteen years a lt. in this regt. M. the only dau. of John Wilson
  town clerk of Lanark; she d. at Lanark in Dec., 1815.

Footnote 22:

  Joined the 71st Regt. as a private when sixteen years of age. Eight
  years after he received an ensign’s commission for distinguished
  gallantry. At the taking of the Cape of Good Hope was one of a party
  of thirty who volunteered to storm a battery. John Fraser was the only
  man of this Forlorn Hope who lived to return, and he was not
  unwounded. At Buenos Ayres he was publicly complimented by Sir Denis
  Pack for his conspicuous gallantry. Placed on h. p. before 1820, and
  d. at Edinburgh, 20th June, 1824.

Footnote 23:

  H. p. 1818.

Footnote 24:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 25:

  Capt. 31st Oct., 1822. Retd. as h. p. maj. 9th Foot, 1838. D. in
  March, 1860.

Footnote 26:

  Capt. 18th Oct., 1821. Exchanged to 33rd Foot 20th March, 1823. Capt.
  Ceylon Rifles 25th Sept., 1824. Serving 1830.

Footnote 27:

  Afterwards Lt. C.T. Cox, h. p. 71st Highland Light Infantry. Entered
  the Army in 1809. Was engaged in numerous battles during the campaigns
  from 1810 to 1815, including the retreat to and the occupation of the
  lines of Torres Vedras, Vittoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, Orthes,
  Tarbes, and Toulouse. At Vittoria he was sev. wnded, a musket ball
  having passed through the lungs and lodged in the body. He was taken
  prisoner, but the enemy being hard pressed, he was left on the field.
  He was present at the capture of Paris. Commissions dated: Ensign,
  June 29, 1809; Lt., May 29, 1811. D. 1875.

Footnote 28:

  3rd son of James Lewin, of Cloghans, co. Mayo. Retd. on h. p. as a lt.
  from 19th Lt. Dns. in 1822. D. s. p. 1844.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 25th Oct., 1821.

Footnote 30:

  Son of Capt. Torriano, 30th Foot, who was killed in action at Toulon,
  15th Oct., 1793, and grandson of Capt. C. Torriano, R.A., wounded and
  disabled for life at the battle of Laffeldt, 1st July, 1747. Lieut.
  Wm. Torriano joined the 1st Batt. 71st in 1811 and proceeded to
  Portugal. Promoted lieut. into 2nd Batt. at home, but remained with
  1st Batt. in the field until the return of the army from France. Was
  present at Arroyos des Molinos, Almaraz, with covering army before
  Badajoz; severely wounded at Vittoria and taken prisoner, but shortly
  after retaken at Nive; Bayonne (twice wounded); Orthes, and Toulouse,
  besides many minor affairs. A French reserve battery was captured by
  the 71st towards the close of the battle of Waterloo, and Siborne
  (Vol. II., p. 234) narrates how “some men of the right flank company
  of the 71st, under Lieut. Torriano, immediately turned round one of
  the guns, which was then discharged into the retiring columns of the
  Imperial Guard by Capt. Campbell, A.D.C. to Major-General Adam, and
  was, there is reason to believe, the last French gun fired on that
  day.” Adjt. 18th Oct., 1821. Retd. 1824 by the sale of his commission.
  D. at Budleigh Salterton, Devonshire, 1862. Above information
  communicated by Col. C. Torriano, late R.A.

Footnote 31:

  2nd son of Thomas Horton, of Howroyde, co. York, by Lady Mary Gordon,
  dau. of George, 3rd Earl of Aberdeen. Served in the Pa. Capt. 81st
  Regt. 1820; Bt.-maj. 1821; Lt.-col., unattached, 1826; Col. 1842. M.,
  1826, Frances, dau. of Rev. Wm. Garnier, rector of Rookesbury, Hants,
  and had issue. Living 1876.

Footnote 32:

  Retd. f. p. 1821. D. at Halifax, N.S., 1st Oct., 1852.

Footnote 33:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 34:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 35:

  Lieut. Connaught Rangers 7th Jan., 1819. Capt. 2nd Feb., 1830.
  Paymaster 71st Foot 1843. D. 16th Dec., 1849.

Footnote 36:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 37:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 38:

  H. p. 1816. D. in Apr., 1860.

Footnote 39:

  Lieut. h. p. 74th Foot, 1822.

Footnote 40:

  Lieut. 23rd Nov., 1815. H. p. 61st Foot 12th Sept., 1822. D. as
  lt.-col. 3rd West York Militia, at Dublin, 24th Feb., 1855.

Footnote 41:

  H. p. 27th Foot 22nd May, 1817.

Footnote 42:

  Lieut. 25th Foot 30th March, 1826. Serving 1830.

Footnote 43:

  Capt. 6th Feb., 1835. H. p. Jan., 1841.

Footnote 44:

  Afterwards maj. in this regt., and retired on f. p. in 1852. Youngest
  brother to Maj. L’Estrange, of same regt., who fell at Waterloo. D. at
  Edinburgh, 1873.

Footnote 45:

  Commissioned ensign in above regt. 22nd June, 1815. H. p. 1816. Living
  1830.

Footnote 46:

  H. p. 1824. D. 25th June, 1854.

Footnote 47:

  Inspector-Gen. of Hospitals 1845. H. p. same year. D. 1854.


                   73RD (HIGHLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT.
                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Wm. George Harris, W.         29 Dec.  1806 │Col., 4 June, 1814

                MAJORS.                            │

       _Dawson Kelly_                31 Oct.  1811 │

   [2] Arch. John Maclean, W.        28 May,  1812 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Henry Coane, W.                8 Mar.  1810 │8 Feb. 1810

       Alexander Robertson, K.       21 Nov.  1810 │

   [4] Wm. Wharton, W.               13 Aug.  1812 │

       John M. Kennedy, K.            8 Oct.  1812 │

   [5] John Garland, W.              26 Nov.  1813 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [6] Richard Leyne                  2 Feb.  1809 │

   [7] Jos. Wm. H. Strachan, K.      11 Oct.  1810 │26 Oct. 1809

       John R. McConnell, W.          8 Aug.  1811 │

       John Acres, K.                20 Nov.  1811 │

       Matthew Hollis, K.            12 Dec.  1811 │

   [8] Joseph Dowling                13 Aug.  1812 │

   [9] Thos. Reynolds, W.            10 Mar.  1814 │

  [10] Donald Browne, W.             24 Mar.  1814 │

  [11] John Y. Lloyd, W.              4 Aug.  1814 │

  [12] Robert Stewart (_sic_)        11 Aug.  1814 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [13] Robert Greville Hesilrige,    17 Sept. 1810 │
       W.                                          │

  [14] Wm. MacBean, W.                1 Apr.  1813 │

  [15] Thomas Deacon, W.              5 Apr.  1813 │

  [16] Chas. Bedford Eastwood, W.     6 Apr.  1813 │

  [17] George Dandridge Bridge,       7 Apr.  1813 │
       W.                                          │

  [18] George Hughes                 29 Apr.  1813 │

       Wm. Lawson Lowe, K.           19 Aug.  1813 │

  [19] Aldworth Blennerhassett       23 Mar.  1814 │

  [20] Charles Page, K.              10 Aug.  1814 │

  [21] Patrick Hay, Adjt., W.        19 Jan.  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

       John Williams                 31 May,  1810 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [22] Duncan McDearmid               5 Sept. 1811 │24 Jan. 1811

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [23] John Riach                     2 July, 1812 │

  [24] Frederick B. White            23 Mar.  1815 │

                  _Facings dark green._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Lt.-Gen. Lord Harris, K.C.H. and C.B., Col.-in-Chf., 73rd
  Regt. Son of the famous Gen. Sir George Harris, of Seringapatam
  renown, who was created a baron in Aug., 1815. Bn. 17th Jan., 1782.
  Served under his father in India, and was one of the first to enter
  the breach at Seringapatam. At Waterloo the 73rd were literally cut to
  pieces, and at the close of the battle only fifty unwounded men were
  left out of a total of from 500 to 600 men. “Once, and once only,
  during the dreadful carnage at Waterloo did the stern 73rd hesitate to
  fill up a gap which the relentless iron had torn in their square.
  Their Colonel, at once pushing his horse lengthwise across the space,
  said, with a smile, ‘Well, my lads, if you won’t, I must.’ Immediately
  his horse was led back to his proper place and the ranks closed up by
  men still more devoted than before.” C.B. and K.W. for Waterloo. Was
  twice md., and left issue by both wives. D. 30th May, 1845.

Footnote 2:

  D. from his wounds at Brussels. Bn. 16th June, 1778. 4th son of
  Gilbert Maclaine, of Scalasdale, in the island of Mull.

Footnote 3:

  There were two capts. of this name in the 73rd in 1815, Anthony and
  Henry. The former d. at Kandy, Ceylon, as maj., 5th Jan., 1819. The
  latter quitted the service in 1820. The Coanes are Irish, but a branch
  was settled at Bath in 1815.

Footnote 4:

  Served in the Pa., and was present at Fuentes d’Onor and siege of
  Badajoz. Was with the 85th in the Walcheren expedition, and with the
  73rd during the campaigns of 1813 and 1814 in Swedish Pomerania,
  Hanover, and the Netherlands. Severely wounded at Waterloo, being shot
  through both thighs by a musket ball. Retired on h. p. 1st June, 1820.
  D. in 1855.

Footnote 5:

  Son of John Garland, of Dorchester. Was desperately wounded at
  Waterloo. After the battle he was carried to Brussels, and after
  months of suffering was able to return to Dorchester. He was not then
  expected to recover, and by some error his death was reported in the
  papers in the autumn of 1816. Here is the _first_ obituary notice in
  the _Gentleman’s Magazine_:—“At his father’s, Dorchester, Capt. John
  Garland, 73rd Foot. He was in most of the Peninsular battles, and was
  desperately wounded at Waterloo at the close of the action, only two
  men of his company being then left, and was confined at Brussels until
  his recent return to England.” But John Garland did _not_ die in 1816,
  and lived to become a bt. maj. on unattached list in 1825, and a bt.
  lt.-col. in 1838. His _second_ obituary notice is given in the _Annual
  Register_ for 1851:—“Jan. 17. At Lille, Lt.-Col. John Garland, K.H.,
  late of Quatre Bras Cottage, Dorchester, who was severely wounded at
  Waterloo.”

Footnote 6:

  Capt. 2nd Aug., 1815. Eldest son of Dr. Maurice Leyne, of Tralee, by
  Agnes, dau. of Cornelius the McGillicuddy of the Reeks. Bn. 1790.
  Served first in the Kerry Militia comded. by Col. Crosbie. Joined the
  73rd with 400 volunteers from his militia regt., the latter being
  induced to join the regular army by Leyne. His zeal was rewarded with
  a lieutenancy in the 73rd. At Waterloo succeeded to the command of the
  regt. and kept it as long as the regt. was in France. Placed on h. p.
  5th July, 1817. Subsequently joined the 58th Foot for a few years and
  served in New South Wales. Md., in 1817, Eliz., dau. of James Connor,
  of Tralee, Clerk of the Peace for Kerry. Capt. Leyne was for some
  years a stipendiary magistrate. Above information communicated by Mr.
  Leyne, son of Capt. R. Leyne.

Footnote 7:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 8:

  Lieut. 1st Rl. Veteran Batt. 27th Nov., 1823. Barrack-master at
  Coventry in 1830.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 12th Foot 1824.

Footnote 10:

  Had his left arm amputated after the battle, and d. shortly after.

Footnote 11:

  Capt. 3rd Feb. 1820. Major 20th March, 1828. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 12:

  Eldest son of Robt. Steuart, of Brownlee, Lanarkshire. H. p. 25th
  Dec., 1818. Restored to full pay 1819. Capt. 91st Foot, 3rd March,
  1825. H. p. unat. 19th June, 1826. D. 5th Nov., 1849. Above
  information was communicated by Capt. Alex. Steuart, Queensland
  Defence Force, great nephew to Capt. Robt. Steuart.

Footnote 13:

  3rd son of Col. Grey Haselrigge, by Bridget, dau. of Rev. Richard
  Buckley, and a direct descendant of Col. Sir Arthur Haselrigge, Bart.,
  the Parliamentary commander, whose regt. of cuirassiers, known us the
  “Lobsters,” performed some signal service during the Civil Wars. Bn.
  23rd Oct., 1796. Quitted the service as lieut. D. unm.

Footnote 14:

  D. as lieut. in 1819.

Footnote 15:

  Lieut. 3rd Aug., 1815. Lieut. 16th Foot 6th Feb., 1822. 1st Lieut.
  Ceylon Rifles 12th Jan., 1824. Capt. 29th Apr., 1836. H. p. 7th Sept.,
  1836. Living 1846. Sergt. Thos. Morris, of the 73rd, in his
  _Recollections of Military Service_, records that Ensign Deacon was
  shot through an arm at Quatre Bras and conveyed by the baggage-train
  to Brussels. “The officer’s wife, who with her three children had been
  left with the baggage guard, passed the whole night in searching for
  her husband among the wounded. At length she was informed he had been
  conveyed to Brussels.... Conveyances there were none to be had, and
  she was in the last state of pregnancy. She made the best of her way
  on foot with her children, exposed to the terrific storm of thunder,
  lightning, and rain, which continued without intermission for about
  ten hours. Faint, exhausted, and wet to the skin, having no other
  clothes but a black silk dress and light shawl, she yet happily
  surmounted all these difficulties, reached Brussels on the morning of
  the 18th, and found her husband in very comfortable quarters, where
  she also was accommodated, the next day giving birth to a fine girl,
  who was afterwards christened ‘Waterloo Deacon.‘”

Footnote 16:

  Lieut. 4th Aug., 1815. Exchanged to 3rd Ceylon Regt., and was placed
  on h. p. 11th June, 1818.

Footnote 17:

  Lieut. 3rd Oct., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 18:

  Lieut. 4th Oct., 1815. H. p. 3rd Aug., 1822.

Footnote 19:

  Lieut. 5th Oct., 1815. Lieut. 38th Foot 1st Dec., 1823. Capt. 26th
  Aug., 1834. H. p. 1838. Living 1846.

Footnote 20:

  Son of Mr. Wm. Page, of Fitzroy Square, London. An autograph letter
  from aforesaid gentleman, written in Nov., 1815, addressed to “Capt.
  Leyne, commanding H.B.M. 73rd Regt., Camp near Boulogne, France,” is
  still in possession of the Leyne family, and bears testimony to the
  writer’s appreciation of Capt. Leyne’s expressions of deep sympathy
  with the bereaved father on the death of his brave son.

Footnote 21:

  Lieut. 13th Feb., 1816. Capt. 7th Feb., 1822. Serving 1824.

Footnote 22:

  D. in Oct., 1830.

Footnote 23:

  Retd. as surgeon h. p. 67th Foot in 1841. Living 1846.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 25th June, 1817. Living 1830.


           79TH REGIMENT OF FOOT (OR CAMERON HIGHLANDERS).[M]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Neil Douglas, W.               3 Dec.  1812 │

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] Andrew Brown, W.              15 Oct.  1812 │Lt.-Col., 26 Aug.
                                                   │1813

   [3] Duncan Cameron, W.            29 Oct.  1812 │Lt.-Col., 12 Apr.
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [4] Thomas Mylne, W.              24 Apr.  1805 │

   [5] Peter Innes                    4 Sept. 1805 │

   [6] James Campbell, W.             5 Sept. 1805 │

   [7] Neil Campbell, W.              8 Apr.  1806 │

   [8] William Marshall, W.          19 July, 1806 │

   [9] Malcolm Fraser, W.            29 Nov.  1806 │

  [10] Wm. Bruce, W.                 14 Mar.  1811 │

  [11] John Sinclair, W.              4 May,  1811 │

       Robert Mackay, K.              2 Apr.  1812 │

  [12] John Cameron, W.              26 May,  1814 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [13] Alexander Cameron, W.         12 May,  1807 │

       Donald Cameron, K.            13 May,  1807 │

  [14] Thomas Brown, W.              15 Dec.  1807 │

  [15] Wm. Maddocks, W.              21 Apr.  1808 │25 July, 1801

  [16] Wm. Leaper, W.                15 Dec.  1808 │

  [17] James Fraser, W.              16 Mar.  1809 │

       Duncan MʻPherson, K.          19 July, 1810 │

  [18] Donald MʻPhee, W.             29 Nov.  1810 │

  [19] Fulton Robertson              21 Feb.  1811 │

  [20] Ewen Cameron, W.              29 May,  1811 │

       John Kynock, Adjt., K.        13 June, 1811 │

  [21] Alexander Forbes, W.           8 Aug.  1811 │

  [22] Charles McArthur, W.          17 Oct.  1811 │

  [23] Kewan Izod Leslie              1 Apr.  1812 │

  [24] John Powling, W.              15 Oct.  1812 │

  [25] James Cameron                 25 Jan.  1813 │11 July, 1811

       Ewen Kennedy, K.              25 Feb.  1813 │

  [26] W.A. Riach, W.                17 June, 1813 │

  [27] John Thompson                 18 Nov.  1813 │

  [28] George Harrison                2 Mar.  1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [29] John Mackenzie                24 Dec.  1812 │

  [30] Chas. Jas. McLean             17 June, 1813 │

  [31] John Nash, W.                 18 Nov.  1813 │

  [32] James Robertson, W.            6 Jan.  1814 │

  [33] Archibald Cameron             13 Jan.  1814 │

  [34] Alex. Spiers Crawford, W.     18 May,  1814 │

  [35] James Campbell                19 May,  1814 │

  [36] Alex. Cameron (Volr.), W.                   │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [37] John McArthur                 21 Nov.  1811 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [38] Angus Cameron                 13 Feb.  1812 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       George Ridesdale               9 Sept. 1813 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       Wm. G. Burrell                14 Dec.  1809 │13 July, 1809

       David Perston                 18 Oct.  1810 │1 Feb. 1810

                  _Facings dark green._  _Lace gold._

Footnote M:

  The Cameron Highlanders were raised in Jan., 1794, by Lt.-Gen. Sir
  Alan Cameron, K.C.B. (then Maj. Cameron), who was their first colonel.
  The officers were mostly selected from the half-pay list, and had
  served, like their colonel, in the American war. The regt. served
  during the campaign in Holland, and the mortality was so great that,
  in 1799, this Scotch regt. had to be again raised. The call for
  officers and men was nobly responded to by the Clan Cameron:—

         “And wild and high the Cameron’s gathering rose,
         The war-note of Lochiel, which Albyn’s hills have heard,
         And heard, too, have her Saxon foes.”

  How the “Cameron men” fought at Waterloo is testified to by the number
  of their killed and wounded in that battle, and it is also recorded
  that, when all the field officers and captains of this regt. had been
  disabled, the regt. was led on to victory by Lieut. Cameron, a nephew
  of Sir Alan Cameron, the col.-in-chf.; but which of the _four_
  lieutenants of this name cannot now be traced. On the evening of 18th
  June, 1815, 9 officers, 21 sergts., 7 drummers and 260 rank and file
  remained unwounded out of a total of 41 combatant officers, 40
  sergts., 11 drummers, and 684 rank and file—the effective strength of
  the regt. at Quatre Bras.

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Lt.-Gen. Sir Neil Douglas, K.C.B. and K.C.H. Col.-in.-Chf.,
  78th Highlanders. 5th son of John Douglas, of Glasgow, and a
  descendant of the Earls of Angus. Wounded in the knee at Quatre Bras.
  C.B. for Waterloo. Had served with the 79th at the siege of
  Copenhagen, in Sweden, in the Walcheren expedition, and in the Pa.
  Received the gold cross for the Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, and Toulouse.
  Also the silver war medal with two clasps for Corunna and Busaco. D.
  in Sept., 1853.

Footnote 2:

  C.B. for Waterloo. Retd. in 1831. D. 1835.

Footnote 3:

  C.B. for Waterloo. Quitted the service in 1819. D. at Toronto, Oct.
  1842.

Footnote 4:

  Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. Quitted the service in 1821. D. at Edinburgh,
  1832.

Footnote 5:

  H. p. 20th Nov., 1816. D. at Tunnach, near Wick, 1822.

Footnote 6:

  Maj. unattached 1826. Retd. same year.

Footnote 7:

  D. from his wounds. A pension of £50 per ann. was granted to his
  mother, Catherine Campbell.

Footnote 8:

  Maj. 1824. Bt. lt.-col. and inspecting f. o. of militia, Nova Scotia,
  1830. Retd. as lt.-col. 17th Sept., 1839.

Footnote 9:

  D. in Ireland, 1822.

Footnote 10:

  Exchanged to 82nd Foot 10th July, 1817. Maj. 31st Dec. 1827. H. p.
  27th Nov., 1828. Retd. as bt.-col. 1849. D. 1868.

Footnote 11:

  D. from his wounds.

Footnote 12:

  D. from his wounds.

Footnote 13:

  Capt. 19th July, 1815. Bt.-maj. Jan., 1819. D. at Tobago, in Oct.,
  1820.

Footnote 14:

  Capt. 20th July, 1815. H. p. 1816.

Footnote 15:

  Capt. 12th Oct., 1815. H. p. 1816. D. 1844.

Footnote 16:

  Capt. 12th Dec., 1822. H. p. 6th Oct., 1825.

Footnote 17:

  Capt. 3rd June, 1819. Retd. 1830. D. 1849.

Footnote 18:

  H. p. 2nd June, 1819.

Footnote 19:

  Lieut. 36th Foot 27th Aug., 1829. Retd. 1835.

Footnote 20:

  D. in Ireland in 1822, of brain fever, through the effects of a blow
  from a stone thrown by a peasant.

Footnote 21:

  Attained rank of major 7th Aug., 1835. H. p. 25th May, 1838. D. 1851
  at Kingston, Canada.

Footnote 22:

  Retd. 1821. D., Inverness, 1846.

Footnote 23:

  Capt. 60th Rifles 18th Oct., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 24:

  D. from his wounds 23rd Oct., 1815.

Footnote 25:

  D. at Blandecque, France, 1818.

Footnote 26:

  Capt. 7th Apr., 1825. Retd. 1842. D. 1843.

Footnote 27:

  H. p. 1820.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. 1817. Lost on passage to South America in 1819.

Footnote 29:

  Lieut. 16th July, 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 30:

  3rd son of Archibald McLean, of Pennycross, co. Argyll, and bro. to
  Allan T. McLean, of 13th Lt. Dragoons. Lieut. 18th July, 1815. H. p.
  1816.

Footnote 31:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 32:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 33:

  H. p. 1821. D. 1824.

Footnote 34:

  Lieut. h. p. 67th Foot 1825. D. 1853.

Footnote 35:

  Out of the regt. before 1st Jan., 1816.

Footnote 36:

  Ensign 17th July, 1815. Lieut. 7th March, 1822. H. p. 1827. D. in
  France in Jan., 1832.

Footnote 37:

  Superseded 1821.

Footnote 38:

  Paymaster Canadian Rifles 29th Oct., 1841. D. in Canada, Sept., 1845.


              92ND REGIMENT OF FOOT (GORDON HIGHLANDERS).

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] John Cameron, K.              23 June, 1808 │Col., 4 June, 1814

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] James Mitchell, W.            30 Mar.  1809 │Lt.-Col., 3 Mar.,
                                                   │1814

   [3] Donald Macdonald              26 Nov.  1812 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [4] George W. Holmes, W.          28 Mar.  1805 │

   [5] Dugald Campbell, W.           13 June, 1805 │

   [6] Peter Wilkie, W.              21 May,  1806 │

   [7] Wm. Charles Grant, K.         28 July, 1808 │

   [8] Wm. Little, K.                 7 Jan.  1813 │

   [9] Archibald Ferrier, W.          4 Mar.  1813 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] Claude Alexander, Adjt.       19 Sept. 1805 │

       James John Chisholm, K.        4 Feb.  1808 │

  [11] Robert Winchester, W.          6 Feb.  1808 │

  [12] Thos. Hobbs, W.                7 Feb.  1808 │

  [13] Thos. Macintosh, W.            9 Feb.  1808 │

  [14] Donald Macdonald              10 Feb.  1808 │

  [15] Andrew Will                   18 Feb.  1808 │

  [16] Alexander Gordon               3 Mar.  1808 │

  [17] James Kerr Ross, W.            4 May,  1808 │

  [18] Ronald Macdonald, W.           5 May,  1808 │

  [19] Thos. Gordon                  28 July, 1808 │

  [20] Hector Innes, W.              13 Apr.  1809 │

  [21] George Logan, W.               5 Oct.  1809 │

  [22] Ewen Campbell                 30 Oct.  1809 │

  [23] Richard MʻDonell               1 Nov.  1809 │

  [24] John MʻKinlay, W.              2 Nov.  1809 │

  [25] Richard Josiah Peat           12 Apr.  1810 │

  [26] George Mackie, W.              8 Oct.  1812 │

  [27] Alexander McPherson, W.       22 Oct.  1812 │

  [28] Ewen Ross, W.                 26 Nov.  1812 │

  [29] James Hope, W.                 7 Jan.  1813 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [30] John Bramwell, W.             29 July, 1813 │

  [31] Robert Logan, W.               5 Aug.  1813 │

  [32] John Clarke                   26 Aug.  1813 │

  [33] Angus McDonald                15 Sept. 1813 │

       Abel Becher, K.               16 Sept. 1813 │

  [34] Robert Hewitt                 21 Oct.  1813 │

       John M.R. McPherson, K.       22 Oct.  1813 │

  [35] Duncan McPherson              23 Dec.  1813 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [36] James Gordon                  16 Apr.  1807 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       George Hicks                  22 Aug.  1811 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

       John Stewart, W.               5 Nov.  1812 │

                   _Facings yellow._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  The heroic Fassifern, great-grandson of John Cameron, 18th of Lochiel,
  and one of the six children of Ewen Cameron of Inverscadale, on Loch
  Linnhe, by his first wife, Lucy Campbell, of Balmadine. In early life
  was articled to a Writer to the Signet at Edinburgh; but when war
  broke out, in 1793, his military tastes inclined him to forsake the
  pen for a sword. Obtained a commission in the 26th Cameronians in
  1793. His chief services were in the Pa. with above regt., and the
  honourable augmentation to his family arms, by the Prince Regent, 20th
  May, 1815, tells the true story of his exploits at “Almaraz” and the
  “Pass of Maya.” K.T.S. He met his death at Quatre Bras whilst leading
  the 92nd against a large body of French troops. Never was a commanding
  officer more universally lamented. He was buried on the 17th June
  during the height of the storm which raged that day. His grave was dug
  in a quiet lane by his devoted foster-brother, Ewen McMillan, a
  private in the 92nd, who had accompanied his master through all his
  campaigns. By desire of his family, Cameron’s body was aftds.
  disinterred and removed to Scotland, where it was re-interred in
  Kilmallie churchyard, where a tall obelisk, with an inscription by Sir
  Walter Scott, marks his grave. His aged father, Ewen Cameron, was
  created a bart. in consideration of his gallant son’s services. The
  title is now extinct.

Footnote 2:

  Succeeded to the command of the regt. when Cameron was wounded, but
  was himself soon disabled. C.B. Served in the Pa. and had the gold
  medal for Orthes. Commanded the regt. until 1819, when he quitted the
  service.

Footnote 3:

  Does not appear to have been present at Quatre Bras, but commanded the
  regt. at Waterloo. C.B. and bt.-lt.-col. 5th son of John Macdonald, of
  Dalchosine, co. Perth, by Mary, dau. of Robert Menzies, of Glassie,
  co. Perth. Retired on h. p. 26th Nov., 1818. Living in 1830.

Footnote 4:

  Succeeded to the command at Quatre Bras when Maj. Mitchell was
  wounded. Promoted maj. 18th June, 1815. Quitted the service in 1818.

Footnote 5:

  Bt.-maj. 11th Jan., 1816. Out of the _Army List_ in 1819.

Footnote 6:

  Maj. in this regt. 21st Jan., 1819. Quitted the service in 1823. Had
  served in Egypt and the Pa. Aftds. held the appointment of
  barrack-master, and d. at Horsfield, Bristol, 4th Nov., 1852.

Footnote 7:

  Killed at Quatre Bras. A pension of £60 per annum was granted to his
  widow, Susan Grant. The late Gen. Sir Thornton Grant, who
  distinguished himself in the Crimea with the 49th Regt., was son of
  the above.

Footnote 8:

  The obituary notice of this officer in the _Scots Magazine_ describes
  him as “son of Mr. Little, a farmer at Burnfoot(?).”

Footnote 9:

  Probably belonged to the military family of “Ferrier, of Belsyde,” co.
  Linlithgow. Maj. in 92nd, 22nd Oct., 1818. Quitted the service before
  1824.

Footnote 10:

  Promoted capt. 18th July, 1815. Quitted the service in 1821. This
  officer may be the “Claud Alexander, of Ballochmyle,” described in
  Burke’s _Landed Gentry_ as of the 1st Regt. of Guards(?).

Footnote 11:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. Robert Winchester, K.H. Retd. as bt.-col. Nov.,
  1842. Served in the Pa. and was wounded both at Quatre Bras and
  Waterloo. Son of Charles Winchester, of Aberdeen. D. 23rd July, 1846,
  at Edinburgh.

Footnote 12:

  Promoted capt. 20th July, 1815. Retired on h. p. 25th May, 1820.
  Living 1842. This officer’s widow attained the great age of 102 on
  18th June, 1896. Her five sons all served in the Army, and she had one
  son and seven grandsons serving in June, 1896. H.M. Queen Victoria
  sent her congratulations to Mrs. Hobbs on the occasion of the 102nd
  anniversary of latter’s birthday.

Footnote 13:

  Capt. 4th Nov., 1819. H. p. 25th Oct., 1821.

Footnote 14:

  H. p. 2nd July, 1818.

Footnote 15:

  Served in the Pa. D. a lieut. in this regt., from yellow fever, 7th
  Oct. 1819, at Snow Hill Camp, Jamaica.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 25th Oct., 1816.

Footnote 17:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. J. Kerr Ross, K.H. Served through the Par. War
  (medal and six clasps), where he was A.D.C. to Gen. Sir John Buchan.
  3rd son of Col. Andrew Ross, by Isabella Macdonnell, of Aberhallader.
  M., 1827, Margaret, 2nd dau. of James McInroy, of Lude, co. Perth. D.
  at Edinburgh, 26th April, 1872.

Footnote 18:

  His proper name was “Reginald Ranald Macdonald.” Aftds. Maj. and Bt.
  Lt.-Col. 4th Foot. Severely wounded at Waterloo. Served on the staff
  in India, and d. at Bombay 31st May, 1845. He was a C.B. and K.H.

Footnote 19:

  Served all through the Par. War. D. a lieut. in this regt., of yellow
  fever, at Kingston, Jamaica, 17th Sept., 1819.

Footnote 20:

  Employed on recruiting service in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 21:

  Son of Wm. Logan, merchant, Aberdeen. D. a lieut. in this regt., from
  yellow fever, at Up Park Camp, Jamaica, 4th Oct., 1819. He had served
  over ten years in the regt.

Footnote 22:

  D. as lieut. in 1822.

Footnote 23:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 25:

  Serving in 1824. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 26:

  Adjt. 24th Aug., 1815. Out of the regt. before 28th Oct., 1821.

Footnote 27:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817. D. 1855.

Footnote 28:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 25th March, 1817. H. p. as adjt. to a recruiting district Dec.,
  1842. Had the Par. medal with three clasps. D. in Kensington, 18th
  March, 1860.

Footnote 30:

  Was severely wounded at Quatre Bras (right leg amputated). Lieut. 18th
  July, 1815. H. p. 1817. Living 1876.

Footnote 31:

  Lieut. 19th July, 1815. H. p. 31st Foot 12th Aug., 1824.

Footnote 32:

  Lieut. 20th July, 1815. Placed on h. p. 1817, but restored as lieut.
  in same regt. 15th March, 1821. Out of the regt. before 1830.

Footnote 33:

  Held the colours of the 92nd at Waterloo until disabled by wounds.
  Lieut. 24th Aug., 1815. H. p. 25th March, 1817. D. at Whinnyhall,
  Fifeshire, 3rd Feb., 1832.

Footnote 34:

  Lieut. 61st Foot 3rd Nov., 1819. H. p. 16th Dec., 1819. Appointed
  barrack-master at Clonmel in 1854.

Footnote 35:

  Lieut. 22nd Oct., 1818. Capt. 22nd Sept., 1825. H. p. April, 1826.

Footnote 36:

  A close and personal friend of Col. Cameron, whose funeral he attended
  on 17th June, 1815. H. p. 2nd March, 1820. Had the Par. medal with
  seven clasps. Living 1855.


                   95TH REGIMENT OF FOOT (RIFLEMEN).
                           (_1st Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir Andrew F. Barnard,        29 Mar., 1810 │Col., 4 June, 1813
       K.C.B., W.                                  │

                 MAJOR.                            │

   [2] Alexander Cameron, W.         14 May,  1812 │Lt.-Col., 27 Apr.,
                                                   │1812

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] Jonathan Leach, W.             1 May,  1806 │Maj., 21 June,
                                                   │1813

       _Charles Beckwith_, W.        28 July, 1808 │Maj., 3 Mar. 1814

       _Charles Smyth_, K.            4 Oct.  1809 │16 June, 1808

   [4] Henry Lee                     20 Sept. 1810 │

       _Henry George Smith_          28 Feb.  1812 │Maj., 29 Sept.,
                                                   │1814

   [5] Edward Chawner, W.            14 May,  1812 │

   [6] Wm. Johnstone, W.             22 Oct.  1812 │

           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [7] Jonathan Layton                3 June, 1809 │

   [8] John Molloy, W.                5 June, 1809 │

   [9] John Cox                       8 June, 1809 │

  [10] Archibald Stewart              2 Oct.  1809 │

  [11] Wm. Chapman                   26 Apr.  1810 │

  [12] Richard B. Frere              21 Aug.  1810 │

  [13] Wm. Lister, K.                23 Aug.  1810 │

  [14] John Gardiner, W.             30 Aug.  1810 │

  [15] John Kincaid, Adjt.           23 May,  1811 │

  [16] George Simmons, W.            25 July, 1811 │

       John Stilwell, K.             26 Sept. 1811 │

  [17] J.P. Gairdner, W.             12 May,  1812 │

  [18] Wm. Haggup                    13 May,  1812 │

  [19] John G. Fitzmaurice, W.       14 Jan.  1813 │

  [20] George Drummond               28 Jan.  1813 │

  [21] Elliott Dunkin Johnston,       7 Dec.  1813 │
       K.                                          │

  [22] Orlando Felix, W.              4 May,  1815 │10 Nov. 1814

          SECOND LIEUTENANTS.                      │

  [23] Allen Stewart, W.             10 Dec.  1812 │

  [24] Wm. Wright, W.                11 Mar.  1813 │

  [25] James Church, W.              26 Aug.  1813 │30 July, 1813

  [26] Wm. Shenley, W.               21 Apr.  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

       John Mackenzie                27 June, 1805 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

       — Bagshaw                     13 Oct.  1814 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       Joseph Burke                  29 June, 1809 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       James Robson                  21 Nov.  1811 │22 Feb. 1810

       Robert Heyt                   $1 $2    $3   │

               VOLUNTEER.                          │

  [27] Charles Smith.                              │

                _Regimentals green._   _Facings black._

Footnote 1:

  Bn. at Fahan, co. Donegal, in 1773. Son of Rev. Henry Barnard, D.D.,
  and grandson of the Bishop of Derry. He received the Russian order of
  St. George for Waterloo; also the Austrian order of Maria Theresa. Was
  made commandant of the British division occupying Paris after the
  capitulation. D. Lt.-Governor of Rl. Hospital, Chelsea, 17th Jan.,
  1855.

Footnote 2:

  “A pupil of Sir John Moore.” Bn. 1781. Younger son of Alexander
  Cameron, of Inverallert, co. Argyll. Served in Holland in 1799 and in
  Egypt in 1801. Was severely wounded in the arm and side at the battle
  of Alexandria. Served through most of the Par. War, until severely
  wounded at the battle of Vittoria. Severely wounded in the throat at
  Waterloo. Received a gold medal for Egypt and a gold medal with two
  clasps for Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, and Salamanca. C.B. for Waterloo.
  Maj.-Gen. 1838. Col.-in-Chf. 74th Regt. 1846. D. 26th July, 1850.

Footnote 3:

  At Waterloo the command of the battalion devolved upon Leach when his
  two senior officers were wounded. C.B. and bt. lt.-col. In 1831
  published _Rough Recollections of an Old Soldier_. D. as lt.-col. 14th
  Jan., 1855, at Worthing, aged 70.

Footnote 4:

  According to the _Army List_ of 1st Jan., 1820, this officer was
  “superseded.” His name appears, however, in the h. p. list of this
  regt. in 1821 and for some years after.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards capt. retired f. p. 4th Rl. Vet. Batt. D. 1826.

Footnote 6:

  An interesting memoir of this gallant soldier appeared in the _United
  Service Journal_ for 1837. He was a native of Dumfriesshire, where his
  father had a small property of his own. In 1805 he joined the 52nd
  L.I. as an ensign, and in the year following was appointed to a
  lieutenancy in the Rifle Brigade (as the old 95th is now styled). As a
  lieut. he had the good fortune to command one of the four companies of
  the Rifles which, under Sir S. Beckwith, at the Pass of Barba del
  Puerco, on 19th March, 1810, so gallantly repulsed 600 chosen French
  troops who attempted to surprise them at midnight. I extract the
  following from the above memoir:—“On the 19th Jan., 1812, he was one
  of the officers who volunteered and led the stormers at the taking of
  Ciudad Rodrigo, and was fortunate enough to come out unscathed,
  although one of the first to enter that deadly pass. At the storming
  of Badajoz on the 6th April, 1812, his name again stood on the list of
  volunteers for the Forlorn Hope, but as it was claimed by a senior
  officer of the division, he was obliged to limit his expectations to
  one of the posts of honour with the storming party. Sir Andrew
  Barnard, however, who commanded the Light Division, knowing how
  peculiarly well qualified he was for desperate enterprise, assigned
  him a post in front of the Forlorn Hope, in the command of a party
  carrying ropes prepared with nooses to throw over the sword-blades
  which formed the chevaux-de-frise, in the hope of being able to
  displace it by dragging it down the breach, but Johnstone and all his
  party were stricken down before they got within throwing distance. His
  appearance next morning is thus described by a brother officer, Capt.
  Kincaid, in _Random Shots from a Rifleman_, page 287:—‘The first tent
  that I entered was Johnstone’s. With his shattered arm bandaged, he
  was lying fast asleep, and coupling his appearance with the daring
  duty he had been called on to perform but a few hours before in front
  of the Forlorn Hope, I thought that I had never set my eyes upon a
  nobler picture of a soldier! His whole appearance, even in sleep,
  showed exactly as it had been in the execution of that duty; his
  splendid figure was so disposed as if he was taking the first step in
  the breach—his eyebrows were elevated—his nostrils still distended,
  and altogether he looked as if he would clutch the castle in his
  remaining hand! No one could have seen him at that moment without
  saying—There lies a hero!’” Johnstone was wounded both at Quatre Bras
  and Waterloo. Promoted maj. 24th Dec., 1829. Quitted the service in
  1831. Was Colonial Sec. at Cape of Good Hope, and d. at sea 6th April,
  1836.

Footnote 7:

  H. p. 21st May, 1818.

Footnote 8:

  Capt. 5th Aug., 1824. H. p. 28th May, 1829. Lt.-col. unatt. 11th May,
  1851. Had the Par. medal with 8 clasps. See account of this officer in
  the _Cornhill Magazine_ for Dec., 1897.

Footnote 9:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. John Cox, K.H. Was present at eleven general
  actions in the Pa. Had a compound fracture of his left arm at the
  storming of Ciudad Rodrigo. Defended a battery with his company at
  Waterloo. D. at Cheltenham, 7th Feb., 1863. There were two officers of
  this name in the Rifles in 1815, who appear to have been brothers, and
  of the same family as Sir Richard Cox, Bart., Lord Chancellor of
  Ireland.

Footnote 10:

  Attained the rank of major 17th Dec., 1829. Retd. 1835.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 1819. D. at Leamington 12th Feb., 1854.

Footnote 12:

  Appointed barrack-master at Tobago, 1830. D. there 1832.

Footnote 13:

  Wounded at Quatre Bras and d. in a house there next day.

Footnote 14:

  Afterwards Capt. and Bt.-Maj. 82nd Regt. D. at Jock’s House, Kinnoull,
  18th June, 1852—“On the anniversary, and at the same hour, on which he
  was carried severely wounded from the field of Waterloo.”

Footnote 15:

  Bn. at Dalbeath, near Falkirk, in Jan., 1787. Served in the Pa. and
  was one of the leaders of the storming party of the Light Division at
  Ciudad Rodrigo. Received the silver war medal in 1848, with nine
  clasps. Had his horse shot under him at Waterloo. Was aftds. knighted
  and appointed an exon in the Yeomen of the Guard. D. at Hastings 22nd
  April, 1862. Author of _Adventures in the Rifle Brigade_.

Footnote 16:

  Served through the Par. War. Was shot through the liver at Waterloo;
  likewise had two ribs broken and a bullet in his chest. Wrote a
  narrative of the Waterloo campaign. Quitted the service as bt. maj.,
  and d. in Jersey, 5th March, 1858.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 1819. Retd. 1827.

Footnote 18:

  Adjt. at Waterloo. Exchanged as lieut. to 11th Foot 3rd Aug., 1820. H.
  p. 14th Feb., 1828.

Footnote 19:

  Aftds. major-general and K.H. D. 24th Dec., 1865.

Footnote 20:

  H. p. 1826, 3rd Vet. Batt. D. 1827.

Footnote 21:

  Killed by a cannon ball. 3rd son of Lt.-Gen. Johnston, H.E.I.C.S.

Footnote 22:

  Wounded at Quatre Bras. Attained rank of maj. gen. “He was the first
  to decipher the names and titles of the Pharaohs, and an epitome he
  drew up was translated into French and Italian.” D. at Geneva, 5th
  April, 1860.

Footnote 23:

  A chivalrous and daring Highlander. Singled out a French officer at
  Waterloo and had a duel with him. When Stewart’s sword broke off at
  the hilt he instantly closed with the Frenchman, “whom he finished in
  an instant.” In later _Army Lists_ his name is spelled “Stuart.”
  Aftds. Capt. in the 3rd Buffs. H. p. 1836. D. in the Norwich Military
  Lunatic Asylum 6th July, 1847.

Footnote 24:

  Entered the army in 1813. Served in Holland in 1813 and 1814, and was
  present at the attack on Merxem and bombardment of the French fleet at
  Antwerp. H. p. 1st lieut. 1818. Living 1876.

Footnote 25:

  H. p. 1816. D. 1824.

Footnote 26:

  H. p. 31st Jan., 1828.

Footnote 27:

  2nd Lieut. 19th July, 1815. H. p. 25th Dec., 1817. Col. of the
  Whittlesea Yeomanry Cavalry 1831. Retd. 1837. Younger bro. of Henry
  George (aftds. Sir Henry) Smith and of Thos. Smith, both of the 95th.
  D. at Whittlesea 24th Dec., 1854. Bd. in St. Mary’s Church.
  Communicated by Mr. George Moore Smith.


                   95TH REGIMENT OF FOOT (RIFLEMEN).
                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                MAJORS.                   Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Amos Godsill Norcott, W.      22 Dec.  1808 │Lt.-Col., 25 July,
                                                   │1810

   [2] George Wilkins, W.            10 May,  1809 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [3] George Miller, W.             21 Jan.  1808 │Maj., 3 Mar. 1814

   [4] Joseph Logan                   2 Feb.  1809 │

   [5] Thos. MacNamara               26 Aug.  1813 │

   [6] John Garlies McCullock, W.    21 Oct.  1813 │

   [7] Charles Eaton                 21 Apr.  1814 │

   [8] Francis le Blanc               1 Dec.  1814 │

           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [9] Wm. Humbley, W.               13 Oct.  1808 │

  [10] John Charles Hope              2 Feb.  1809 │

  [11] Thos. Cochrane                22 Feb.  1809 │

  [12] John Robert Budgen             4 May,  1809 │

  [13] Thomas Smith, Adjt.            7 June, 1809 │

  [14] Francis Bennett                1 Oct.  1809 │

  [15] Francis Dixon                  4 Jan.  1810 │

  [16] Edward Coxen, W.              28 June, 1810 │

  [17] Dugald Cameron, W.             1 May,  1811 │

  [18] Robert Cochrane, W.            8 May,  1812 │

  [19] John Allen Ridgeway, W.        9 May,  1812 │

  [20] John Fry, W.                  10 May,  1812 │

  [21] Edward Madden                 13 July, 1812 │

  [22] Vere Webb, W.                  9 Dec.  1813 │

  [23] Chas. Gordon Urquhart         27 Oct.  1814 │

  [24] J. Lynam, W.                  22 Mar.  1815 │

  [25] Charles Rochfort              15 June, 1815 │

          SECOND LIEUTENANTS.                      │

  [26] Wm. Shaw                      25 Apr.  1813 │

  [27] Richard Fowler                22 Oct.  1813 │22 Feb. 1813

  [28] Thos. Bowen Sheean            25 Dec.  1813 │

  [29] Richard Cocks Eyre, W.        22 Apr.  1814 │

  [30] John Prendergast Walsh, W.     5 May,  1814 │

  [31] R.J.N. Kellett (Volunteer)                  │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

       Angus McDonald                15 Feb.  1810 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

       Donald Ross                    3 Apr.  1806 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       Francis Scott                 25 Jan.  1810 │

          ASSISTANT SURGEONS.                      │

       John Armstrong                11 Mar.  1813 │

       Robert Scott                   5 Sept. 1814 │5 Nov. 1812

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Norcott, C.B. Served in the Pa., and had the gold
  medal for Corunna. K. St. A. for Waterloo. D. at Cork in 1838 whilst
  commanding the southern district.

Footnote 2:

  C.B. for Waterloo. Served in the Pa., and had the gold medal for
  Salamanca. Retd. as bt. lt.-col. in 1817. K.H. D. at Shirley,
  Southampton, 8th Nov., 1862.

Footnote 3:

  C.B. and bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. Served in the Pa., and had the
  gold medal for Nivelle. Lt.-Col. unattached list, 25th May, 1826. D.
  1843.

Footnote 4:

  Appointed lt.-col. of 63rd Foot in 1829, and d. at Dover, 1st Sept.,
  1844, when in command of that regt.

Footnote 5:

  Quitted the service as capt. Served in the Pa., and in the Buenos
  Ayres expedition. Was a J.P. for the counties of Cork, Waterford, and
  Limerick. D. at Cork, 7th Jan. 1832.

Footnote 6:

  “MʻCullock had been wounded in the shoulder on Massena’s retreat from
  Portugal in March, 1811, and this wound deprived him of the use of the
  arm. At Waterloo, by a shot fired very late in the day, he lost the
  other arm. He was promoted, ‘having no longer an arm to wield for his
  country,’ as he told the Duke of Wellington, ‘but being anxious to
  serve it,’ to a majority in the 2nd Garrison Battalion in Dec., 1815,
  and d. in London in 1818.” Sir W. Cope’s _History of the Rifle
  Brigade_.

Footnote 7:

  Retired on h. p. as capt., 11th Aug., 1823. Served through the Par.
  War, and had the silver medal with seven clasps. Living in 1860.

Footnote 8:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. 46th Regt. M., 10th April, 1828, Eliz., 2nd dau.
  of Thomas Porter, of Rockbeare House, Devon. Col. 23rd Nov., 1841.
  Retd. in 1845. Living 1879.

Footnote 9:

  This officer had been present at almost every battle and action in the
  Pa., and when the long-looked-for silver war medal was given, in 1848,
  he received one with thirteen clasps. Sev. wnded. at Waterloo.
  Attained the rank of lt.-col. unattached, 1851, and d. 26th Oct.,
  1857, at Eyresbury.

Footnote 10:

  Recommended for promotion by Gen. Sir H. Clinton for gallantry at
  Waterloo. Capt. 9th Nov., 1820. Eventually succeeded to the command of
  the 1st batt. D. 12th Oct., 1842.

Footnote 11:

  D. as lt. in this regt. 1823 at Kinsale.

Footnote 12:

  Born 1st Dec., 1791. Eldest son of Thomas Budgen (of the family of
  Budgen, of Ballindoney, co. Wexford). J.P. and D.L. for Surrey, and
  J.P. for co. Wexford. M., 13th Jan., 1823, Williamza Caroline Mary,
  3rd dau. of Col. Lorenzo Moore, of the “Battle-axe Guards,” by
  Henrietta, only dau. of Sir S.T. Janssen, Bart. Had the Par. War medal
  with eight clasps. H. p. 1818. D. 1866.

Footnote 13:

  Brother to Gen. Sir Harry Smith (_see under_ Staff). His full name was
  Thos. Lawrence Smith. Served through the Par. War, for which in 1848
  he received the silver medal and ten clasps. Recommended for promotion
  for gallantry at Waterloo, by Sir H. Clinton. H. p. 1819.

  It is stated in Cope’s _History of the Rifle Brigade_: “On July 7th,
  1815, the army marched into Paris, and the 2nd Batt. had the honour of
  being the first corps which entered, Lieut. and Adjt. Thos. Smith
  riding in front of the Battalion, being the first British officer who
  entered Paris on that famous day.” Was aftds. principal barrack-master
  at Aldershot. Recd. a special pension and was made a C.B. D. 6th Apr.,
  1877. Bd. in the military cemetery, Aldershot.

Footnote 14:

  D. in May, 1817.

Footnote 15:

  H. p. 80th Foot 11th Dec., 1817. D. in Jersey, 1832.

Footnote 16:

  Capt. 8th Apr., 1825. Paymaster 60th Rifles 9th Feb., 1826. Served in
  last-named regt. 31 years. Served in the Punjaub campaign. Had the
  Par. medal with 10 clasps.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 1817 89th Foot. D. in Aug., 1846.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 22nd May, 1828. Major retd. f. p. 1841. Knight of Windsor. D. at
  the Lower Ward, Windsor Castle, and was buried in the catacombs there,
  with military honours, all the naval and military knights attending,
  in May, 1864.

Footnote 19:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. Ridgeway. Adjt. N. Devon Militia, 1831. D. 11th
  June, 1856, at Newton St. Cyres, Exeter.

Footnote 20:

  Capt. Rifle Bde., 22nd July, 1830. D. 1840.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 1818. D. at Chichester, 1819.

Footnote 22:

  H. p. 1831.

Footnote 23:

  Probably one of the Urquharts of Meldrum, Perthshire. Adam Urquhart,
  of this family, married Lady Mary Gordon, sister of 1st Duke of
  Gordon. Retd. on h. p. 30th Jan., 1823. D. 1827.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 1818. D. 1821.

Footnote 25:

  7th son of Gustavus Rochfort, M.P. for Westmeath, by Frances, dau. of
  John Bloomfield, of Redwood. Retd. on h. p. 25th Aug., 1821. M., 1832,
  Hannah, eldest dau. of Col. Pratt, of Cabra Castle, and had issue. Of
  Rochfort Lodge, co. Donegal. D. 1844.

Footnote 26:

  D. as lt. on h. p. in 1829.

Footnote 27:

  Assumed the surname of Butler on succeeding to the Barton estate, co.
  Stafford. 2nd son and eventual heir of Thomas Fowler, of Pendeford
  Hall, by Harriet Fowler. Served in the Pa. Placed on h. p. 25th Dec.,
  1818. Was thrice married, and had issue. D. 14th March. 1864.

Footnote 28:

  Retd. 1830.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 30:

  Lost right leg at Waterloo. Retd. 1833 as lieut. h. p. 6th Foot. Took
  Holy Orders.

Footnote 31:

  2nd Lieut. 18th July, 1815. Retd. as capt. in 1838. D. at Florence in
  Nov. 1853.


                   95TH REGIMENT OF FOOT (RIFLEMEN).
                (_Two companies of the 3rd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                 MAJOR.                   Regiment.│Army.

   [1] John Ross, W.                 11 May,  1809 │Lt.-Col., 6  Mar.
                                                   │1811

               CAPTAINS.                           │

       _Charles Geo. Gray_            6 May,  1809 │

   [2] James Fullerton, W.            7 May,  1809 │Maj., 7 Apr. 1814

   [3] Wm. Eeles                      7 Dec.  1813 │

       _Charles Eeles_, K.           20 July, 1814 │

           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [4] Gentle Vickers                14 May,  1812 │

   [5] Thos. Taylor Worsley,          2 Oct.  1812 │
       Adjt., W.                                   │

   [6] Godfrey H. Shenley, W.        17 Mar.  1814 │

          SECOND LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [7] Alexander Milligan            25 Nov.  1813 │

   [8] Charles Probart               25 Nov.  1813 │

           ASSISTANT-SURGEON.                      │

   [9] Thos. P. McCabe               19 Aug.  1813 │

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Sir John Ross, K.C.B. Lt.-Col. Cape Corps (1824).
  Served in the Pa., and received the gold cross for Barossa, Vittoria,
  Orthes, and Toulouse. D. 21 April, 1835.

Footnote 2:

  Son of Lewis Fullarton, of Kilmichael, Isle of Arran. C.B. and bt.
  lt.-col. for Waterloo. M., 7th Aug., 1817, Jane, dau. of Colin
  MʻCleverty, M.D., of Chestervale, Jamaica. Lt.-col. 96th Regt. 1827.
  K.H. D. at Halifax, N.S., 8th March, 1834.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards lt.-col. 1st Batt. (_see_ under Capt. Charles Eeles, of
  Staff). H. p. 1850.

Footnote 4:

  D. in South America, 1823.

Footnote 5:

  Belonged to the old Yorkshire family of Worsley, of Hovingham. Served
  through the Par. War, and in 1848 received the silver medal with nine
  clasps. “He was wounded, at the siege of Badajoz, under one of his
  ears. The ball made the circuit of his neck, and was taken out on the
  opposite side. He was again wounded at Waterloo under the other ear,
  the ball, as before, making the circuit of the neck.” Kincaid relates
  that the wound Worsley received at Badajoz had the effect of turning
  his head to the right, and that the wound he received at Waterloo
  restored his head to its original position. Placed on h. p. 11th Feb.,
  1816. M. Rose, dau. of the Rev. James Stovin, D.D., Rector of
  Rossington, co. York, and d. s. p. 25th Oct., 1851.

Footnote 6:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 7:

  H. p. 1826. D. in Scotland, 1828.

Footnote 8:

  D. at Skibereen in March, 1822.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 1818.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                           ROYAL STAFF CORPS.

        (_Attached to the Quartermaster-General’s Department._)

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Wm. Nicolay                    4 Apr.  1805 │Col., 4 June, 1813
               CAPTAINS.                           │
       _Thomas Wright_, W.           23 Dec.  1813 │
   [2] Wm. Staveley                  12 Jan.  1815 │Maj., 15 Dec. 1814
       _Francis Read_                16 Mar.  1815 │
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
   [3] George D. Hall, W.            28 Nov.  1811 │
       _Basil Jackson_                6 May,  1813 │
       _A.C.G. Brauns_               17 Feb.  1814 │
                ENSIGNS.                           │
   [4] John Sumner Sedley             6 May,  1813 │
   [5] John James Milliken           10 June, 1813 │
                    _Facings blue._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  C.B. for Waterloo. Maj.-Gen. 1819. Gov. of Mauritius 1832. K.C.H. and
  Col.-in-Chf. 1st W.I. Regt. D. 1844.

Footnote 2:

  C.B. and bt. lt.-col. for Waterloo. Aftds. Com.-in-Chf. at Madras.
  Lt.-Gen. and Col.-in-Chf. 24th Foot. D. whilst on a journey in his
  carriage, after leaving Tippicadoo, in March, 1854.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards Col. George Dry Hall. Retd on h. p. in 1839. D. at Hythe,
  25th Feb., 1852.

Footnote 4:

  Afterwards Maj. J.S. Sedley, first-class barrack-master at the
  Mauritius. Retd. in Aug., 1860, on a pension of £145 13_s._ 9_d._ per
  annum. D. 21st Aug., 1867.

Footnote 5:

  Placed on h. p. 11th March, 1819.


                         ROYAL WAGGON TRAIN.[N]

        (_Attached to the Quartermaster General’s Department._)

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Thomas Aird                    4 May,  1815 │2 June, 1814
               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [2] Thomas Pardoe                  1 Oct.  1812 │
   [3] Basil Jackson                  3 Dec.  1812 │
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
   [4] Wm. Aitkin                     9 Feb.  1809 │
   [5] Edward Smith                  23 Feb.  1815 │
   [6] Joseph McDowall               16 Mar.  1815 │4 July, 1811
   [7] Henry O’Neil                  27 Apr.  1815 │
   [8] Robert Parkinson               4 May,  1815 │
   [9] Charles Bott                  25 May,  1815 │22 Apr. 1813
  [10] Robert Kerr                   25 May,  1815 │
                CORNETS.                           │
  [11] Thos. Glendinning                           │9 Dec. 1813
  [12] John Fenn                      4 May,  1815 │
                SURGEON.                           │
       Thomas Wynne                   6 Oct.  1808 │20 June, 1799
          VETERINARY-SURGEON.                      │
  [13] Frederick Cherry              16 July, 1807 │
                _Blue._  _Facings red._  _Lace silver._

Footnote N:

  In 1816 the Rl. Waggon Train took up a new position in the _Army
  List_, viz., after the cavalry and newly-raised corps, the “Staff
  Corps of Cavalry,” so called to distinguish it from the “Royal Staff
  Corps,” which followed in the wake of the Rifle Brigade. The Waggon
  Train was reduced about twenty years after Waterloo, and after the
  Crimean War a corps called “The Military Train” sprung into existence,
  which, like its predecessor, was chiefly officered by old soldiers who
  had won their commissions while serving in the ranks. The Military
  Train was reduced in its turn, and “The Army Service Corps” may be
  said to be its present equivalent.

Footnote 1:

  Placed on h. p. 25th Dec., 1818. D. 1839. (_See_ note to Lieut. Elwes,
  71st Regt.)

Footnote 2:

  In 1830 this unfortunate officer was still a capt. in the corps.

Footnote 3:

  Quitted the service after 1830, with rank of maj. D. 10th Sept., 1849,
  aged 92. His son, Basil Jackson (_see_ Staff notes), wrote the
  military life of the Duke of Wellington, and several scientific works.

Footnote 4:

  Serving in 1817. H. p. 1818.

Footnote 5:

  H. p. 28th Aug., 1823.

Footnote 6:

  Serving in same corps in 1830.

Footnote 7:

  Adjt. 20th July, 1815. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 8:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 10:

  Lieut. 60th Rifles 28th Nov., 1816. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 11:

  Lieut. 20th July, 1815. Exchanged to 60th Rifles 18th Apr., 1816. H.
  p. 27th Sept., 1817. Living 1855.

Footnote 12:

  H. p. 25th Dec., 1818.

Footnote 13:

  Principal vet.-surgeon at Maidstone depôt 17th Sept., 1839. Serving in
  1846.

                           ------------------


                      ROYAL REGIMENT OF ARTILLERY.

                                 STAFF.

 [1] Col. Sir George Adam Wood, Kt., commanding.

 [2] Lt.-Col. Sir Augustus Frazer, K.C.B., commanding Royal Horse
    Artillery.

 [3] Lt.-Col. A. Macdonald, commanding six troops of Horse Artillery
    attached to the Cavalry.

 [4] Adjt. Capt. Wm. Pakenham, R.H.A.

 [5] Lt.-Col. Sir John May, A.A. General.

 [6] Capt. H. Baynes, W., Brigade Major.

 [7] Lieuts. John Bloomfield and  [8]George Coles, Staff-Adjts. to
    Sir George Wood.

 [9] Lieut. Wm. Bell, Staff-Adjt. to Sir A. Frazer.

[10] Lt.-Cols. S.G. Adye, [11] C. Gold, [12] J.S. Williamson,
    and [13] J. Hawker, field officers commanding two batteries of
    Foot Artillery attached to each division of the army.

[14] Major P. Drummond, field officer commanding Reserve Artillery.

[15] Lt.-Col. Sir Alexander Dickson, K.C.B., commanding Battering
    Train.

Footnote 1:

  Son of Adam Wood, Lt. of Capt. Coote’s Independent Company of Foot at
  Landguard Fort, who d. 1773. Commanded the R.A. in Holland during the
  campaign of 1814, and led one of the attacking columns at
  Bergen-op-Zoom. Was knighted when proxy to Sir J.C. Sherbrooke at the
  installation of the Bath. 22nd May, 1812. C.B., K.M.T., K.St.V., and
  K.W. for Waterloo. A.D.C. to George IV., and K.C.H. D. a maj.-gen.,
  22nd April, 1831.

Footnote 2:

  Son of Col. Andrew Frazer, R.E., by Charlotte, dau. of Stillingfleet
  Durnford, of the Ordnance Office. Bn at Dunkirk, 5th Sept., 1776, and
  educated at the High School, Edinburgh, where he was a contemporary of
  Lord Brougham. Joined the Military Academy at Woolwich in August,
  1790, and became 2nd lt. R.A., 18th Sept., 1793. Served in Holland in
  1794. In 1795 was appointed to the Royal Horse Artillery, and in 1799
  again embarked for active service in Holland. Commanded the artillery
  of the expedition against Buenos Ayres, and was present at the assault
  of that city in July, 1807. In June 1811, was made bt. maj., and in
  Nov., 1812, joined the British army in the Pa. Five months later was
  appointed to command the Horse Artillery of Wellington’s army, and
  served in this capacity until the conclusion of the war, winning for
  himself, and his branch of the service, a high reputation. K.C.B. and
  the gold cross, with one clasp. In the Waterloo campaign, Frazer again
  commanded the R.H.A., and “his high reputation as an artillery
  officer, combined with his firmness of character, prevailed on the
  Duke of Wellington, who was at first not favourable to the exchange,
  to permit him to substitute 9-pounders for 6-pounders in the troops of
  Horse Artillery serving with the army. To this exchange, which
  preceded the battle of Waterloo, may justly be ascribed much of the
  success of that memorable day.” Another instance of Frazer’s firmness
  of character is exhibited in the speedy way in which he made the
  Prussians, two days after Waterloo, surrender all the French guns
  which had been captured by the British, and which the rapacious
  Prussians had annexed, and “regularly parked with Prussian sentries.”
  Frazer’s interesting letters from the Pa. and the Netherlands were
  published in 1859. These letters stamp the writer as a thorough
  soldier, a perfect gentleman, a delightful companion, and a modest and
  unassuming man, possessing a heart that could feel for others’ woes.
  He m., in 1809, Emma, youngest dau. of James Lynn, of Woodbridge, in
  Suffolk, and had issue two sons. He d. as col., 11th June, 1835, at
  Woolwich, whilst holding the appointment of Director of the Royal
  Laboratory.

Footnote 3:

  One of the “Macdonalds of Glencoe.” Commanded a troop of R.H.A. in the
  Pa. C.B. for Waterloo. Was entertained at a public banquet at
  Edinburgh on 18th June, 1816. Maj.-gen. 1837. D. at Leamington 21st
  May, 1840.

Footnote 4:

  Retired on h. p. as 2nd capt., 1st July, 1822. 3rd son of Edward
  Pakenham, M.P. for co. Donegal, by Catherine, dau. of Chambre
  Ponsonby-Barker. Bn. 3rd Feb., 1789. D. about 1863.

Footnote 5:

  Son of John May, Esq., storekeeper of the Ordnance, Fort George,
  Guernsey; lineally descended from Thos. May, the poet (of the family
  of Mays, of Mayfield, county Sussex). Bn. 1778. Md. 1819 the only
  child of Robt. Broff, Esq., formerly governor of Bencoolen, Sumatra.
  Major-Genl. in the army 1838. Was a colonel in the R.A., in which he
  served from 1795. Recd. the gold cross and three clasps for his
  services at Badajoz, Salamanca, Vittoria, San Sebastian, Nivelle,
  Nive, and Toulouse. Was given the order of St. Anne of Russia, 2nd
  class, for his services at Quatre Bras and Waterloo, also nominated a
  knight of the Tower and Sword of Portugal, in 1815, for his services
  in the Peninsula. K.C.B. 1815. K.C.H. 1822. Sir John was employed
  afloat in bomb service from 1st Dec., 1797, to the 16th April, 1801.
  Present at Copenhagen in 1807. He recd. two musket balls through the
  left thigh when charging the French rearguard on the morning after the
  battle of Salamanca, and a violent contusion at Vittoria. D., 8th May,
  1847, in London. Above information communicated by Mrs. Gibbons,
  great-niece of Sir John May, K.C.B.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards bt. maj. and K.H. Maj., unattached list, 12th Dec., 1826.
  D. in Guernsey, 15th July, 1844.

Footnote 7:

  A scion of the Tipperary family, and cousin of the late Baron
  Bloomfield, the diplomatist. Was attaché at Stockholm for some years.
  G.C.B. Gen. and col.-commandant R.H.A. D. 1st Aug., 1880, in London,
  unm.

Footnote 8:

  Retired by sale of his commission, as 2nd capt., 9th April, 1825,
  after being some years on temporary h. p.

Footnote 9:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir Wm. Bell, K.C.B. Col.-comdt. R.H.A. His father was
  Wm. Bell, a native of Tanfield, Yorkshire, a cornet in the Yeomanry,
  but a surgeon by profession, who had a good practice in Ripon, and was
  twice mayor of that town. His mother was Ann Atkinson, one of the
  daughters of Henry Atkinson, town clerk of Ripon. The way W. Bell
  became an artilleryman was as follows:—“Old Col. Quist of the R.A.,
  head of the riding establishment (who belonged to a Dutch family),
  came to Ripon to buy horses when Bell was a boy in his teens, and
  happening to meet the youth in Ripon society, he took a fancy to him.”
  Col. Quist used his interest in obtaining for Bell a nomination to a
  cadetship at Woolwich Academy. In due course Bell obtained a
  commission in the R.A., and soon evinced that he had a talent for “the
  music of war.” He served in the West Indies from 1807–1810, and was
  present at the capture of several of the West Indian islands. Served
  in the Pa. from July, 1813, to 1814, and was present at five general
  actions. Slightly wounded at Toulouse. His duties were very onerous
  both at Quatre Bras and Waterloo, where he was employed in conveying
  instructions and orders to officers commanding batteries in all parts
  of the field. He had the narrowest escape of being crushed to death,
  in after life, that ever befell anyone. “He fell from his horse in
  front of a battery of R.H.A. at Norwich (or Ipswich), and the battery
  going over him at a gallop, the drag-shoe of one of the guns knocked
  his ear off!” Sir W. Bell resided during the latter part of his life
  at Ripon, and d. there, unm., 28th March, 1873. Buried at Tanfield.
  M.I. (The above is from information supplied by the late Gen. W.H.
  Askwith, R.A.)

Footnote 10:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Stephen Galway Adye, C.B. Superintendent of the
  Rl. Laboratory. 2nd son of Maj. Stephen P. Adye, R.A. Served under
  Abercromby in Egypt, and took part in the Walcheren Expedition. Served
  also in the Pa. D. 13th Sept., 1838.

Footnote 11:

  Afterwards Col. Charles Gold, C.B. Sold his commission 31st Dec.,
  1827. D. at Leamington, 17th April, 1842.

Footnote 12:

  C.B. for Waterloo. M., 30th April, 1817, Miss Maclean, of Giese, co.
  Caithness. Was an officer of considerable ability, and his scientific
  knowledge of gunnery was most beneficial to his corps. D. at Woolwich,
  26th April, 1836.

Footnote 13:

  Afterwards Col. James Hawker, C.B., Lt.-Gov. of Tilbury Fort. Brother
  to Capt. Edward Hawker, of the _Britannia_, and to John Hawker, of
  Plymouth. D. at Woolwich, 12th Oct., 1827, leaving a widow and three
  daughters.

Footnote 14:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Percy Drummond, C.B. Son of Duncan Drummond,
  R.A., Director-Gen. of the Field Train. Lt.-Gov. of the R.M. Academy,
  1829. Director-Gen. of Artillery, 1840. D. at Woolwich, 1st Jan.,
  1843.

Footnote 15:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. Sir A. Dickson, G.C.B. and K.C.H., &c. 3rd son of
  Adm. Wm. Dickson, by his 1st wife, Jane, dau. of Alexander
  Collingwood, of Unthank, in Northumberland. The eminent war services
  of this distinguished soldier are too well known to need
  recapitulation. From 1798 to 1815 Sir A. Dickson was “on the
  war-path,” in Europe, North and South America. He commanded the allied
  artillery at Vittoria, San Sebastian, the passage of Bidassoa,
  Nivelle, Nive, and Toulouse. Recd. the gold cross and six clasps.
  K.T.S. The Portuguese medal, and Spanish gold cross for Albuera. Good
  service pens. of £365 per ann. M. Miss Briones, and had issue. D. 22nd
  April, 1840, and was bd. at Plumstead.


                         ROYAL HORSE ARTILLERY.

                          MAJOR BULL’S TROOP.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Robert Bull, W.               28 June, 1805 │Maj., 31 Dec. 1811
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Robert M. Cairnes, K.          1 Feb.  1808 │12 Apr. 1814
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] Matthew Louis                 28 Dec.  1805 │
   [4] Wm. Smith, W.                  1 Feb.  1808 │
   [5] John Townsend                  1 Dec.  1811 │

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Lt.-Col. R. Bull, C.B. and K.H. Bn. at Stafford, 3rd March,
  1778. Entered the R.A. in 1794, and saw service in the West Indies in
  1796–1798. Commanded I troop of Horse Artillery in the Pa. At Waterloo
  “his troop effected the greatest possible service throughout the early
  part of the battle; but owing to the loss sustained both in men and
  horses, together with the disabled condition of the guns (through
  incessant firing) it was obliged to retire before the close.” Bt.
  lt.-col. for Waterloo. Retd. on f. p. in 1834. D. at Bath, 17th Aug.,
  1835.

Footnote 2:

  2nd son of Maj. W. Cairnes, of 39th Foot, who served all through the
  defence of Gibraltar, and d. in India. On the female side he was of
  the elder branch of the same family to whom a baronetcy was granted by
  Queen Anne (extinct). Killed by a cannon ball. Had seen much service
  in the Pa. M.I. in Canterbury Cathedral.

Footnote 3:

  3rd son of Rear.-Adm. Sir Thomas Louis, Bart., by Jacquetta, dau. of
  Samuel Belfield. M., in 1825, Mary, eldest dau. of the Rev. A.
  Mallock, of Cockington Court. Retd. on f. p. as lt.-col., 1st April,
  1852. D. in Jersey, 19th March, 1853.

Footnote 4:

  Afterwards Sir W. Smith, Knt. 2nd capt. 1825. Killed by a carriage
  accident in Dublin, 3rd April, 1835. His son, a cadet at the R.M.A.
  Woolwich, met with a violent death in May, 1836.

Footnote 5:

  Retired on h. p. 6th Feb., 1826.

                  LIEUT.-COLONEL WEBBER SMITH’S TROOP.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.

   [1] James Webber Smith             1 June, 1806 │Lt.-Col., 21 Sept.
                                                   │1813

            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │

   [2] Edmund Y. Walcot              23 Mar.  1809 │

           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [3] Donald Craufurd, W.            2 Nov.  1805 │

   [4] David J. Edwards               1 June, 1806 │

   [5] Henry Forster, W.             16 Oct.  1807 │

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards lt.-gen. and C.B. Commanded a troop of Horse Artillery in
  the Pa., and recd. the gold medal and one clasp for Vittoria and San
  Sebastian. C.B. for Waterloo. M. Eleanora, eldest dau. of Sir John
  Simeon, Bart. Director-Gen. of Artillery 1844–1848. Col.-Comdt. 1848.
  D. at Brighton, 21st March, 1853.

Footnote 2:

  Retired on f. p., 10th April, 1845, as lt.-col. D. at Winkton, Hants
  28th Feb., 1847.

Footnote 3:

  4th son of Patrick Craufurd, by Jean, dau. of Lt.-Col. Donald
  Macdonald of the 84th Regt. D. in Perthshire, 21st Oct., 1819.

Footnote 4:

  Retired on h. p. 29th July, 1825, as 2nd capt., and d. at Kerryside,
  near Carmarthen, 14th April, 1866.

Footnote 5:

  Severely wounded in the foot by a grape shot. Served at Copenhagen in
  1807, and in the Corunna campaign. Retd. on h. p. as 2nd capt., 7th
  Feb., 1832, and d. at Aix-la-Chapelle, 24th Oct., 1855.

               LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR R. GARDINER’S TROOP.[O]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir Robert Gardiner,          18 Nov.  1811 │Lt.-Col., 3 Mar.
       K.C.B.                                      │1814

            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │

   [2] Thos. Dyneley                 22 May,  1808 │

           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [3] Robert Harding                 6 Apr.  1807 │

   [4] Wm. Swabey                    13 Aug.  1807 │

   [5] Wm. Ingilby                    9 Apr.  1812 │

Footnote O:

  This troop had the old 6-pounders.

Footnote 1:

  Youngest son of Capt. John Gardiner (3rd Buffs), and brother of
  Lt.-Gen. Sir John Gardiner, Col.-in-Chf. 61st Regt. Bn. 2nd May, 1781.
  Joined the R.A. 7th April, 1797. In Oct. of same year was sent to
  Gibraltar, then partially blockaded by the French fleet. In Nov.,
  1798, was present at the capture of Minorca. Served under Lord
  Cathcart, in North Germany, in 1805, and in the Pa., and was made bt.
  maj. for his services in the trenches before Badajoz. Commanded a
  field battery at Salamanca, and at the capture of Madrid. At the siege
  of Burgos he volunteered with several of his men for the trenches. Was
  soon after appointed to the command of a troop of Horse Artillery,
  with which he served until the conclusion of the war. K.C.B. “His
  troop was most severely pressed in covering the left of the army on
  the retreat from Quatre Bras on the 17th, and took part in the great
  battle of the 18th June.” Appointed principal equerry to Prince
  Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, on the latter’s marriage with Princess
  Charlotte. A.D.C. to George IV., William IV., and her late Majesty
  Queen Victoria. In 1848 was appointed Gov. and Col.-in-Chf. of
  Gibraltar. G.C.B. K.St.A. and Grand Cross of Charles III. of Spain. D.
  as gen. and col.-comdt. R.A. at Claremont, 26th June, 1864. He m., in
  1816, Caroline, eldest dau. of Lt.-Gen. Sir John MacLeod, and had
  issue.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards Lt.-Gen. Dyneley, C.B. Served at the battle of Maida, and
  in the Pa. Was taken prisoner at Majalahonda, when engaged with the
  rearguard of the French army, 11th Aug., 1812, but escaped from the
  enemy. Bt.-maj. for Waterloo. D. 21st June, 1860.

Footnote 3:

  4th son of John Harding, of Old Springs, co. Stafford, by Sarah Booth,
  Bn. 1791. Retd. on h. p. 8th April, 1825, as 2nd capt., and d. 12th
  Nov., 1849.

Footnote 4:

  Retired on h. p. as 2nd capt., 1825. D. 6th Feb., 1872. There is a
  short memoir of this officer’s services in the _Gentleman’s Magazine_
  for 1872.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir Wm. Bates Ingilby, K.C.B., col.-comdt. R.A. 2nd
  son of the Rev. Henry Ingilby, of Ripley, and aftds. of Kirkleatham,
  co. York, by Isabella, eldest dau. of Ralph Bates, of Milbourne, co.
  Northumberland. Bn. 30th April, 1791. Served in the Pa., and was
  present at the sieges of Ciudad Rodrigo, forts of Salamanca (wounded)
  and Burgos. Also at the battles of Busaco, Fuentes d’Onor, and
  Salamanca. This Sir Wm. Ingilby, who d. in 1879, unm., must not be
  confounded with his cousin and namesake, Sir Wm. Ingilby, of Ripley
  Castle, a baronet of the second creation, of whom many amusing
  anecdotes are still remembered in Yorkshire, and whose appearance
  cannot have been martial.

                  CAPTAIN EDWARD C. WHINYATES’S TROOP.

                   (_Rocket Troop—reduced in 1816._)

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Edward C. Whinyates, W.       24 Jan.  1813 │8 July, 1805
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Charles C. Dansey, W.         10 Oct.  1809 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] Robert H. Ord                  7 Apr.  1806 │
   [4] Amherst Wright, W.             1 Feb.  1808 │
   [5] Thos. Fox Strangways, W.       1 Feb.  1808 │
   [6] Adam Ward                      9 Sept. 1810 │

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir E.C. Whinyates, K.C.B. and K.H. Col.-Comdt. R.H.A.
  This distinguished officer was 3rd son of Maj. Thomas Whinyates, of
  Abbotsleigh, co. Devon. His mother was Catherine, dau. of Adm. Sir
  Thomas Frankland, 5th Bart., representative of the historic family of
  “Frankland of Thirkleby,” co. York, which has a direct descent from
  Oliver Cromwell. Bn. 6th May, 1782. Joined the R.A. 1st March, 1798.
  Accompanied the expedition, under Abercromby, to the Helder in 1799.
  Aftds. joined the army under the Duke of York, and took part in the
  campaign in North Holland. Served at the capture of Madeira in 1801.
  In 1807 was appointed adj. to the artillery of the army which, under
  Lord Cathcart, was employed in the attack on Copenhagen, and where he
  commanded, throughout the siege, one of the principal batteries, which
  went by the expressive name of the “Churchyard” battery. On his return
  home was appointed 2nd capt. of Capt. Lefebure’s troop of horse
  artillery (D troop), and in Feb., 1810, embarked for the Pa. The
  _Camilla_, of 200 tons, having on board Capt. Whinyates, two officers,
  and 36 horses, nearly foundered in the Bay of Biscay, and was at last
  driven back to Cork, almost a wreck. This troop, arriving in the Pa.
  by detachments, was prevented from taking the field for some time.
  During the interval Whinyates served on the artillery staff, and was
  present at the battle of Busaco. His troop took the field before the
  battle of Albuera, where Whinyates commanded the half-troop which was
  attached to the cavalry on the right. It was here that some of the
  severest fighting took place. He was mentioned in public despatches
  for his conduct in the brilliant attack and defeat of Lallemand’s
  cavalry at Ribera, 24th July, 1812. Promoted 1st capt. in Jan., 1813,
  which occasioned his return to England. At Waterloo he had three
  horses shot under him, was struck by a round shot on the leg, and sev.
  wnded. in the left arm towards the close of the day. Bt. maj., and a
  permanent pens. for wounds. The eminent services of Maj. Whinyates
  were recognised by his being promoted bt. maj. for Waterloo, and
  re-appointed to a troop of horse artillery by the Duke of Wellington
  in 1823, and nominated K.H. same year. C.B., 1831. K.C.B. 1860. Gen.
  and col.-comdt. of Brigade R.H.A., 1864. D. at Cheltenham 25th Dec.,
  1865. He had m., 22nd May, 1827, Eliz., only dau. of Samuel Crompton,
  of Wood End, co. York. An interesting memoir of Gen. Whinyates’s
  military life was published by the R.A. Institution in 1867, from
  which the above notice is extracted. The Editor is indebted to
  Maj.-Gen. Whinyates, nephew of Sir Edward, for the loan of the said
  memoir.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards Col. Dansey, C.B. Served in the Pa. Sev. wnded. at
  Waterloo. D. 21st July, 1853.

Footnote 3:

  Afterwards Maj. Ord. K.H. Placed on temporary h. p. 1st April, 1817,
  and again from 1st Feb., 1819, to 1823. D. 4th Dec., 1828.

Footnote 4:

  Was attached to the Swedish army in 1813–1814, and saw much service.
  Recd. a gold medal from the Prince Royal of Sweden for the siege of
  Gluckstadt, and made a Knt. of the Rl. Order of the Sword in 1814.
  Retd. on f. p. as maj. 15th June, 1840. D. at Malta, 27th Sept., 1840.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards Brig.-Gen. in the Crimea, where he met a soldier’s death at
  Inkermann by the bursting of a shell. Served as a subaltern with the
  Rocket Troop sent to Germany, and was present at the battles of Goerde
  and Leipsic in 1813. K.St.A. of Russia, and the Swedish Order of the
  Sword. Dangerously wounded at Waterloo, and his recovery was
  miraculous. Eldest son of the Hon. Charles Strangways, by Jane, dau.
  of Rev. Dr. Haines. Bn. 28th Dec., 1790. M., 20th July, 1833, Sophia,
  eldest dau. of Benjamin Harenc, and had issue.

Footnote 6:

  Lost a leg at Tarbes. D. in Dublin, 28th Feb., 1827.

                           ------------------

                        CAPTAIN MERCER’S TROOP.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            SECOND CAPTAINS.              Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Alexander Cavalié Mercer       3 Dec.  1806 │
   [2] Robert Newland                20 Dec.  1814 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] Henry M. Leathes               1 June, 1806 │
   [4] John Hincks                    1 Feb.  1808 │
   [5] John F. Breton                15 Mar.  1811 │

Footnote 1:

  Came of a military race. 2nd son of Gen. Mercer, R.E. Bn. 1783. Served
  in South America in 1807–1808. His troop came in for the hottest part
  of the battle on Waterloo Day, and suffered considerably in loss of
  men and horses. Sir George Wood, R.A., paid the battery a visit on
  that memorable afternoon, and was surprised to find so many cannon
  balls whizzing round his ears. “D——n it, Mercer,” he exclaimed, “you
  seem to be having a hot time of it here.” Hot it was for all parties
  concerned, but the gallant way in which the gunners worked their guns
  kept the French cavalry from reaching the infantry squares behind
  Mercer’s battery. In after years Gen. Mercer published his _Journal of
  the Waterloo Campaign_, which is a delightful book in every respect.
  Attained the rank of gen. and col.-comdt., and d. at Cowley Cottage,
  Exeter, 9th Nov., 1868.

Footnote 2:

  Retired by the sale of his commission 5th April, 1831.

Footnote 3:

  Of Herringfleet Hall, Suffolk. 3rd son and eventual heir of Maj.
  George Leathes, by Mary, dau. of J. Moore. Served in the Pa. Resigned
  his commission in 1819. Was distinguished through life for his
  benevolence and philanthropy, and was equally beloved by rich and
  poor, young and old, soldiers and civilians. He d. at Lowestoft, 16th
  Dec., 1864. An interesting obituary notice appeared in the
  _Gentleman’s Magazine_ soon after his lamented death. He left issue by
  his marriage with Charlotte, dau. of Thos. Fowler, of Gunton Hall,
  Suffolk.

Footnote 4:

  2nd son of Capt. Thos. Hincks, of Marfield, co. Leicester, by Joanne,
  eldest dau. of Lt.-Col. Roger Morris, of York. Retd. as capt. on h. p.
  1826. M., 31st May, 1826, Henrietta, dau. of Henry Pulleine, of Crake
  Hall, co. York and d. s. p. 14th Oct., 1842.

Footnote 5:

  The following anecdote is taken from Gen. Mercer’s _Waterloo Journal_:
  “Lt. Breton, who had already lost two horses and had mounted a troop
  horse, was conversing with me during a leisure moment. As his horse
  stood at right angles to mine, the poor jaded animal dozingly rested
  his muzzle on my thigh; whilst I, the better to hear amidst the
  infernal din, leant forward, resting my arm between his ears. In this
  attitude a cannon ball smashed the horse’s head to atoms, and the
  headless trunk sank to the ground!” Retd. on h. p. 1st Oct., 1820, and
  d. at Lyndhurst, 17th March, 1852.

                         MAJOR RAMSAY’S TROOP.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Wm. Norman Ramsay, K.         17 Dec.  1813 │Maj., 22 Nov. 1813
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Alexander Macdonald, W.        1 Oct.  1812 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] Wm. Brereton, W.               1 June, 1806 │
   [4] Philip Sandilands              1 Feb.  1808 │
   [5] Wm. L. Robe, K.               28 June, 1808 │

Footnote 1:

  This officer’s name has been immortalised by Napier in his _Peninsular
  War_. He came of a Scottish family, and was the eldest of three sons
  of a retired naval officer who resided in Edinburgh. He was the pride
  and glory of the branch of the army to which he belonged, and the
  beau-ideal of what a Horse Artilleryman should be. He served with
  great credit in Maj. Bull’s troop of R.H.A., in the Pa., from 1811 to
  1813. It was in the campaign of 1811 that he performed the brilliant
  action which Napier’s facile pen has so strikingly illustrated. This
  happened on 5th May, 1811, when, the British cavalry out-guards being
  far outnumbered near Fuentes d’Onor, were driven in upon their
  supports, and Capt. Ramsay found himself cut off. It is a matter of
  history how Ramsay, at the head of his battery, charged like a
  whirlwind through the French squadrons who intervened between his
  handful of men and the British troops, and rejoined the latter in
  safety when given up for lost. And at the battle of Vittoria, Ramsay
  again distinguished himself, but, by an unfortunate act of
  disobedience to Wellington’s orders, he incurred the Iron Duke’s iron
  displeasure. The story has been told as follows by a well-known
  author, and differs somewhat from the account given by Col. Duncan in
  his _History of the Royal Artillery_:—“I remember hearing a striking
  instance of what, perhaps, might be called severe justice, which he
  exercised on a young and distinguished officer of artillery in Spain;
  and though one cannot help pitying the case of the gallant young
  fellow who was the sacrifice, yet the question of strict duty, to the
  very word, was set at rest for ever under the Duke’s command, and it
  saved much after trouble, by making every officer satisfied, however
  fiery his courage or tender his sense of being suspected of the white
  feather, that implicit obedience was the course he must pursue. The
  case was this: The army was going into action. The Duke posted an
  officer, with his six guns, at a certain point, telling him to remain
  there until he had orders from him. Away went the rest of the army,
  and the officer was left doing nothing at all, which he didn’t like;
  for he was one of those high-blooded gentlemen who are never so happy
  as when they are making other people miserable, and he was longing for
  the head of a French column to be hammering away at. In half an hour
  or so he heard the distant sound of action, and it approached nearer
  and nearer, until he heard it close beside him; and he wondered rather
  that he was not invited to take a share in it, when, pat to his
  thought, up came an aide-de-camp at full speed, telling him that Gen.
  Somebody ordered him to bring up his guns. The officer asked, ‘Did not
  the order come from Lord Wellington?’ The aide-de-camp said ‘No,’ but
  from the gen., whoever he was. The officer explained that he was
  placed there by Lord Wellington, under command not to move unless by
  an order from himself. The aide-de-camp stated that the general’s
  entire brigade was being driven in, and must be annihilated without
  the aid of the guns, and asked, ‘Would he let a whole brigade be
  slaughtered?’ in a tone which wounded the young soldier’s pride,
  savouring, as he thought it did, of an imputation on his courage. He
  immediately ordered his guns to move, and joined battle with the
  general; but while he was away an aide-de-camp from Lord Wellington
  rode up to where the guns had been posted, and, of course, no gun was
  to be had for the service which Lord Wellington required. Well, the
  French were repulsed, as it happened; but the want of those six guns
  seriously marred a pre-concerted movement of the Duke’s, and the
  officer in command of them was immediately put in arrest. Almost every
  general officer in the army endeavoured to get this sentence revoked,
  lamenting the fate of a gallant fellow being sent away for a slight
  error in judgment while the army was in full action; but Lord
  Wellington was inexorable, saying he must make an example to secure
  himself in the perfect obedience of officers to their orders, and it
  had the effect.”—Mr. Lover’s _Handy Andy_. To a man of Norman Ramsay’s
  highly honourable and sensitive nature the circumstances of his
  arrest, coupled with the omission of his name from the Vittoria
  despatches, and the loss of a brevet he had well earned, may be said
  to have inflicted a wound which neither time nor subsequent honours
  could heal. Three weeks after his arrest he was restored to the
  command of his battery, to the great joy of the whole army in Spain,
  and after the battle of the Bidassoa he was promoted bt. maj. At
  Waterloo he commanded the H Troop R.H.A., and his forward gallantry in
  that battle attracted the fatal bullet which put an end to his noble
  life. He was buried on the field by his great friend Sir Augustus
  Frazer, during a momentary lull in the battle, but three weeks later
  was disinterred and his body sent to Edinburgh, as the only
  consolation to his aged father, half-demented with grief, who was
  fated to lose his three gallant sons in the short space of eight
  months. Norman Ramsay m., 14th June, 1808, Mary Emilia, eldest dau. of
  Lt.-Gen. MacLeod, of Macleod. Sir Augustus Frazer erected a monument
  to Ramsay’s memory on the field of Waterloo. The hero’s remains were
  subsequently interred in Inveresk Churchyard.

Footnote 2:

  Brother to Gen. Sir John Macdonald, Adjt.-Gen., and to Col. Robert
  Macdonald, 1st Foot. Aftds. Lt.-Gen., C.B., and K.St.A. Served at the
  capture of the in 1806, and was taken prisoner at Buenos Ayres in
  1807. Served in the Pa. and distinguished himself at Busaco and San
  Sebastian. Was sev. wnded. at Waterloo. Bt. Maj. D. at
  Aix-la-Chapelle, 31st May, 1856.

Footnote 3:

  Aftds. Lt.-Gen. and K.C.B. Also K.H. and col.-comdt. R.A. Served in
  the Pa., and was sev. wounded at Waterloo (bt.-maj. in Jan., 1819.)
  Served as maj.-gen., and was second in command of the expedition under
  M.-Gen. D’Aguilar, who assaulted and took the forts of the Bocca
  Tigris in the Canton River. Served with the fleets off Sebastopol in
  Oct., 1854, and directed the rockets fired from the _Britannia_
  against the city and forts. D. 27th July, 1864.

Footnote 4:

  Retired on f. p. 23rd June, 1846. D. as lt.-gen. at Hythe, Oct., 1869.

Footnote 5:

  Son of Col. Sir Wm. Robe, R.A., a distinguished officer. He obtained
  his first commission 3rd Oct., 1807, and in the same year accompanied
  the expedition to Gothenburg. Served throughout the Par. War with much
  distinction. “He had the singular honour, as a subaltern, to be
  mentioned for his distinguished conduct by Wellington, and in
  consequence the gold medal and clasp for the battles of Nivelle and
  Nive were forwarded to his family after his death.” An account of his
  death at Waterloo is given in a letter from Capt. Alex. Macdonald, of
  Ramsay’s battery, to Sir Wm. Robe. (_See_ Appendix.)

                LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR HEW D. ROSS’S TROOP.

                  (_The historical “Chestnut Troop.”_)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir Hew Dalrymple Ross,       24 July, 1806 │Lt.-Col., 21 June,
       K.C.B.                                      │1813

            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │

   [2] John B. Parker, W.             5 June, 1808 │Maj., 21 June,
                                                   │1813

           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │

   [3] _Richard Hardinge_            19 Dec.  1806 │

   [4] James Day, W.                  1 Feb.  1808 │

   [5] Phipps Onslow                 16 Dec.  1808 │

   [6] Francis Warde                  8 Mar.  1812 │

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards F.-M. and G.C.B. He was grandson of Alexander Ross, of
  Balkail, co. Wigtown, and cousin to Capt. Sir James Ross. R.N., the
  distinguished Polar navigator. Commanded the A Troop, A Brigade,
  R.H.A., during the Par. War, and was dangerously wounded at the siege
  of Badajoz. K.C.B. and K.T.S., also the gold cross and two clasps.
  K.St.A. of Russia for Waterloo. He was the first artilleryman who was
  made a F.-M. D. lt.-gov. of Chelsea Hospital in Dec., 1868, aged 90.

Footnote 2:

  Afterwards maj.-gen. and C.B. Served in the Pa. and at Walcheren. Lost
  his left leg at Waterloo. Bt. lt.-col. 18th June, 1815. Was lt.-gov.
  of the R.M.A. at Woolwich, from 1st April, 1848, up to the time of his
  death in March, 1851. He was 2nd son of Adm. Sir Hyde Parker, by Anne,
  dau. of John Boteler, of Henley. M., in 1814, Anne, dau. of Adm. Home
  Popham, and had issue.

Footnote 3:

  Brother to Henry, Viscount Hardinge. Was not at Waterloo, being
  otherwise employed that day, but was present both at Ligny and Quatre
  Bras on the eventful 16th June, 1815. Had served in the Pa. Aftds.
  maj.-gen. and K.H. Bn. 14th April, 1790. D. 20th July, 1864. He was
  twice md., and left issue by both wives.

Footnote 4:

  Served in the Pa. Retd. on h. p. as 2nd capt., 3rd Feb., 1828, and d.
  in Jersey, 1st Aug., 1843.

Footnote 5:

  3rd son of the Rev. Arthur Onslow, Archdeacon of Berks and Dean of
  Worcester, by Frances, dau. of Constantine Phipps. He was distantly
  related to the noble family of Onslow, one of whom was satirised in
  the lines:—

                 “What can Tommy Onslow do?
                 He can drive a curricle and two.
                 Can Tommy Onslow do no more?
                 Yes, he can drive a curricle and four.”

  Retd. on h. p. as lt. 9th Dec., 1824. D. 10th May, 1867. He was twice
  md., and left issue.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir Francis Warde, K.C.B., col.-comdt. R.A. D. at
  Winchfield, 4th May, 1879. He was 4th son of Charles Warde, of
  Squerryes Court, Kent. M. Annabella, eldest dau. of Robert Adeane, of
  Babraham, Cambs. D. at Reading in May, 1879.

MAJOR BEANE’S TROOP.

(_Reduced in 1816._)

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] George Beane, K.               1 Feb.  1808 │Maj., 12 Apr. 1814
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Wm. Webber, W.                17 Apr.  1812 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] John E. Maunsell               1 June, 1806 │
   [4] James R. Bruce                 1 June, 1806 │
   [5] Michael T. Cromie, W.         25 Jan.  1809 │

Footnote 1:

  This officer was appointed to the command of D Troop R.H.A. in 1813.
  Capt. Mercer succeeded to the command after Waterloo. Served in the
  Pa., and was present at Corunna, Vittoria, San Sebastian, Orthes, and
  Toulouse.

Footnote 2:

  Was present at the capture of the colony of Surinam in 1804. Served
  through the Par. War, and saw active service in Canada in 1814.
  Bt.-maj. 21st Jan., 1819; Maj., h. p., unattached, 1826; Lt.-col.,
  1837. D. at Hexworth House, Cornwall, 1st March, 1847.

Footnote 3:

  Retired on h. p. as 2nd capt., 1826. D. 20th Nov., 1869.

Footnote 4:

  Afterwards Sir James Robertson Bruce, Bart. 2nd son of the Rev. Sir
  Henry Bruce, Bart., by Letitia, dau. of the Rev. Dr. Henry Barnard.
  Retd. on h. p. as 1st lt., 16th June, 1820. M., 20th Sept., 1819,
  Ellen, youngest dau. of Robert Bamford Hesketh, of Gwyrch Castle, co.
  Denbigh, and had issue. D. 1836.

Footnote 5:

  Had both his legs taken off by one shot, and d. two days after, while
  undergoing amputation.


                            ROYAL ARTILLERY.

                     CAPTAIN SANDHAM’S BRIGADE.[P]

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Charles F. Sandham            14 Feb.  1814 │1 June, 1806
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Wm. H. Stopford                1 Apr.  1815 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] George Foot                    1 Feb.  1808 │
   [4] George M. Baynes               1 Feb.  1808 │
           SECOND LIEUTENANT.                      │
   [5] Darell Jago                    5 July, 1813 │

Footnote P:

  This and all the other Field Brigades were each armed with five
  9-pounders and one 5–1/2-inch howitzer.

Footnote 1:

  The name of Sandham has been a household word in the Artillery for
  nearly 140 years. The above Capt. Sandham came of the Sussex family of
  this name, who have for long been landholders in that county. “The
  first shot fired by the allied artillery at Waterloo was fired by
  Sandham’s brigade.” Retd. on h. p. as bt. maj., 7th June, 1822. D. at
  Rowdell, Sussex, Feb., 1869.

Footnote 2:

  Third son of Lt.-Gen. the Hon. Edward Stopford. Assumed the additional
  surname of Blair on succeeding to the Penninghame estate, co. Wigtown.
  Retd. on h. p. as bt. col., 20th Dec., 1841. Col. Stopford-Blair m.,
  in 1823, a dau. of Col. R. Bull, C.B. He d. 23rd Sept., 1868, and was
  succeeded by his eldest son.

Footnote 3:

  Retired on h. p. as 2nd capt., 13th Nov., 1826, and d. 26th Oct.,
  1874. In 1814 he served at the attack on Merxem, and the bombardment
  of the French shipping at Antwerp.

Footnote 4:

  Served in the Pa. Retd. on h. p. as 2nd capt., 25th Sept., 1834. D. in
  Guernsey, 28th Oct., 1874. He was nephew of Sir John Macleod, R.A.,
  and brother to Capt. H. Baynes, Bde.-Maj., R.A., at Waterloo.

Footnote 5:

  Retd. on h. p. as 2nd capt., 6th Jan., 1836. D. 22nd Dec., 1850.

                      CAPTAIN S. BOLTON’S BRIGADE.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Samuel Bolton, K.             20 Dec.  1814 │
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Charles Napier, W.            16 Mar.  1812 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] George Pringle                 1 June, 1806 │
   [4] Wm. C. Anderson                1 Aug.  1808 │
   [5] Charles Spearman, W.          30 Aug.  1812 │
   [6] Wm. Sharpin                   20 Dec.  1814 │
           SECOND LIEUTENANT.                      │
   [7] Burke Cuppage                 17 Dec.  1812 │

Footnote 1:

  This officer was killed towards the close of the battle, when
  directing the fire of his battery against the Imperial Guards in their
  historical advance.

Footnote 2:

  Succeeded Capt. Bolton in the command of the battery, and by
  Wellington’s orders gave the advancing French column “a salvo of grape
  and canister” which did terrible execution among their devoted ranks.
  A few minutes afterwards Capt. Napier recd. eight wounds from the
  bursting of a shrapnel shell. On 21st Jan., 1819, recd. a tardy bt. of
  maj. for his services at Waterloo. Retd. by the sale of his
  commission, 20th March, 1827. D. at Lisburn, 20th June, 1849.

Footnote 3:

  Retd. on f. p. as bt. maj., 16th May, 1839. D. in Edinburgh, 23rd
  March, 1842.

Footnote 4:

  Afterwards maj.-gen. D. in Edinburgh, 30th Aug., 1865.

Footnote 5:

  D. at Brussels, 27th June, 1815, of wounds recd. at Waterloo. Eldest
  son of Charles Spearman, of Thornley Hall, co. Durham, by Sarah, dau.
  and heir of Samuel Brooke, of Birchington, Kent.

Footnote 6:

  Retd. on h. p. 1st July, 1823. D. 23rd July, 1857.

Footnote 7:

  Afterwards Gen. Sir Burke Cuppage, K.C.B., and col.-comdt. R.A. Son of
  Lt.-Gen. Wm. Cuppage, R.A., by the widow of Maj. Cairnes, 39th Foot,
  whose son’s death has already been recorded. D. 19th April, 1877.

                       MAJOR W. LLOYD’S BRIGADE.

                          (_Reduced in 1817._)

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Wm. Lloyd, W.                 13 June, 1807 │Maj., 4 June, 1814
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Samuel Rudyerd                24 Mar.  1809 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] Fortescue Wells                1 Feb.  1808 │
   [4] Samuel Phelps                 18 Sept. 1809 │
           SECOND LIEUTENANT.                      │
   [5] Wm. H. Harvey, W.             13 Dec.  1813 │

Footnote 1:

  This gallant soldier was son of Maj. John Lloyd, 46th Foot, A.D.C. to
  Sir H. Clinton during the American War, by Corbetta, dau. of the Ven.
  George Holcombe, Archdeacon of Carmarthen. Bn. 2nd Dec., 1778. D. at
  Brussels 29th July, 1815, of a wound recd. at Waterloo.

Footnote 2:

  Son of Lt.-Gen. Henry Rudyerd, R.E. Attained rank of col. in 1846, and
  d. at Whitby, 29th July, 1847.

Footnote 3:

  Probably son of Adm. Wells, one of whose sons, in 1815, was a
  subaltern in the R.E. Retd. on h. p. 27th Oct., 1826. D. at Slade,
  29th Dec., 1861.

Footnote 4:

  Appears to have been the 7th son of Joseph Phelps, of Moyallon, co.
  Down. Retd. on h. p. 4th Aug., 1822. D. unm., 13th Dec., 1827.

Footnote 5:

  Second son of John Harvey, of Mount Pleasant, co. Wexford, by Mary,
  dau. of Wm. Harrison, of Castle Harrison, co. Cork. “Left his bride
  (Eliz., dau. of Col. Paulet Colebrooke, R.A.) at the church door to
  join his battery in the Netherlands.” Lost his right arm at Waterloo.
  Recd. a pens. of £70 per ann., and was appointed to the Invalid Batt.
  in 1817. Retd. on f. p. in 1819, and d. at Eltham, 18th Aug., 1826,
  leaving issue.

                     CAPTAIN J. SINCLAIR’S BRIGADE.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            SECOND CAPTAINS.              Regiment.│Army.
   [1] James Sinclair                14 Feb.  1814 │
   [2] Forbes Macbean                20 Dec.  1814 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] John A. Wilson                20 Dec.  1814 │
   [4] Wm. H. Poole, W.              10 May,  1815 │
           SECOND LIEUTENANT.                      │
   [5] Richard B. Burnaby            17 Dec.  1812 │

Footnote 1:

  Retd. on f. p. as lt.-col., 23rd Dec., 1841. D. in Jersey, 15th May,
  1851.

Footnote 2:

  Served at the siege of Copenhagen in 1807, expedition to Sweden 1808,
  Corunna campaign same year, Walcheren expedition and siege of Flushing
  1809. Served in Canada during the rebellion in 1837–1838, and for his
  services at Prescott, in Upper Canada, in Nov., 1838, received the
  thanks of the lt.-gov. and a bt. lt.-colonelcy. The Editor is indebted
  to this officer’s son, the late Col. Forbes Macbean, formerly comg.
  92nd Highlanders, Sergt.-at-Arms to Her late Majesty, for the
  following interesting particulars regarding his family: “My
  great-great-grandfather was minister of the High Church (Presbyterian)
  at Inverness for upwards of forty years. One of his sons (Forbes) was
  a maj.-gen. of R.A.; two of his sons were—one (Frederick) col.-comg.
  6th Foot, the other maj. of the 14th and 71st Regts. The eldest had
  six sons, all in the army, viz.: Sir William, K.C.B. and K.T.S., gen.
  and col.-in-chf. 92nd Highlanders; Frederick, K.H., col. 84th Regt.;
  Forbes, col. R.A.; Archibald, lt.-gen. R.A.; Alfred, capt. 93rd
  Highlanders; Alexander, lt. 83rd Regt. The last two died young. When
  their father took the youngest to the Duke of York, C.-in-C., to ask
  for a commission for him, the duke replied, ‘Yes, and if you had six
  more sons they should all have commissions.’ In the retreat on
  Corunna, my uncle Archibald, then in the Horse Artillery, picked up
  his brother Frederick off the roadside, very seriously wounded, and
  carried him on a gun-carriage into Corunna, and so saved his life.”
  Forbes Macbean attained the rank of bt. col., and d. (on f. p. retd.
  list) in Cleveland, co. York, 19th June, 1853.

Footnote 3:

  D. as col. R.A. at Dinan, France, 20th July, 1857.

Footnote 4:

  Retd. on h. p. as 2nd capt., 22nd Jan., 1834. D. at Terrick Hall,
  Whitechurch, 20th Jan., 1859.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards lt.-gen. on the retd. f. p. list. D. in 1871.

                     MAJOR T. ROGERS’S BRIGADE.[Q]

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Thos. Rogers                   1 June, 1806 │Maj., 4 June, 1814
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] Thos. Scott                   20 June, 1812 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANT.                       │
   [3] Robert Manners, W.            13 Mar.  1811 │
           SECOND LIEUTENANT.                      │
   [4] Richard Goodwin Wilson        17 Dec.  1812 │

Footnote Q:

  This list is imperfect, but is an improvement on the list given in
  Col. Duncan’s _History of the R.A._ in so far that the Editor has been
  able to add two officers to his list.

Footnote 1:

  Major Rogers’s battery was hotly engaged at Quatre Bras, and rendered
  valuable service. C.B. for Waterloo. D. as col., 9th Aug., 1839, at
  Woolwich.

Footnote 2:

  Had his horse killed under him at Quatre Bras. D. as bt.-maj. at
  Fordwich, Canterbury, 28th Dec., 1834.

Footnote 3:

  Was attached to Capt. Cleeves’s German battery at the battle of Ligny,
  and recd. a wound, which proved mortal, on 18th June, 1815.

Footnote 4:

  Was near Picton when the latter was killed at Waterloo, and was the
  last survivor of Rogers’s Waterloo Battery. Was superintendent at
  Shoeburyness during the Crimean War. D. as maj.-gen., retd. f. p.,
  24th Oct., 1876.

       ROYAL ARTILLERY OFFICERS AT WATERLOO WHO WERE UNATTACHED.

                           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.

                               [1] Wm. Lemoine.
                               [2] Edward Trevor.

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards maj. retd. p., 1840. D. 21st Oct., 1874.

Footnote 2:

  “Belonged to Capt. Tyler’s Company (6 Co. 5th Batt.) in 1815. The co.
  was at Antwerp in June, 1815, but Lieut. Trevor was unattached at
  Waterloo.” (Communicated by Lieut. Hubert Trevor, grandson of above
  officer.) Aftds. major-gen. retd. f. p. Md., 11th June, 1827, Anne,
  2nd dau. of G. Goulding. D. at Plymouth, 22nd Nov., 1878.

The following R.A. officers received the Waterloo medal, but “chaotic
confusion” has left a doubt as to whether they served at Waterloo, or
were with the reserve forces on 18th June, 1815:—

                           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.

                               [1] Edward Wm. Wood.
                               [2] George Silvester Maule.

                          SECOND LIEUTENANTS.

                               [3] Henry Dunnicliffe.
                               [4] Thos. Watkis.
                               [5] Wm. How Hennis.
                               [6] Chas. Geo. Kett.
                               [7] Gustavus T. Hume.

Footnote 1:

  In Capt. Ilbert’s company at Brussels in June, 1815. D. at Gibraltar,
  25th Nov., 1826.

Footnote 2:

  In Capt. Ilbert’s company at Brussels in June, 1815. Served on board a
  gunboat in the Adriatic 1812. Served in Spain 1813. 2nd capt. 31st
  July, 1832. D. at Greenwich, 18th Oct., 1839.

Footnote 3:

  Retd. h. p. 1st Apr., 1819. D. at Richmond, 8th Apr., 1866.

Footnote 4:

  1st Lieut. 1st Aug., 1815. D. at the Cape of Good Hope 29th Apr.,
  1828.

Footnote 5:

  Retd. on f. p. as lt.-col. 1851. Attained rank of lt.-gen. retd. list
  1868, and d. at Boulogne 14th Dec., 1872.

Footnote 6:

  1st Lieut. 30th Sept., 1816. Retd. f. p. 4th March, 1835. D. 14th
  Sept., 1841.

Footnote 7:

  In Capt. Ilbert’s company at Brussels in June, 1815. 1st Lieut. 21st
  Nov., 1816. Purchased a cornetcy in 15th Lt. Dragoons, 16th Dec.,
  1819. Lieut. 7th Aug., 1823. Capt. 10th June, 1824. H. p. 1829.
  Probably belonged to a collateral branch of “Hume, of Castle Hume,”
  co. Fermanagh.

                  CORPS OF ROYAL ARTILLERY DRIVERS.[R]

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

          CAPTAIN-COMMISSARY.             Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Wm. H. Humphreys              21 May,  1806 │

       FIRST LIEUT.-COMMISSARIES.                  │

   [2] George Fiske                   5 June, 1804 │

   [3] Matthew Evans                  1 Jan.  1807 │

   [4] Wm. Carthew                   14 Jan.  1807 │

   [5] George Wilkinson               1 Sept. 1808 │

   [6] Edward Philpot                 1 Sept. 1808 │

   [7] Thomas Reid                    1 May,  1809 │

   [8] John Roberts                   1 Dec.  1809 │

       SECOND LIEUT. COMMISSARY.                   │

   [9] Joseph Jagger                 16 July, 1813 │

               ADJUTANT.                           │

  [10] Moore Jordan                   1 Jan.  1813 │First Lieut., 7
                                                   │June, 1804

Footnote R:

  “The corps of R.A. Drivers was gradually reduced after the peace of
  1814—four troops on 1st Jan., 1815, two on 1st July, 1816, and two on
  1st Aug., 1816—the officers being placed on half-pay. In 1822 the
  corps ceased to exist.”—Kane’s _R.A. List_, from which the following
  notes are taken:—

Footnote 1:

  Retd. 1st Aug., 1816. D. at Paris, 17th Feb., 1837.

Footnote 2:

  Retd. 1st Dec., 1816. D. 6th Sept., 1824.

Footnote 3:

  Retd. 1st Aug., 1816. D. 7th April, 1854.

Footnote 4:

  Retd. 1st Aug., 1816.

Footnote 5:

  Served at Copenhagen and in the Pa. Also in the Walcheren expedition.
  H. p. 1st Aug., 1816. Appointed barrack-master at Rutland barracks. D.
  1831.

Footnote 6:

  Retd. 1st Aug., 1816. D. 12th May, 1855.

Footnote 7:

  Retd. 1st July, 1816. D. 1855.

Footnote 8:

  Retd. 1st July, 1816. D. 20th Aug., 1858.

Footnote 9:

  Retd. 1st Aug., 1816. D. 28th Sept., 1862.

Footnote 10:

  Retd. on f. p., 11th March, 1817.


                       CORPS OF ROYAL ENGINEERS.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Jas. Carmichael Smyth         20 Oct.  1813 │
               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [2] Sir George Hoste, Kt.         21 May,  1812 │Maj., 17 Mar. 1814
   [3] John Oldfield                 26 Jan.  1815 │
            SECOND CAPTAINS.                       │
   [4] Frank Stanway                 21 July, 1813 │
   [5] Alexander Thomson             21 July, 1813 │
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
   [6] John Wm. Pringle, W.           1 May,  1811 │
   [7] Marcus Anton Waters            1 May,  1811 │
   [8] Francis Bond Head             13 May,  1811 │
   [9] Francis Yarde Gilbert         10 June, 1811 │
  [10] John Sperling, Adjt.           1 July, 1812 │
  [11] Andrew Douglas White          21 July, 1813 │

Footnote 1:

  C.B. for Waterloo. The admirable position which Wellington chose for
  his army on 18th June, 1815, had been surveyed by the Duke’s
  directions in 1814, and it was Col. Smyth’s plan of the ground which
  enabled Wellington to place his troops so rapidly and advantageously
  that day. Created a bart. 25th Aug., 1821. Eldest son of James
  Carmichael Smyth, M.D., F.R.S., the intimate friend and contemporary
  of Sir Robert Strange, the great engraver. Bn. 22nd Feb., 1780. M.,
  28th May, 1816, Harriet, only surviving child of Gen. Robert Morse,
  and had issue. Gov. of British Guiana. D. there 4th March, 1838.

Footnote 2:

  2nd son of Dixon Hoste, by Margaret, dau. of Henry Stanforth, of
  Salthouse, co. Norfolk. M., in 1812, Mary, only dau. of James
  Borroughes, of Burlingham Hall, Norfolk, and had issue. Lt.-Col. 29th
  July, 1825. C.B. D. 1845.

Footnote 3:

  Brigade-Maj. at Waterloo. An interesting extract from his journal of
  the Waterloo campaign is given in Maj.-Gen. Porter’s _History of the
  Corps of Royal Engineers_. D. as gen. and K.H. 2nd Aug., 1863.

Footnote 4:

  Served in Sweden and in the Pa. Capt. 23rd March, 1825. D. at
  Limerick, 9th Dec., 1832.

Footnote 5:

  Wounded at the taking of Cambray in June, 1815. D. as maj. 20th June,
  1830, in Edinburgh.

Footnote 6:

  Served in the Pa. D. as maj., 12th Oct., 1861, at Bath.

Footnote 7:

  Retd. on f. p. as col., and d. in London, 14th Jan., 1868.

Footnote 8:

  Afterwards lt.-gov. of Upper Canada, and K.C.H. Retd. in 1828 as maj.
  Created a bart. in 1837. Son of James Head, by Frances, dau. of George
  Burges. M., 20th May, 1816, Julia Valenza, sister of Mark, Lord
  Somerville, and had issue. D. 20th July, 1875.

Footnote 9:

  Mentioned in Sir C. Colville’s despatch for his services at the taking
  of Cambray, in June, 1815. 6th son of the Rev. Edmund Gilbert, Vicar
  of Constantine, co. Cornwall. Retd. as capt. 1825. M. Eliz., widow of
  Wm. Burroughs. D. at Killaloe, 30 Nov., 1871.

Footnote 10:

  Led the Forlorn Hope at Bergen-op-Zoom in 1814. Some extracts from his
  Waterloo diary are given in Maj.-Gen. Porter’s _History of the R.E._
  One of the sons of Henry Piper Sperling, of Norbury Park, Surrey, by
  Sarah, dau. and co-heir of Henry Grace, of Tottenham, Middlesex. Retd.
  on h. p. as lt. 1824. M. Harriet, dau. of John Hanson. D. 14th Feb.,
  1877.

Footnote 11:

  2nd capt. 6th Dec., 1826. H. p. 6th Oct., 1831. D. at Paramatta,
  N.S.W. 24th Nov., 1837.


                             MEDICAL STAFF.

                               INSPECTOR.
                                                 Date of Commission.
     [1]  Sir James Robert Grant, M.D.               14 July, 1814
                           DEPUTY-INSPECTORS.
            Wm. Taylor                                 25 July, 1811
            John Gunning                               17 Sept. 1812
            Stephen Woolriche                          26  May, 1814
     [2]  John R.H.me                                26  May, 1814
                               PHYSICIAN.
     [3]  George Denecke, M.D., W.                   17 June, 1813
                               SURGEONS.
     [4]  David Brownrigg                            18 June, 1807
            Henry Gresley Emery, M.D.                  11  Aug. 1808
     [5]  Thos. Draper                                1 Sept. 1808
            M.A. Burmeister                             4  Jan. 1810
            Robert Grant                               22  Aug. 1811
            John Maling                                3  Sept. 1812
     [6]  John Callander                             25  Mar. 1813
     [7]  Andrew Halliday                            29  Apr. 1813
     [8]  Jas. Matthews, M.D.                         9 Sept. 1813
     [9]  J. Gideon Van Millingen, M.D.              26  May, 1814
    [10] Samuel Barwick Bruce                       25  May, 1815
                          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.
    [11] J.W. McAuley                                8  Feb. 1810
            James Dease                                11  Mar. 1813
            Wm. Twining                                10  Mar. 1814
    [12] George Evers                                3 June, 1815
                              APOTHECARY.
            Wm. Lyons                                   9 Sept. 1813

Footnote 1:

  This distinguished physician was son of Duncan Grant, of Lingeston,
  N.B., and brother to that equally distinguished soldier, Col.
  Colquhoun Grant (_see_ Staff). Bn. at Forres, Morayshire, in 1771.
  Served as assistant-surgeon and surgeon in the 11th Regt. of Foot, and
  was one of the very few officers who served through the whole of the
  war with France, viz., from 1793 to 1815. C.B. and K.H. In 1814 he
  recd. the order of St. Anne of Russia from the Emperor for his
  services when with the Russian army in France. Aftds. Inspector-Gen.
  of Hospitals. Retd. on f. p. about 1847. Resided in Cumberland, and d.
  10th Jan., 1864. (Communicated by the late Major Walter McGregor,
  nephew of the above.)

Footnote 2:

  Wellington’s friend and physician for many years. “AFTER
  WATERLOO.—After the battle Wellington rode to Brussels, and the first
  person who entered his room on the morning of the 19th was Dr. Hume.
  ‘He had, as usual,’ says the doctor, ‘taken off his clothes, but his
  face was covered with the dust and sweat of the previous day. He
  extended his hand to me, which I held in mine while I told him of
  Alexander Gordon’s death. He was much affected. I felt his tears
  dropping fast upon my hand, and, looking towards him, saw them chasing
  one another in a stream over his dusty cheeks. He brushed them
  suddenly away with his left hand, and said to me, in a voice tremulous
  with emotion—“Well, thank God, I don’t know what it is to lose a
  battle, but certainly nothing can be more painful than to gain one
  with the loss of so many of one’s friends.”’”—_Fifty Years’
  Biographical Reminiscences_, by Lord William Lennox.

Footnote 3:

  Slightly wounded at Quatre Bras, and his horse sev. wnded.

Footnote 4:

  Served in the Pa. “Was the first surgeon to amputate with success at
  the hip joint.” D. in Dublin in Nov., 1836.

Footnote 5:

  Served in Egypt, at Maida, and in the Pa. Was surgeon to Sir John
  Moore. Recd. the thanks of the Govt. for his services at Waterloo.
  Inspector-Gen. of Hospitals. D. 28th June, 1850, at Instow,
  Barnstaple.

Footnote 6:

  Surgeon to the 7th Hussars, 7th May, 1816. H. p. 25th June, 1829, from
  Rl. Waggon Train. Living 1846.

Footnote 7:

  Afterwards Sir Andrew Halliday, Knt., M.D., F.R.S., and K.H. Was
  educated for the Church, but finding he had a medical turn, adopted
  the latter profession. Served on the medical staff both in Spain and
  Portugal, and aftds. at Waterloo. Was of humble parentage, but of good
  blood, being descended from “Thom Halliday, my sister’s son, so dear,”
  mentioned by the great Sir William Wallace. D. at Dumfries, 7th Sept.,
  1839.

Footnote 8:

  Hospital assistant 8th July, 1799. Assist.-surgn. Dec., 1799. H. p.
  before 1824.

Footnote 9:

  D. Sept., 1852.

Footnote 10:

  Entered the medical dept. 1804, but saw some of his earliest service
  afloat under Lord Nelson in 1805. Present at the capture of St.
  Thomas, St. Croix, and St. John in 1807. Subsequently served at Fort
  Dessaix, Martinique, and Guadaloupe. Proceeded to the Pa. in 1813 and
  America 1814–15. Present at the attack on New Orleans and Fort Bowyer.
  Joined the army in the Netherlands in May, 1815. Present at Waterloo
  and capture of Paris. H. p. 1816. Retd. in Jan., 1833. D. in London
  24th Dec., 1852. Left issue a son, Lt.-Col. Robt. C.D. Bruce, h. p.
  8th Foot, to whom there is a tablet in Ripon Minster.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 5th Foot 22nd Aug., 1816. Living 1852.

Footnote 12:

  Assist.-Surgn. 14th Foot 23rd Dec., 1824. H. p. 15th Dec., 1825.
  Living 1846.


                    ORDNANCE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT.[S]

                               SURGEONS.
                                                 Date of Commission.
     [1]  Edward Simpson                              5  Aug. 1813
     [2]  John Morgan                                16  Feb. 1814
     [3]  James Powell                               28  May, 1814
     [4]  T. Macmillan Fogo, M.D.                    26 Sept. 1814
                          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.
     [5]  Richard Hichins                            11  Nov. 1811
     [6]  James Ambrose                              11  Nov. 1811
     [7]  Alex. Macdonald, M.D.                       5  Aug. 1813
                       SECOND ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.
     [8]  Matthias Kenny                              1  Dec. 1810
     [9]  Edward Rudge                                3  Dec. 1812
    [10] Thos. Beard                                 5  Aug. 1813
    [11] Henry Gatty                                20  Nov. 1813
    [12] Edward Donovan Verner                      29  Nov. 1813
    [13] Henry Peter Loedel                          1  Feb. 1814
    [14] Wm. Barker Daniel                          16  Apr. 1814
    [15] John Bingham                               26 Sept. 1814
    [16] Walter Raleigh, M.D.                       12  Oct. 1814
    [17] Stewart Chisholm                           20  Oct. 1814

Footnote S:

  The notes given below are taken from Kane’s _R.A. List_:—

Footnote 1:

  Sen. surgeon 16th Jan., 1841. Retd. f. p. 24th Jan., 1844. D. at
  Jessfield, 23rd Sept., 1854.

Footnote 2:

  H. p. 1st Sept., 1817. D. at Dover, 4th Sept., 1849.

Footnote 3:

  H. p. 1st Oct., 1817.

Footnote 4:

  H. p. as sen. surgeon 25th July, 1849. D. at Tiverton, 28th Sept.,
  1850.

Footnote 5:

  H. p. 1st Apr., 1816. D. at St. Ives, 17th Jan., 1866.

Footnote 6:

  H. p. 1st Oct., 1816. D. at Westport, Ireland, 17th Apr., 1824.

Footnote 7:

  H. p. 11th Sept., 1838. D. at Aberdeen, 8th March, 1860.

Footnote 8:

  H. p. 1st Feb., 1819. D. in Dublin, 24th Sept., 1874.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 1st June, 1816. D. at Fakenham, 29th Nov., 1854.

Footnote 10:

  H. p. 1st Nov., 1822. D. at Spa, 29th Aug., 1848.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 31st Dec., 1824. D. 6th Apr., 1858.

Footnote 12:

  H. p. 30th March, 1825. D. in London, 9th July, 1861.

Footnote 13:

  D. at Montreal, 24th March, 1825.

Footnote 14:

  D. 28th Jan., 1824.

Footnote 15:

  H. p. 1st May, 1816. D. in Ireland, 20th Jan., 1825.

Footnote 16:

  Retd. 8th Nov., 1832.

Footnote 17:

  Sen. surgeon 18th June, 1846. H. p. 8th Nov., 1852. Staff surgeon, 1st
  class, 20th July, 1855. D. at Inverness, 30th Sept., 1862.


               FIELD TRAIN DEPARTMENT OF THE ORDNANCE.[T]

Footnote T:

  The Editor has no means of tracing the war services of the officers of
  this department, and can only give two Waterloo representatives of the
  above.

                        ASSISTANT-COMMISSARIES.
                                                 Date of Commission.
     [1]  Samuel J. Tibbs                             1 June, 1814
     [2]  Richard Bant                                1 June, 1815

Footnote 1:

  Served through the whole of the Par. war, and in 1848 recd. the medal
  with fourteen clasps. He also recd. the Waterloo medal. H. p. 6th
  Aug., 1816. An interesting memoir of this veteran, with his portrait,
  appeared in _The Regiment_, 29th Aug., 1896.

Footnote 2:

  H. p. 27th March, 1816. D. in 1818. His Waterloo medal was for long in
  the Seaforth collection.

                           ------------------


                      COMMISSARIAT DEPARTMENT.[U]

Footnote U:

  The Commissariat officers who served at Waterloo were not granted the
  Waterloo medal, and none of them ever appeared in any _Army List_ with
  the glorious “W” before their names, although, in after years, those
  who had served in the Pa. had the “P” before their names in the _Army
  Lists_, and they recd. the Par. medal in 1848. It is, therefore,
  impossible, to give any correct list of officers belonging to the
  above department, but the Editor gives the names of six officers who
  were undoubtedly at Waterloo.

                      DEPUTY-COMMISSARIES-GENERAL.
                                                 Date of Commission.
     [1]  Randal Isham Routh                          9  Mar. 1812
     [2]  Gregory Haines                             25  Dec. 1814

                     ASSISTANT-COMMISSARIES-GENERAL

     [3]  Tupper Carey                               10  Aug. 1811
     [4]  Chas. Purcell                              10  Aug. 1811
     [5]  Alex. R.C. Dallas                           1 July, 1814

                  DEPUTY-ASSISTANT-COMMISSARY-GENERAL.

     [6]  Gilbert Dinwiddie                           5 Sept. 1814

Footnote 1:

  Afterwards Sir Randal Routh, K.C.B., commissary-gen. Son of Richard
  Routh, Chief Justice of Newfoundland. Bn. at Poole, co. Dorset, 1787.
  Served in the Pa. M. in Paris, in 1815, the niece of the French Bishop
  of Canada. D. in Jersey, 29th Nov., 1858.

Footnote 2:

  Reed, the Par. medal with eleven clasps in 1848. Retd. h. p. as
  commissary-gen. 30th Aug., 1833. Living 1846.

Footnote 3:

  H. p. commissary-gen. 24th Dec., 1844. Recd. the Par. medal with seven
  clasps in 1848. See mention of this officer in the paper on “Waterloo”
  in the _Cornhill Mag._, 1897.

Footnote 4:

  Dep. commissary-gen. 22nd Oct., 1816. Served with the Walcheren
  expedition and in the Pa. He wrote a MS. journal of his services which
  came into the Editor’s possession a few years ago, and is now in the
  R.A. Institution Library.

Footnote 5:

  Afterwards the Rev. A.R.C. Dallas, Rector of Wonston, Hants. “He left
  a distinguished name behind him as a clergyman, particularly in
  Ireland, where his work was well recognised.” Eldest son of Robert
  Dallas, of Dallas Castle.

Footnote 6:

  Afterwards commissary-gen. D. in London, 10th March, 1862.


                            RESERVE FORCES.

The 35th, 54th, 59th, and 91st British Foot Regts., with two brigades of
Rl. Artillery, were not engaged at Waterloo, but being in the vicinity
(at Hal), and forming part of Wellington’s army, on 18th June, 1815,
they were granted the Waterloo medal, and were also allowed the grant of
two years’ service, but the word “Waterloo” is not to be found on the
colours of the above four regts.


               35TH (OR THE SUSSEX) REGIMENT OF FOOT.[V]
                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

       _Sir George H.F.              13 June, 1811 │
       Berkeley_, K.C.B., W.                       │

                MAJORS.                            │

   [1] Charles Macalister            13 June, 1811 │

   [2] John Slessor                   7 Oct.  1813 │Lt.-Col., 4 June,
                                                   │1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

       Charles Wm. Wall              19 May,  1805 │

   [3] Wm. Rawson                     4 May,  1809 │

       Henry Rutherford               3 Aug.  1809 │

   [4] Thos. McNeil                  11 Mar.  1813 │8 Sept. 1808

   [5] Nich. F. Dromgoole            29 July, 1813 │

       _Henry G. Macleod_, W.        10 Dec.  1813 │29 Sept. 1813

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

   [6] Samuel Scarfe                 28 Nov.  1805 │

       J.W. Amos                     13 Apr.  1809 │

       Francis Stenton               18 May,  1809 │

       John Osbourne                  3 Aug.  1809 │

   [7] Thos. McDonough               30 Oct.  1809 │

   [8] Christ. Spencer Breary,        2 Nov.  1809 │
       Adjt.                                       │

   [9] Robert Thoburn                18 Oct.  1810 │12 Jan. 1809

  [10] Wm. Farrant                   29 Jan.  1812 │

       Aylmer Barnewell              10 Dec.  1812 │

       John Hildebrand               23 Sept. 1813 │

       Peter Murdoch                  8 Dec.  1813 │

       James Wilder                   9 Dec.  1813 │

       Newland R. Tompkins           10 Dec.  1813 │

       Edward Shewell                22 Dec.  1813 │

       Wm. Rainsforth                23 Dec.  1813 │

       George Wilkins                 1 Sept. 1814 │

       H. Middleton                   1 Dec.  1814 │7 Oct. 1813

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [11] Wm. Levitt Hedding             7 Jan.  1813 │

  [12] John Hewetson                 13 May,  1813 │

  [13] Wm. Macalister                10 June, 1813 │

  [14] John Barwis Wyatt             22 Dec.  1813 │

  [15] Anthony Macdonell              7 Apr.  1814 │

       Herbert Potenger               7 July, 1814 │

       Alex. Duke Hamilton           27 Oct.  1814 │

       John Thomas                   22 Dec.  1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

       Wm. Bury                       7 Jan.  1808 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

       Robert Foote                   2 Dec.  1813 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       Chas. Simon Doyle             31 Mar.  1808 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       Wm. Keoghoe                   22 Feb.  1810 │

       John Purcell                  28 July, 1814 │

                   _Facings orange._  _Lace silver._

Footnote V:

  The col.-in-chf. of this regt. was Charles, 4th Duke of Richmond,
  K.G., a gen. and gov. of Plymouth. He was present at Waterloo as a
  spectator, and although Wellington, his personal friend, implored him
  early in the day to retire to Brussels, the Duke did not beat a
  retreat until the battle was half over. He was accompanied by his son,
  Lord William Lennox (a boy of 15), a cornet in the Horse Guards, and
  extra A.D.C. to Gen. Maitland. By an unfortunate accident, a few days
  before the battle, Lord William fractured his right arm, and had the
  sight of one of his eyes destroyed, and although he left his sick bed
  at Brussels to proffer his services to Gen. Maitland, the latter felt
  himself obliged to decline them, so the disappointed youth followed
  his father and another brother to the field, _en amateur_. Gen. Mercer
  records in his _Waterloo Journal_ how surprised he was to see “a fine,
  tall, upright old gentleman, in plain clothes, followed by two young
  ones, come across our front at a gallop, from the Brussels road, and
  press forward to so hot a fight.” This fine old veteran died from
  hydrophobia, while holding the appointment of Gov.-Gen. of Canada,
  28th Aug., 1819.

Footnote 1:

  Probably a son of Gen. Archibald Macalister, who for many years
  commanded this regt. D. at Axminster in Aug., 1869.

Footnote 2:

  Served for many years in the Rl. Irish Artillery, and was transferred
  to above regt. Retd. on f. p., Rl. Irish Artillery, in 1817, and d. at
  Sidmouth, 11th Oct., 1850. For an account of his family see the
  Editor’s _English Army Lists and Commission Registers_, 1661–1714,
  Vol. V., p. 227, note 2.

Footnote 3:

  H. p. 27th Feb., 1818. Adjt. 3rd West York Militia, 1827. D. 18th
  July, 1850.

Footnote 4:

  Appointed ens. in the 35th Foot, 20th Feb., 1800. Served at the
  blockade of Malta. Lieut. 82nd Foot 1803. Served at the siege of
  Copenhagen, and was wounded at Windmill Battery; recd. the thanks of
  Col. Sir Geo. Smith for his heroism while employed at that post. Capt.
  in the army 8th Sept., 1808. Capt. 74th Foot 2nd Nov., 1809. Was with
  Sir John Moore’s army during the whole of its operations until its
  returning from Madrid and Burgos to the north of Portugal. Employed on
  recruiting service 1810-Sept., 1812. Exchanged back to 35th Foot in
  1813. Served with Lord Lynedoch’s army in the Netherlands. Recd. the
  medal for Waterloo. Transferred to 7th Veteran Battalion, 3rd Aug.,
  1815. Retd. f. p. 24th May, 1816. D. 23rd Sept., 1839. The above
  information was communicated by Capt. McNeil’s nephew, the late
  Major-Gen. McNeil, of the Indian Army.

Footnote 5:

  H. p. 1817. D. in 1863.

Footnote 6:

  Capt. 24th Aug., 1815. H. p. 25th June, 1817.

Footnote 7:

  H. p. 34th Foot 1837.

Footnote 8:

  H. p. 27th Foot 1825.

Footnote 9:

  H. p. 25th Feb., 1816.

Footnote 10:

  H. p. 25th June, 1817.

Footnote 11:

  Lieut. 25th Sept., 1815. H. p. 1817.

Footnote 12:

  Lieut. 28th Sept., 1815. H. p. 25th Apr., 1817.

Footnote 13:

  Lieut. 30th Nov., 1815. Exchanged to 20th Foot, 24th July, 1823.
  Exchanged to 98th Foot, 5th July, 1827.

Footnote 14:

  Lieut. 26th July, 1821. H. p. in Oct. same year. Restored to full pay
  as ensign 47th Foot, 8th June, 1826. Serving in 1830.

Footnote 15:

  H. p. 2nd Apr., 1818.


              54TH (OR THE WEST NORFOLK) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.
       John, Earl Waldegrave         26 Nov.  1812 │
                MAJORS.                            │
   [1] Sir Neil Campbell, Kt.        20 Feb.  1806 │Col., 4 June, 1814
   [2] Allan Kelly                   31 Oct.  1811 │
               CAPTAINS.                           │
   [3] Thos. Cox Kirby               25 Sept. 1806 │
       Richard Blakeman              15 Mar.  1809 │
       _Walter Crofton_, K.          16 Mar.  1809 │
   [4] James Leslie                   3 Jan.  1811 │
       Gilhow J. Tappenham           12 Dec.  1811 │
       _George Black_                 9 July, 1812 │
       Thos. Chartres                28 Apr.  1814 │
              LIEUTENANTS.                         │
       George Fraser                 11 Dec.  1806 │
   [5] Gonville Bromhead             23 Mar.  1809 │
   [6] Edward Alleyne Evanson        20 Apr.  1809 │
   [7] John Pillon                   11 May,  1809 │20 Mar. 1807
       Robert Woodgate               28 Sept. 1809 │
       Wm. Claus                     22 Feb.  1810 │
       Richard Kelly                 14 June, 1810 │
       John Grey                     19 Sept. 1811 │
   [8] Philip Mandilhon               7 Nov.  1811 │
       Joseph Henry Potts            12 Dec.  1811 │
       Robert Leacroft               21 Aug.  1812 │
       Francis Taylor                10 Sept. 1812 │
   [9] Edward Marcon                 20 May,  1813 │
       John Reid                     22 Oct.  1813 │
       Richard Stacpoole             15 Dec.  1813 │
       Francis Burgess               16 Dec.  1813 │
       Wm. Pilkington                12 May,  1814 │
       Wm. Nich. Persse               2 June, 1814 │
  [10] Dixon Denham                   1 Dec.  1814 │7 Sept. 1813
       Francis Hutchinson             8 Dec.  1814 │
  [11] M. Stoughton H. Lloyd          2 Mar.  1815 │
                ENSIGNS.                           │
       Edward Nugent                 23 Dec.  1813 │
       Thos. Fraser                   5 May,  1814 │
  [12] Charles Hill                  12 May,  1814 │
  [13] John Clark                     2 June, 1814 │
  [14] C.W. Thomas                   17 Nov.  1814 │15 July, 1814
       Alexander Mathewson            8 Dec.  1814 │
  [15] Pryce Clarke                   2 Mar.  1815 │
               PAYMASTER.                          │
       Henry Irwin                   11 Feb.  1813 │18 June, 1801
             QUARTERMASTER.                        │
  [16] Wm. Coates                     1 Aug.  1811 │
                SURGEON.                           │
       George Redmond                11 Sept. 1806 │
          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │
       Moore F. Fynan                28 Feb.  1811 │
       George Leech                  25 Nov.  1813 │
                    _Facings green._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  “The man who let Boney go.” This distinguished officer was second son
  of Capt. Neil Campbell, of Duntroon. Bn. 1st May, 1776. Joined 6th
  West India Regt. as ensign in 1797. After three years’ service in West
  Indies returned to England and joined 95th Rifles as a lieut., and in
  following year purchased a company in same regt. In 1805 was promoted
  major in 43rd Foot, and in 1806 was removed to 54th Foot. Served with
  this regt. in Jamaica, and in 1808 returned home. Again sent to West
  Indies as a bt. lt.-col. on the staff, and in that capacity was
  present at the capture of Guadaloupe. Commanded a Portuguese regt.
  during the Par. War. In Feb., 1813, was sent to Russia by the British
  Government, and was employed by Gen. Lord Cathcart, British Ambassador
  at St. Petersburg, to accompany a corps of the Russian army and report
  on its force and military operations. In the autumn of 1813 was
  detached to the siege of Dantzig, where a corps of 30,000 men was
  employed under Prince Alexander of Wurtemberg. On the 24th March,
  1814, was severely wounded at Fere Champenoise, in France, in a
  cavalry charge, by a Cossack, who mistook him for a French officer and
  struck him to the ground. In April, 1814, was chosen by the British
  Government to accompany Napoleon from Fontainebleau to Elba. Author of
  _Napoleon at Fontainebleau_. In the following spring, whilst Col.
  Campbell was at Florence, having left Elba for a few days on pressing
  business, Napoleon formed and carried out his plan of escape.
  Commanded the 54th in 1815, and was at the storming of Cambray. C.B.
  Gold cross for the capture of Martinique and Guadaloupe, siege of
  Ciudad Rodrigo, and battle of Salamanca. A knight bachelor, maj.-gen.,
  Governor of Sierra Leone, where he died of fever, 14th Aug., 1827.

Footnote 2:

  Bt. lt.-col. 12th Aug., 1819. D. in 1829.

Footnote 3:

  Retd. as bt. lt.-col. 1845. D. 1850.

Footnote 4:

  Lt.-col. unatt. 23rd Nov., 1841. D. in Edinburgh in Feb., 1853.

Footnote 5:

  Son of Lt.-Gen. Sir Gonville Bromhead, 1st Bart., by Jane, youngest
  dau. of Sir Charles Ffrench, Bart. In 1830 was a maj. on the h. p.
  list. Bn. 22nd Jan., 1791. M., 1823, Judith Coriston, youngest dau. of
  James Wood, of Woodville, co. Sligo.

Footnote 6:

  Son of Alderman Evanson, of Cork. D. as capt. in this regt. in Jan.
  1827.

Footnote 7:

  Paymaster Nov., 1818. Retd. 1825. D. in Feb., 1854.

Footnote 8:

  Capt. 30th Jan., 1823. D. at Trichinopoly, 30th June, 1836.

Footnote 9:

  Capt. 3rd Jan., 1822. H. p., capt. 78th Foot, 6th Feb., 1823.

Footnote 10:

  Lieut. 64th Foot 9th Dec., 1819. Capt. h. p., 3rd Foot, 24th Oct.,
  1821. Given the local rank of major while serving in Africa, 22nd
  Nov., 1821.

Footnote 11:

  Afterwards Maj.-Gen. M.S.H. Lloyd, h. p. unattached. Entered the army
  in 1813. He was present at the taking of Cambray and Paris, also
  served in India against the Rajah of Kolapore (1826), and in the
  campaign in the southern Mahratta country (1844). His commissions are
  dated: Ensign, Dec. 16th, 1813; Lieut. March 2nd, 1815; Capt. Sept.
  13th, 1835; Maj. Nov. 9th, 1846; Lt.-col. June 20th, 1854; Col. May
  14th, 1859; Maj.-Gen. March 6th, 1868. Son of Richard Bateman Lloyd,
  by Eliz., widow of Capt. Trant. Living 1876.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 5th Jan., 1826. Bt.-major 23rd Nov., 1841. Retd. Nov., 1846, on
  full pay. D. 1852.

Footnote 13:

  Lieut. 27th Nov., 1821. Capt. 29th Aug., 1826. Major 25th Dec., 1829.
  Lt.-col. 23rd Nov., 1841. Col. 20th June, 1854. Major-Gen. 26th Oct.,
  1858. Served the campaign of 1824–5 in Ava, including the taking of
  Rangoon. Led the attack upon the fortified heights of Aracan, and was
  sev. wounded. K.H. and medal. At the time of his death, 22nd March,
  1865, was hon. colonel of 59th Foot.

Footnote 14:

  Lieut. 18th Apr., 1822. H. p. 30th Aug., 1826.

Footnote 15:

  Lieut. 27th June, 1822. Adjt. 25th Oct., 1827. Capt. 16th July, 1833.
  Paymaster 92nd Highrs. 23rd July, 1844. D. or retd. 9th June, 1846.

Footnote 16:

  Retd. f. p. 1827.


          59TH (OR THE 2ND NOTTINGHAMSHIRE) REGIMENT OF FOOT.
                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Henry Austen                  23 Sept. 1813 │25 Jan. 1812

                MAJORS.                            │

   [2] Fred. W. Hoysted              17 June, 1813 │Lt.-Col., 26 Dec.
                                                   │1813

   [3] Charles Douglas               20 Apr.  1815 │

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [4] Francis Fuller                 5 Oct.  1809 │

       James Cockburn                 4 Sept. 1812 │

   [5] Abraham Pilkington            17 June, 1813 │

       Jas. Arch. Crawford           22 July, 1813 │

   [6] Jas. MacGregor                25 Sept. 1813 │

       John Fawson                   11 Nov.  1813 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

       Robert Preedy                 15 June, 1808 │

       Wm. F. Mayne                   4 Sept. 1808 │

   [7] Abraham Dent                   4 June, 1809 │

   [8] John Cowper                    7 June, 1809 │

       Henry Brown                   26 Oct.  1809 │

   [9] Alexander Macpherson          21 Dec.  1809 │

  [10] Edward Duncan                 28 Feb.  1811 │

       Archibald Campbell, Adjt.     28 Mar.  1811 │

  [11] Nicholas Chadwick              5 Dec.  1811 │

       Nicholas Hovenden             12 Dec.  1811 │

  [12] Lewis Carmichael               7 Mar.  1812 │

  [13] Henry Hartford                12 Mar.  1812 │

  [14] Paterson O’Hara                2 Sept. 1812 │

  [15] Wm. Veall                     23 Sept. 1813 │

  [16] Wm. Pittman                   27 Sept. 1813 │

       Wm. Henry Hill                25 May,  1814 │

       Gilmour Robinson               1 Sept. 1814 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [17] Andrew Clark Ross             23 Sept. 1813 │

  [18] Henry Keane Bloomfield        30 Sept. 1813 │

  [19] Rowley F. Hill                25 May,  1814 │

  [20] Charles Makepeace             13 Apr.  1815 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

  [21] Charles Marr                   7 Mar.  1805 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [22] Wm. Baird                     31 May,  1810 │

                SURGEON.                           │

  [23] James Hagan                   25 Nov.  1813 │9 Sept. 1813

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

  [24] Peter K. Lambe                 8 Feb.  1810 │

       Andrew Colvin                  9 Sept. 1813 │

                     _Facings white._  _Lace gold._

Footnote 1:

  Placed on h. p. in March, 1816.

Footnote 2:

  Saw service in the Pa. Transferred to 1st Batt. in 1816. Serving in
  1817.

Footnote 3:

  Drowned in Tramore Bay, near Waterford, when the _Seahorse_ transport
  was wrecked in a storm, 30th Jan., 1816. Son of Capt. Wm. Douglas 11th
  Foot.

Footnote 4:

  Major 17th July, 1817. Bt. lt.-col. 19th Jan. 1826. Lt.-Col. 59th Foot
  25th Nov., 1828. Recd. the gold medal for San Sebastian. Distinguished
  himself at the siege of Bhurtpore. C.B. D. in Jersey 19th Apr., 1868.

Footnote 5:

  Placed on h. p. in May, 1816. 9th son of Thos. Pilkington (of the
  Westmeath family), by Bridget, dau. of the Rev. Ephraim Harpur. D.
  24th May, 1843.

Footnote 6:

  Lost in the wreck of the _Seahorse_. Brother to Col. George MacGregor
  of 1st batt. same regt. Had served at Corunna and Vittoria, where he
  was severely wounded.

Footnote 7:

  Afterwards adjt. Lost in the _Seahorse_.

Footnote 8:

  Saved when the _Seahorse_ was wrecked.

Footnote 9:

  Saved when the _Seahorse_ was wrecked. This officer’s Waterloo medal
  was for some years in the Editor’s collection of war medals.

Footnote 10:

  Capt. 48th Foot 19th May, 1837. Retd. as maj. in 1840.

Footnote 11:

  Capt. 13th Foot 3rd Aug., 1826. Serving 1830.

Footnote 12:

  Capt. 5th Dec., 1826. Major of a corps raised for “particular service”
  1st Jan., 1838, and bt. lt.-col. serving in aforesaid regt. in 1842.

Footnote 13:

  Saved when the _Seahorse_ was wrecked.

Footnote 14:

  H. p. 1816. D. in Dublin 1850.

Footnote 15:

  Lost in the _Seahorse_. A native of Portsmouth and son of a
  master-builder of that town.

Footnote 16:

  Capt. 49th Foot 12th Apr., 1831. H. p. 10th Jan., 1834. D. 17th Nov.,
  1853.

Footnote 17:

  Lost in the _Seahorse_.

Footnote 18:

  Capt. 11th Foot 1st Apr., 1824. Lt.-col. 11th Foot 27th June, 1845.
  Living 1860.

Footnote 19:

  Lost in the _Seahorse_.

Footnote 20:

  Capt. 4th D.G. 24th July, 1823. Retd. as major 1841.

Footnote 21:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 22:

  Lost in the _Seahorse_ with his wife and two children.

Footnote 23:

  Lost in the _Seahorse_.

Footnote 24:

  Lost in the _Seahorse_.


                         91ST REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                                              Rank in the

                                                 ——————

            LIEUT.-COLONEL.               Regiment.│Army.

   [1] Sir Wm. Douglas, K.C.B.       25 Nov.  1808 │Col., 4 June, 1814

               CAPTAINS.                           │

   [2] James Walsh                   28 Aug.  1804 │Maj., 12 Apr. 1814

       _Thos. Hunter-Blair_, W.      28 Mar.  1805 │Maj., 30 May, 1811

   [3] Wm. Steuart                   17 Apr.  1806 │

   [4] Archibald Campbell (1st        1 Oct.  1807 │
       Batt.)                                      │

   [5] Dugald Campbell               23 Nov.  1809 │

   [6] James C. Murdoch              29 Nov.  1810 │

   [7] Alexander Jas. Callander      10 Oct.  1811 │Maj., 4 June, 1814

   [8] Archibald Campbell (2nd       15 Jan.  1812 │
       Batt.)                                      │

   [9] Robert Anderson               30 Apr.  1812 │

              LIEUTENANTS.                         │

  [10] John Campbell                 24 Aug.  1807 │

  [11] John Russell                  11 May,  1808 │

  [12] Alexander Campbell (1st       12 May,  1808 │
       Batt.)                                      │

  [13] Robert Stewart                13 May,  1808 │

  [14] Andrew McLachlan              14 May,  1808 │

  [15] Carberry Egan                 19 May,  1808 │

  [16] Andrew Cathcart               11 May,  1809 │

  [17] John McDougall                15 June, 1809 │

  [18] James Hood                     3 Aug.  1809 │

  [19] Alexander Smith               30 Aug.  1810 │22 Feb. 1810

  [20] Thos. Lisle Fenwick           13 Sept. 1810 │3 Nov. 1808

  [21] Thomas Murray                 11 July, 1811 │

  [22] Robert Spencer Knox            2 Jan.  1812 │

  [23] Charles Stuart                16 Jan.  1812 │

  [24] John McDonald                 30 Apr.  1812 │

  [25] Eugene Browne                  9 July, 1812 │

  [26] Alex. Campbell (2nd Batt.)    20 July, 1813 │

  [27] George Scott, Adjt.           21 July, 1813 │

  [28] Wm. Smith                     21 July, 1813 │

  [29] James Black                   22 July, 1813 │

  [30] Alexander Sword                2 Mar.  1815 │

                ENSIGNS.                           │

  [31] Norman Lamont                 26 Aug.  1813 │

  [32] Wm. Trimmer                   18 Nov.  1813 │

  [33] James Paton                   30 Dec.  1813 │

  [34] Dugald Ducat                  24 Feb.  1814 │

  [35] Patrick Cahill                31 Mar.  1814 │

  [36] Andrew Smith                  14 Apr.  1814 │

  [37] Lawrence Lind                  9 June, 1814 │

               PAYMASTER.                          │

       Dugald Campbell               16 May,  1808 │

             QUARTERMASTER.                        │

  [38] James Stewart                 16 Apr.  1807 │

                SURGEON.                           │

       Robert Douglas                 6 June, 1805 │

          ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.                      │

       Geo. M. McLachlan             26 Mar.  1812 │

       Wm. H. Young                   4 Feb.  1813 │

                   _Facings yellow._  _Lace silver._

Footnote 1:

  Served in the Pa. and recd. the gold cross and two clasps for six
  general actions. Commanded the second column of attack at the assault
  of Cambray in June, 1815. D. at Valenciennes in Aug., 1818, and was
  interred there.

Footnote 2:

  Bt. lt.-col. 21st Jan., 1819. Retd. 1825.

Footnote 3:

  D. 1825.

Footnote 4:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 5:

  D. 1825.

Footnote 6:

  H. p. 1819. This officer’s Waterloo medal was many years in the
  Tancred collection.

Footnote 7:

  Eldest son of James Callander of Craigforth. H. p. 1821.

Footnote 8:

  D. 1822.

Footnote 9:

  Major 23rd Sept., 1824. Lt.-Col. 91st Foot 2nd Dec., 1831.

Footnote 10:

  Capt. 7th Sept., 1815. H. p. 1816.

Footnote 11:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 12:

  H. p. 1821. D. 1835.

Footnote 13:

  Retd. 1823. D. in Mar., 1851.

Footnote 14:

  D. as capt. in 1822.

Footnote 15:

  Serving in 1817. Out of the regt. before 1824.

Footnote 16:

  H. p. 1821.

Footnote 17:

  H. p. 39th Foot 1820.

Footnote 18:

  Retd. f. p. 9th Rl. Veteran Batt. 1821. D. in Jersey 1853.

Footnote 19:

  H. p. Lieut. 42nd Highrs. 30th Sept., 1819.

Footnote 20:

  Capt. 55th Foot 26th Nov., 1830.

Footnote 21:

  Capt. 1824. D. 1826.

Footnote 22:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 23:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 24:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 25:

  H. p. 1817.

Footnote 26:

  Lieut. 38th Foot 28th Nov., 1821. Serving 1830.

Footnote 27:

  H. p. 1821.

Footnote 28:

  D. 1823.

Footnote 29:

  H. p. 1817. Appointed Lieut. 100th Foot (Rl. Canadian Rifles) in 1841.

Footnote 30:

  H. p. 1816.

Footnote 31:

  A scion of the ancient family of Lamont, of Lamont, co. Argyll. Capt.
  7th Apr., 1825. Major 2nd Dec., 1831. K.H. D. in 1845 at the Cape of
  Good Hope.

Footnote 32:

  Lieut. 2nd Mar., 1820. H. p. 17th Foot 6th Aug., 1823.

Footnote 33:

  Lieut. 27th Apr., 1820. Out of the regt, before 1830.

Footnote 34:

  Capt, 4th Aug, 1828. Major 2nd. July, 1841. Lt.-Col. in Oct., 1842. D.
  1844 at Colesberg, South Africa.

Footnote 35:

  Lieut, 11th Aug., 1822. Adjt. 23rd Aug., 1823. D. in Jamaica, 1827.

Footnote 36:

  D. 1825.

Footnote 37:

  H. p. 1816. Living 1830.

Footnote 38:

  H. p. 36th Foot 1821.


                          ROYAL ARTILLERY.[W]

                     MAJOR JOSEPH BROME’S BRIGADE.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                  Regiment.│Army.
   [1] Joseph Brome                  13 Aug.  1804 │Maj., 4 June, 1813
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [2] John E.G. Parker              20 Dec.  1814 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [3] Robert J. Saunders            11 Aug.  1811 │
   [4] Thos. O. Cater                16 Apr.  1812 │
           SECOND LIEUTENANT.                      │
   [5] Anthony O. Molesworth         17 Dec.  1812 │

                           ------------------

                    MAJOR GEORGE W. UNETT’S BRIGADE.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                           │
   [6] George W. Unett                1 Feb.  1808 │Maj., 4 June, 1814
            SECOND CAPTAIN.                        │
   [7] Thos. Gore Browne              1 Feb.  1808 │
           FIRST LIEUTENANTS.                      │
   [8] Douglas Lawson                28 Oct.  1808 │
   [9] Willoughby Montagu            11 Aug.  1811 │

                           ------------------

               CAPTAIN THOMAS HUTCHESSON’S FOOT BATTERY.

                                              Rank in the
                                                 ——————
                CAPTAIN.                           │
  [10] Thomas Hutchesson             24 Oct.  1812 │10 Apr. 1805

Footnote W:

  Major Brome’s Brigade was at Hal with Sir Charles Colville’s Division.
  Major Unett’s was attached to the 6th Division, and Capt. Hutchesson’s
  is said to have been at Ostend.

Footnote 1:

  Lt.-col. 24th June, 1823. Served at Copenhagen in 1807 and at
  Walcheren in 1809. D. in Jamaica, 4th Jan., 1825.

Footnote 2:

  Capt. 30th Dec., 1828. Succeeded as 4th Bart. of Basingbourn, Essex.
  D. 1835 without issue.

Footnote 3:

  H. p. 1st Apr., 1821.

Footnote 4:

  Served with distinction in the Pa. Retd. f. p. major-gen. 26th May,
  1857. D. 1862.

Footnote 5:

  2nd Capt. 10th July, 1834. H. p. 1835. D. 10th July, 1848.

Footnote 6:

  Sold his commission 1825. D. same year.

Footnote 7:

  Served at the siege of Flushing, 1809. Attained rank of col. 9th Nov.,
  1846. D. 23rd Jan., 1854.

Footnote 8:

  D. 10th Aug., 1823.

Footnote 9:

  2nd Capt, 6th Nov., 1827. H. p. same year. D. 2nd Dec., 1872.

Footnote 10:

  Served in the Pa. and France. Attained the rank of lt.-gen. 14th June,
  1856. D. at Dover, 28th Aug., 1857.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                PART II

               2ND OR R.N. BRITISH REGIMENT OF DRAGOONS.

                        WATERLOO MUSTER ROLL.[X]

Footnote X:

  Taken presumably on 19th June, 1815.

              A TRUE COPY OF THE LIST TRANSMITTED FROM THE
                             HORSE GUARDS.

    _Those wounded have the letter_ “W” _placed after their names._

                       FIELD AND STAFF OFFICERS.

      Major Isaac B. Clarke, W.
         ”    T.P. Hankin, W.
      Adjutant Henry Macmillan.
      Surgeon Robert Dunn.
      Asst.-Surgeon James Alexander.
      Vet.-Surgeon John Trigg.
      Reg. Quartermast.. John Lennox.
      Paymaster William Dawson.

CAPTAIN (late) BARNARD’S TROOP.

      Lieut. G.H. Falconer.
      Troop Sergt.-Major Will. Perrie.
      Reg. Sergt.-Major Will. Crawford.
      Paymaster-Sergt. Will. Bayne.
      Armourer-Sergt. James Bray.
      Saddler-Sergt. Alex. Wallace.
      Sergt. John Gillies.
         ”    Will Porteous.
         ”    John White.
      Corp. Alex. Hall.
         ”    Alex. Litch.
         ”    John Scott.
         ”    Hugh Wylie.
      Trumpeter Humphrey Stevenson.
      Privates—
        John Aitkin.
        John Andrew.
        James Ballantyne.
        Edward Bell.
        Isaac Bell.
        John Blair.
        Will. Bromley.
        James Bullock.
        John Callander.
        John Chambling.
        James Clachan.
        James Drummond.
        George Fiddes.
        James Frame.
        James Gibson.
        Henry Head.
        John Jarvie.
        Joseph Jarvie.
        David Kally.
        William Kidd.
        James Knox.
        John Livingston.
        William Leeke.
        Adam McCree.
        James MʻMillan.
        John Marshall.
        David Mathie.
        Robert Mathews.
        James Nairn.
        Thomas Nicol, W.
        William Patrick.
        David Pentland.
        Will. Provan.
        Will Robertson.
        Job Rood.
        James Rowan.
        Will Taylor, W.
        John Watson.
        Robert Watt, W.
        William Wells, W.
        Will Williamson.
        David Wilson.
        John White.
        Thomas Young.

                         CAPTAIN PAYNE’S TROOP.

      Capt. Edward Payne.
      Lieut. Arch. Hamilton, W.
         ”   Charles Wyndham, W.
      Troop Sergt.-Maj. Will. Robertson.
      Sergt. James Bullock.
         ”    David Dunn, W.
         ”    John MʻNeil.
         ”    Will Somerville.
      Corp. Geo. Edwards.
         ”    Geo. Milward.
         ”    Michael Nelson. [1]
      Privates—
        David Anderson.
        Alex. Armour, W.
        John Bishop.
        Alex. Borland.
        Joseph Brazier.
        John Brown.
        Thomas Bullock, W.
        Alex. Campbell.
        Colin Campbell.
        Robert Carmaly.
        William Clark.
        William Cunningham.
        Daniel Dick.
        Henry Eaves.
        Peter Evans.
        Thomas Fergus.
        William Fleming.
        Peter Gibson.
        Alex. Gourley.
        John Hamilton.
        James Hart.
        William Hickling.
        William Hill, W.
        Alex. Hunter.
        Alex. Ingram.
        James Lapsley.
        Richard Lee.
        William Levitt, W.
        Geo. Longworth, W.
        John MʻKeching.
        David MʻLelland.
        Hugh MʻLelland.
        Alexander McLeod.
        James MʻLintock.
        William Mackie.
        John Martin.
        James Masterton.
        Geo. Manchlin.
        Will. Merrie.
        Robert Miller.
        James Paterson.
        Robert Paterson.
        Hugh Pattison.
        Andrew Peden.
        Samuel Sifton.
        James Smith.
        William Smith.
        James Smithers.
        Joseph Tucky.
        James Waite.
        James Walker.
        Francis Wells.
        George Willet, W.
        Will. Wilkerson.
        William Wilson.
        Robert Wilson.
        Arch. Wright, W.


                        CAPTAIN CHENEY’S TROOP.

      Capt. Edward Cheney.
      Lieut. Francis Stupart, W.
         ”    James Gape.
      Troop Sergt.-Major Alex. Dingwell.
      Sergt. Donald Campbell.
         ”    William Dickie.
         ”    Will Harvey, W.
         ”    Alex. Rennie.
      Corp. Robert Hare.
         ”    William Laird.
         ”    John Long.
         ”    James Ross.
      Trumpeter John H. Sibold.
      Privates—
        Geo. Alison.
        Matthew Anderson.
        Arch. Bell.
        Hugh Bicket.
        John Brash, W.
        Charles Burges, W.
        James Bulton.
        John Calder, W.
        Samuel Clarke, W.
        Arch. Craig.
        David Crighton.
        Thomas Crowe.
        John Crombie.
        Major Dickinson.
        Peter Drysdale.
        John Fraser.
        George Gray.
        William Gunn.
        James Hamilton, Sen.
        James Hamilton, Jun.
        Robert Hamilton.
        David Henderson.
        Adam Hepburn.
        Will. Hubbard.
        Thomas Johnston, W.
        John Judd, W.
        Will. Lockead, W.
        Andrew MʻClure.
        Arch. MʻFarlan.
        John MʻIntire.
        Andrew MʻKendrick.
        Will. MʻKinley.
        Alex. MʻPherson.
        Robert Makin.
        James Mann.
        Will. Mathie.
        Thomas Oman.
        David Rampton, W.
        James Ronald, W.
        Andrew Scott.
        James Scott.
        John Spraike.
        John Stirling, W.
        Robert Stirling.
        William Stirling.
        Thomas Stobo.
        Thomas Timperly, W.
        Robert Temple.
        James Thompson.
        John Toman.
        John Wallace.
        William Watt.


                         CAPTAIN POOLE’S TROOP.

      Capt. James Poole, W.
      Lieut. James Wemyss.
      Troop Sergt.-Major James Russell.
      Sergt. John Bishop.
         ”    Arch. Johnston.
         ”    Thomas Stoddart, W.
      Corp. Alex. Gardner, W. [2]
      Corp. James Nelson.
         ”    John Wallace, W.
      Trumpeter Peter Buncle.
      Privates—
        John Alexander.
        James Bruce.
        James Crawford.
        David Craig.
        Joseph Crowe.
        Alexander Donaldson.
        William Erskine.
        Gavin Gibson.
        Robert Gilchrist.
        Thomas Goods.
        James Kennedy.
        Alexander Lander.
        Andrew Lees.
        William Lock, W.
        Robert Lawrie, W.
        David MʻGown, W.
        Fred. MʻVicar.
        John Miller.
        Andrew Muir.
        John Nelson.
        Edward Noaks.
        Henry Palmer, W.
        Thomas Philips.
        James Ratcliff.
        James Richardson.
        Thomas Robertson.
        William Robertson.
        John Rowat.
        John Salmon.
        Matthew Scott.
        Robert Smellie.
        Robert Stevenson.
        Adam Tait.
        John Thompson.
        James Tovie.
        John Wark, W.
        Andrew White.
        Robert Wilson.
        William Willis.
        William Wright.
        Alexander Young.
        Nathaniel Young.


                        CAPTAIN VERNOR’S TROOP.

      Capt. Robert Vernor.
      Lieut. John Mills, W.
      Troop Sergt.-Major W. McMillan, W.
      Sergt. William Clarke.
         ”    Charles Ewart.
         ”    John Tannock.
      Corp. John Dickson. [3]
         ”    Samuel Tar, W.
         ”    Alex. Wilson.
      Trumpeter Joseph Reeves.
      Privates—
        John Atherley.
        Francis Brown, W.
        James Brown.
        John Brobin.
        George Butler, W.
        Adam Colquhoun.
        John Collier.
        Robert Craig, W.
        John Dalziel.
        William Dunlop, W.
        John Dunn.
        John Gillies.
        William Gordon.
        Robert Gourley.
        Robert Greig.
        John Harkness, W.
        John Henderson.
        Henry Hodkinson, W.
        William Jones.
        Samuel Kinnier.
        James King.
        John Lane.
        David McAll.
        John McGee, W.
        William Mackie.
        William MʻNair.
        John Matthews, W.
        James Montgomery.
        John Moore.
        William Patton, Sen.
        William Patton, Jun.
        William Park.
        Robert Reid.
        William Ross.
        James Smith.
        William Smith.
        William Sykes.
        Ebenezer Thompson.
        John Veazy.
        Robert Wallace. [4]
        Thomas Watson.
        Richard Wharan.
        John Wise.


                        CAPTAIN FENTON’S TROOP.

      Capt. Thomas C. Fenton.
      Lieut. J.R.T. Graham.
      Sergt. James Andrew.
         ”    Richard Hayward.
         ”    Thomas Soars, W.
         ”    William Swan. [5]
      Corp. John Craig, W.
         ”    Thomas Davis.
         ”    Robert Thompson.
         ”    John Mair. [6]
      Trumpeter Henry Bowig.
      Privates—
        Thos. Anderson.
        John Arklie.
        James Armour.
        William Ballantyne.
        George Biddolph.
        Alex. Blackadder.
        Samuel Boulter.
        Cunningham Bowes, W.
        Stephen Brooks.
        Adam Brown, W.
        John Campbell.
        John Clarke, W.
        Robert Currie.
        William Dick, W.
        John Dobbie, W.
        John Ferguson.
        John Gould.
        James Green.
        William Howie.
        Alex. Hunter.
        Hugh Hunter.
        Robert Hunter.
        Arch. Hutton.
        James Jones, W.
        Arch. Kean.
        James Kean.
        Samuel Kinder.
        John Liddle, W.
        Robert Littlejohn, W. (dead).
        Joseph Macro.
        Peter Miller, W.
        John Mitchell, W.
        William Pearson, W.
        William Reid, W.
        John Ross.
        William Smith.
        Peter Swan, W.
        Jonathan Taylor.
        Andrew Thompson.
        John Watson.
        Thomas Wilmot.

                      NOTES BY CAPTAIN G. TANCRED.

Privates William Storrie and J. Liddle, of Capt. Vernor’s Troop, are not
mentioned in the above Muster Roll, having been returned as killed 18th
June. They rejoined 19th Sept., 1815, from a French prison, the former
having been wounded and his horse killed.

Footnote 1:

  M. Nelson became regt. sergt.-maj. 25th March, 1825.

Footnote 2:

  Alex. Gardner was promoted as troop sergt.-maj. 1st Jan., 1826.

Footnote 3:

  John Dickson became a troop sergt.-maj. He d. at Nunhead Lane, Surrey,
  16th July, 1880, aged 90.

Footnote 4:

  Robert Wallace, a troop sergt.-maj. 2nd March, 1826, and in 1872 was a
  messenger in the Queen’s Body Guard.

Footnote 5:

  William Swan became a regt. sergt.-maj., and d. as such, March, 1825.

Footnote 6:

  Corp. John Mair rejoined from a French prison 1st Sept., 1815,
  supposed to have been killed 18th June.




                               PART III.


                 NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS AND PRIVATES
                      AT WATERLOO WHO SUBSEQUENTLY
                         RECEIVED COMMISSIONS.

                            1ST LIFE GUARDS.

                    Corporal-Major Robert Falconer.

Appointed quartermaster same regt. 2nd Sept., 1836. H. p. 1847. D. Apr.,
1849.

                            2ND LIFE GUARDS.

                            John Ellington.

Appointed quartermaster 19th June, 1815.

                           ------------------

                          ROYAL HORSE GUARDS.

                    Corporal-Major Andrew Heartley.

Served in the Pa. Appointed quartermaster 12th Dec., 1822. H. p. 1831.
D. Feb. 1861 as a Military Knight of Windsor.

                          Carter Fairbrother.

Appointed quartermaster 7th Nov., 1829. D. Feb., 1852.

                              John Frost.

Appointed quartermaster 31st May, 1828. D. Apr., 1852.

                              Wm. Emmett.

Appointed quartermaster 25th Sept., 1828. H. p. 1831.

                           ------------------

                          1ST DRAGOON GUARDS.

                      Sergt.-Major Richard Hollis.

Appointed adjt. to above regt, 8th July, 1836. Lieut. 12th Jan., 1838.
Lieut, Rl. Canadian Rifles 24th Oct., 1845. D. in Canada as a retd.
capt. in 1856.

                           ------------------

                             1ST DRAGOONS.

                        Corporal Francis Stiles.

This brave soldier was promoted sergt. in the 1st Dns., and aftds.
Ensign in the 6th West India Regt. (commission dated 11th April, 1816),
for the gallantry he displayed at Waterloo, in helping Capt. Clark of
the same regt. to capture the Eagle of the 105th French Regt. The
following letter, copied from the original in the United Service Museum,
throws additional light on the above exploit:—

                                    IPSWICH BARRACKS, _31st Jan., 1816_.

SIR,—This day Col. Clifton sent for me about the taking the Eagle and
colours. He asked me if I had any person that see me take the Eagle; I
told him that you see me, I believe, as the officer of the French was
making away with it. I belonged to your troop at that time, and you gave
me orders to charge him, which I did, and took it from him. When I
stated it to him this day he wants to know the particulars about it, and
me to rite to you for you to state to him how it was. I would thank you
to rite to the Colonel, as you was the nearest officer to me that day.
Sir, by so doing you will much oblige,—Your most obedient humble
servant,

                                                       FRANCIS STILES,

                                                _Sergt. 1st Royal Drag._

To Lt. Gunning, 1st Dragoons,
  Cheltenham, Glostershire.

Ensign Stiles was placed on h. p., 28th Dec., 1817, and d. in London,
9th Jan., 1828.

                              John Smith.

Appointed cornet and adjt. 26th Oct., 1815. Left the regt. in 1829.

                            John Partridge.

Appointed quartermaster in above regt. 18th July, 1834. H. p. 1849. Hon.
capt. 1 t July, 1859. D. in Aug., 1863.

                           ------------------

                             2ND DRAGOONS.

                          [1] Sergt.-Maj. Wm. Crawford.
                          [2] Sergt. Charles Ewart.

Footnote 1:

  Promoted cornet and adjt. same regt., 17th Aug., 1815. Lt. 25th June,
  1819. Paymaster, 24th March, 1829. Held this appointment for 20 years.
  H. p. 1849. Living in 1855.

Footnote 2:

  Captured the Eagle of the 45th French Regt. at Waterloo. This daring
  act won the admiration of the whole British Army. Ewart was rewarded
  with an ensigncy in the 5th Royal Veteran Battalion, 22nd Feb., 1816,
  and on the reduction of this regt. in 1821 he recd. a retiring pens.
  of 5_s._ 10_d._ per day. He was a native of Kilmarnock. D. at
  Davyhulme, near Manchester, 17th March, 1846. The _Edinburgh
  Advertiser_ for 21st June, 1816, has the following:—

  “Extract of a letter from Sergt. Ewart, of the Scots Greys, dated
  Rouen, 16th Aug., 1815:—

  “The enemy began forming their line of battle about nine in the
  morning of the 18th. They came down to the left, where they were
  received by our brave Highlanders. No men could ever behave better;
  our brigade of cavalry covered them. Owing to a column of foreign
  troops giving way, our brigade was forced to advance to the support of
  our brave fellows, and which we certainly did in style; we charged
  through two of their columns, each about 500. It was in the first
  charge I took the Eagle from the enemy; he and I had a hard contest
  for it; he thrust for my groin—I parried it off, and I cut him through
  the head; after which I was attacked by one of their Lancers, who
  threw his lance at me, but missed the mark by my throwing it off with
  my sword by my right side; then I cut him from the chin upwards, which
  cut went through his teeth. Next I was attacked by a foot soldier,
  who, after firing at me, charged me with his bayonet; but he very soon
  lost the combat, for I parried it, and cut him down through the head;
  so that finished the contest for the Eagle. After which I presumed to
  follow my comrades, Eagle and all, but was stopped by the General
  saying to me, ‘You brave fellow, take that to the rear; you have done
  enough until you get quit of it,’ which I was obliged to do, but with
  great reluctance. I retired to a height, and stood there for upwards
  of an hour, which gave me a general view of the field, but I cannot
  express the sight I beheld; the bodies of my brave comrades were lying
  so thick upon the field that it was scarcely possible to pass, and
  horses innumerable. I took the Eagle into Brussels, amidst the
  acclamation of thousands of the spectators that saw it.”

  On 18th June, 1816, Ensign Ewart, and other Waterloo officers, were
  entertained at a public banquet in Edinburgh. “Nearly 400 noblemen and
  gentlemen sat down to an elegant dinner in the Assembly Rooms, the Rt.
  Hon. Wm. Arbuthnot, Lord Provost of the city, in the chair. After
  several toasts had been given and duly honoured, Sir Walter (then Mr.)
  Scott proposed a bumper to the health of Ensign Ewart, late of the
  Scots Greys, whose bravery was conspicuous where he took a French
  Eagle, and killed with his own hand three of Napoleon’s guard. The
  toast was drank with great acclamation, and a general expectation
  prevailed that Ensign Ewart, who was present, would address the
  company. After a short pause, the Lord Provost rose, and, at the
  request of Mr. Ewart, stated how much he felt honoured by this mark of
  the company’s approbation, but that he would much rather fight the
  battle over again and take another Eagle, than make a speech.”

                           ------------------

                             6TH DRAGOONS.

                              F. McDowell.

Appointed quartermaster 10th Dec., 1829. H. p. 1843. D. in June, 1846.

                              Thos. Boyd.

Appointed adjt. 19th Oct., 1815. Lieut. 18th June, 1819. Out of the
regt. in 1840.

                           ------------------

                              7TH HUSSARS.

                     Troop Sergt. Maj. Thos. Jeffs.

Promoted cornet and adjt. same regt., 7th March, 1816, for gallantry at
Waterloo. Lt. 4th March, 1819. H. p. unattached, 14th June, 1827. Living
1830.

                     Sergt.-Major Samuel Brodribb.

Appointed quartermaster 15th Jan., 1829. Quartermaster 14th Lt. Dns.
24th Apr., 1838. D. 1846.

                            Thos. Blackier.

Appointed quartermaster 16th Sept., 1819. H. p. 1839. D. 1841.

                           ------------------

                             10TH HUSSARS.

                              Fred Kinkie.

Appointed quartermaster 19th Lt. Dns. 1st July, 1824. H. p. 18th Aug.,
1825. D. in Nov., 1863.

                          11TH LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                        Sergt.-Maj. G. Butcher.

Appointed adjt. 12th Oct., 1815. Lieut. 8th Nov., 1818. Capt. 13th Nov.,
1834. Retd. 1837.

                         Sergt. Robt. Bambrick.

Lieut. 12th Oct., 1825. Capt. 7th D.G. 25th Feb., 1843. K. in action at
the Cape in Apr., 1846.

                           ------------------

                          12TH LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                      Sergt.-Maj. John Carruthers.

Promoted cornet in same regt., 26th Oct., 1815. H. p. 25th Dec., 1816.

                           ------------------

                          13TH LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                    Troop Sergt. Maj. Edward Wells.

Commanded Capt. Gubbins’s troop at Waterloo after all the officers had
fallen. His gallantry that day was particularly remarked. Promoted
Ensign in the 2nd West India Regt. in 1816. Lt., 25th Dec., 1823.
Exchanged to 54th Regt., and quitted the service as capt. same regt. in
1841.

                    Troop Sergt.-Maj. Thos. Rosser.

Appointed adjt. 24th June, 1819. Out of the regt. in 1831.

                           ------------------

                             15TH HUSSARS.

                            George Chettle.

Appointed quartermaster 9th Sept., 1824. Out of the above regt. in 1835.

                           ------------------

                          16TH LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                              Wm. Webster.

Appointed lieut. and riding master 25th Sept., 1832. Serving on f. p. in
1846.

                           ------------------

                             18TH HUSSARS.

                             John Collins.

Appointed quartermaster 12th June, 1817. H. p. 1821.

                      Sergt. James Robert Cruess.

Served in Capt. Ellis’s troop at Waterloo. Promoted Ensign 92nd Regt.
11th Jan., 1816. H. p. 37th Regt., 22nd Jan., 1816. Living 1824.

                           ------------------

                            1ST FOOT GUARDS.

                           Sergt. John Payne.

Afterwards Capt. J. Payne, late quartermaster of the Grenadier Guards.
Served in Sicily in 1806–7 and in Spain in 1808–9, and was present in
several actions, including Corunna. He was also at Walcheren. He served
in the campaigns of 1812 to 1815, and was present at the actions in the
Pyrenees, capture of San Sebastian, passage of the Bidassoa, Nive,
Nivelle, investment of Bayonne, Quatre Bras, and Waterloo. He was
commissioned as a quartermaster the 31st Aug., 1815, and retd. with the
rank of capt. in Dec., 1855. Living 1876. The following description of
the square of the Grenadier Guards during the afternoon of Waterloo day
is by Capt. Gronow of that regt., and is certainly worthy of
remembrance, exhibiting as it does the desperate heroism of the British
resistance:—

“During the battle our squares presented a shocking sight. Inside we
were nearly suffocated by the smoke and smell from burnt cartridges. It
was impossible to move a yard without treading upon a wounded comrade,
or upon the bodies of the dead; and the loud groans of the wounded and
dying were most appalling.

“At four o’clock our square was a perfect hospital being full of dead,
dying, and mutilated soldiers. The charges of cavalry were in appearance
very formidable, but in reality a great relief, as the artillery could
no longer fire on us; the very earth shook under the enormous mass of
men and horses. I shall never forget the strange noise our bullets made
against the breast-plates of Kellerman’s and Millhaud’s cuirassiers, six
or seven thousand in number, who attacked us with great fury. I can only
compare it, with a somewhat homely simile, to the noise of a violent
hailstorm beating against panes of glass.

“The artillery did great execution; but our musketry did not at first
seem to kill many men, though it brought down a large number of horses,
and created indescribable confusion. The horses of the first rank of
cuirassiers, in spite of all the efforts of their riders, came to a
standstill, shaking and covered with foam, at about twenty yards’
distance from our squares, and generally resisted all attempts to force
them to charge the line of serried steel. On one occasion two gallant
French officers forced their way into a gap momentarily created by the
discharge of artillery; one was killed by Stables, the other by Adair.
Nothing could be more gallant than the behaviour of those veterans, many
of whom had distinguished themselves on half the battle-fields of
Europe.

“In the midst of our terrible fire, their officers were seen as if on
parade, keeping order in their ranks, and encouraging them. Unable to
renew the charge, but unwilling to retreat, they brandished their swords
with loud cries of ‘Vive l’Empereur!’ and allowed themselves to be mowed
down by hundreds rather than yield. Our men, who shot them down, could
not help admiring the gallant bearing and heroic resignation of their
enemies.”

                                                    Sergt. Robt. Steele.

Appointed adjt. 66th Foot 23rd March, 1826. Lieut. 10th Foot 26th Sept.,
1833. H. p. 8th Nov., 1842.

                     Sergt.-Maj. Christopher Main.

Appointed ens. 43rd L.I. 4th Aug., 1825. H. p. 18th May, 1826.

                               Wm. Hanna.

Quartermaster 4th Foot 8th Jan., 1829. H. p. 27th May, 1836. D. at
Ardres en Calais 7th March, 1856.

                           ------------------

                            3RD FOOT GUARDS.

                   Quartermaster-Sergt. Wm. Thompson.

Appointed quartermaster 6th May, 1819. H. p. 1837. D. Sept., 1851.

                             Jas. Davidson.

Quartermaster 41st Foot 14th Feb., 1828. H. p. 1836.

                             Joseph Aston.

Quartermaster 9th Aug., 1833. D. in the Tower 23rd June, 1853. Bd.
within the Tower precincts with military honours.

                           ------------------

                         4TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                             H.N. Shipton.

Appointed ens. in above regt. 19th Nov., 1818. D., of fever, in
Barbadoes, 1823.

                           ------------------

                         14TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                   Sergt. Samuel Goddard (3rd Batt.).

In the _Standard_ of 5th Jan., 1868, appeared the following obituary
notice regarding this gallant soldier:—

“DEATH OF A MILITARY KNIGHT, AT WINDSOR CASTLE.—On Sunday last Capt.
Samuel Goddard, Military Knight of Windsor, died at his residence in the
Lower Ward, Windsor Castle. This veteran and gallant officer was
formerly of the 14th or Buckinghamshire Regt. of Foot, and had seen very
lengthened service in the army, having served in the campaign of 1815,
including the battle of Waterloo and the storming of Cambray; in 1817,
in the East Indies, he was present at the siege of Hattrass, and in the
campaign of 1817–18, in the Deccan; also at the siege and storming of
Bhurtpore, in 1825–26. With the medal so well earned, he was one of the
officers receiving rewards for distinguished service; moreover, as
having originated the measure by which was accorded to meritorious
quartermasters of long service the nominal rank of captain, several of
whom, many years since, presented him with a handsome testimonial,
expressive of their obligation, and of his efficient aid.”

On Waterloo day, Sergt. Goddard was with an advanced party of
skirmishers of the 14th, and about four o’clock the reflux wave of some
French cuirassiers passed through them. They were, of course, fired at
by the 14th skirmishers, and several bit the dust. One poor wounded
Frenchman was thrown from his horse, and a comrade nobly returned and
offered the soldier the help of his stirrup. An active light infantry
man of the 14th, Whitney by name, who had shot one cuirassier, having
reloaded, was about to fire at the mounted Frenchman, who was then
rescuing his comrade, when Goddard interfered and said, “No, Whitney,
don’t fire; let him off, he is a noble fellow.” (Communicated by a
friend of Capt. Goddard.)

                           ------------------

                         23RD REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                             Charles Grant.

Severely wounded at Quatre Bras whilst serving in the ranks. Was
acting-quartermaster to the Grenadier Guards in Canada in 1838–39.
Appointed quartermaster to the 23rd Welsh Fusiliers 5th July, 1844.
Retd. on h. p. with rank of capt. in 1854. D., in London, 12th Dec.,
1865.

                           Samuel Brelsford.

Appointed 2nd lieut. and adjt. 60th Rifles 25th Aug., 1827.

                             Garret Moore.

Appointed quartermaster in above regt. 8th Nov., 1827. H. p. 5th July,
1844. D., Dec., 1852, at Picton, Canada.

                               Wm. Howe.

Appointed quartermaster 35th Foot 29th March, 1827.

                           ------------------

                         27TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                             John Kennedy.

Appointed quartermaster 22nd June, 1820. Appears with the “W.” before
his name in Army List for 1825 only.

                           ------------------

                         28TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                        Private John O’Brien, W.

In one of the charges made by the 28th, at Waterloo, “a flag belonging
to the 25th French regt. was taken by Private John O’Brien, of the 8th
company, who the moment after received a severe wound, which ultimately
occasioned the loss of his leg. The trophy, however, was preserved, and
sent to Maj.-Gen. Sir James Kempt, who commanded the division, when the
regt. arrived at Paris.” Received a lieut.’s commission in the Sicilian
Regt., and subsequently in 61st Foot. Retd. f. p. Rl. Veteran Batt. in
1817.

                               Wm. Kerr.

Appointed ens. 7th July, 1837, and quartermaster 1st June, 1838. H. p.
1844.

                           ------------------

                         32ND REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                        Sergt.-Major George Oke.

Appointed adjt. 8th Dec., 1825. Lieut. 26th June, 1828.

                       Sergt.-Major Wm. Pepperal.

Appointed quartermaster 15th Oct., 1818. H. p. 1827. D. 1837.

                             Thos. Healey.

Appointed quartermaster 29th Nov., 1827. H. p. 28th June, 1844. D., at
Quebec, in Jan., 1849.

                           ------------------

                         42ND REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                       Sergt.-Major Finlay King.

Appointed quartermaster 31st Dec., 1818. Retd. 1840. D., in Guernsey,
1842.

                      Armourer-Sergt. Edwd. Paton.

Appointed quartermaster 19th June, 1840. D., at Southsea, in May, 1863.

                           ------------------

                         71ST REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                            Thos. Creighton.

Appointed quartermaster 19th Sept., 1827. H. p. 24th Jan., 1840. D.
July, 1853.

                             Bernard Grant.

Ens., 82nd Foot, 28th Dec., 1832. Quartermaster 28th Aug., 1835. D. May,
1856.

                           ------------------

                         73RD REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                             Maurice Shea.

Bn., in County Clare, in 1794; joined the Kerry Militia 1812, and in
1813 enlisted in 73rd Regt. and went to Holland. Served under Gen.
Graham, and was at the siege of Antwerp. Was in Capt. Kennedy’s company
at Waterloo. In 1835 joined the British Legion at Cork as quartermaster,
and was subsequently promoted lieut. Was in twenty-six engagements
during the war. Received the Order of Isabella II. for his Spanish
services. D., at Sherbrooke, Canada, in March, 1892. He was the last
Waterloo survivor known.—_Army and Navy Gazette_, 2nd April, 1892.

                         Sergt. George Austin.

Appointed adjt. 30th Nov., 1815. H. p. 1817.

                           ------------------

                         79TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                        Sergt. Colin Macdonald.

Served throughout the Par. War with the 79th, and was twice sev. wnded.
Was again badly wounded at Waterloo. Served in Canada during the
rebellion of 1838–39. Received an ensign’s commission 30th Jan., 1835,
and appointed Town Major at Montreal. Living 1855.

                           Alex. Cruikshank.

Appointed quartermaster 12th Oct., 1838. H. p. 1849. Fort Major,
Edinburgh Castle, 1851.

                           ------------------

                         92ND REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                        Sergt.-Major Wm. Grant.

Appointed adjt. 5th Nov., 1819.

                           ------------------

                              95TH RIFLES.

                           (_1st Battalion._)

                             Fras. Feneran.

Appointed quartermaster to above regt. 1st Dec., 1823, and paymaster
95th Regt. of Foot 15th Dec., 1837. Serving as paymaster to the depôt
battalion at Parkhurst in 1860.

                      Sergt.-Major Robt. Fairfoot.

A Peninsular hero who had been wounded in the breach at Badajoz; had his
right fore-arm fractured by a shot on 17th June, 1815. Appointed
quartermaster to above regt. 28th Apr., 1825. D. in Sept., 1838.

                               Wm. Hill.

Appointed quartermaster to above batt. 25th Dec., 1826. H. p. 29th
March, 1839.

                           ------------------

                              95TH RIFLES.

                           (_2nd Battalion._)

                            Robt. Trafford.

Appointed quartermaster to above batt. 2nd June, 1837.

                           ------------------

                              95TH RIFLES.

                           (_3rd Battalion._)

                           Dugald Macfarlane.

Appointed 1st lieut. 18th July, 1815. H. p. Feb., 1816.

                            RESERVE FORCES.

                         54TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                             James Willox.

Appointed quartermaster to above regt. 27th Sept., 1827. H. p. 1846. D.
June, 1864.

                           ------------------

                         91ST REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                     Sergeant-Major Andrew Maclean.

Appointed quartermaster to above regt, 8th Aug., 1823. D., at Boulogne
in 1869.




                                PART IV.
                         A FEW WATERLOO HEROES.


                            1ST LIFE GUARDS.

                      Field-Trumpeter J. Edwards.

Sounded the bugle for the decisive charge of the 1st Life Guards at
Waterloo. Was 32 years in the regt., and received a pension in June,
1841 His medal and bugle are still preserved in the regiment.

                           ------------------

                            2ND LIFE GUARDS.

                  [1]            Corp. John Shaw, k.
                  [2]         Private Samuel Godley.
                  [3]                  ”    Johnson.
                                           ”    Dakin.
                                         ”    Hodgson.

Footnote 1:

  The well-known pugilist and “fancy man” of this regt. His prowess when
  charging with the Life Guards at Waterloo was exemplified by the
  number of cuirassiers he slew. The little that is known of his early
  life, and the account of his death at Waterloo, are given in his
  biography by Lt.-Col. Knollys, who, out of very scanty material, has
  compiled a very interesting little book. Shaw was born at Woolaston,
  co. Notts, in 1789, and enlisted 15th Oct., 1807.

Footnote 2:

  Known in the regt. as “Marquis of Granby,” from the fact of his having
  a bald head. Had his horse shot under him in one of the charges at
  Waterloo, and was thrown. As he got up, minus his helmet, which had
  fallen off, a cuirassier rode at him and attempted to cut him down.
  Godley managed to kill his assailant, and mounting the Frenchman’s
  horse, rode back to his regt. who welcomed him with shouts of “Well
  done, Marquis of Granby!” Discharged in 1824. D. in 1831. M.I. St.
  John’s Wood Cemetery.

Footnote 3:

  Immediately after the first charge of his regt. at Waterloo, when the
  French cavalry were being pursued by ours, Johnson pursued three
  cuirassiers who, with a view of escaping, turned down a narrow lane.
  “There proved to be no thoroughfare at the end of the road, when
  Johnson, though alone, attacked the three, and, after a slight
  resistance, they surrendered themselves prisoners.”

                           ------------------

                          1ST DRAGOON GUARDS.

                     [1] Troop Sergt.-Maj. Thos.
                           Nicholson, W.

                     [2] Sergt. John Hodgkins.

Footnote 1:

  Received a sabre wound through his body when charging at Waterloo.
  After being discharged he resided at York, and kept the “Light
  Horseman” Inn, Fulford Road. D. there, 28th Sept., 1850, aged 66.

Footnote 2:

  Served at Salamanca in a dragoon regt. Aftds. exchanged to 1st D.G. as
  sergt., and was present at Waterloo. Bought his discharge after 17
  years’ service, and recd. a pens. of 6_d._ a day for two years! He was
  a native of Tipperary, but spent the latter part of his life at
  Penrith, where he was a well-known figure, being “29 stone in weight,
  6 feet 2 inches in height, and 2 feet 4 inches across the shoulders.”
  D., at Penrith, in 1867, aged 80.

                           ------------------

                             2ND DRAGOONS.

                     [1] Troop Sergt.-Maj. Wm.
                           Robertson.

                     [2] Sergt. John Weir, K.

                     [3] Private Thos. Stobo.

Footnote 1:

  A native of Renfrewshire. Aftds. sergt.-major of the Rl. Fifeshire
  Yeomanry. Was in every charge made by his regt. at Waterloo. D., at
  Kirkcaldy, in Dec., 1825.

Footnote 2:

  “Sergeant Weir of the Scots Greys was pay-sergt. of his troop, and as
  such might have been excused serving in action, and perhaps he should
  not have been forward; but, on such a day as Waterloo, he requested to
  be allowed to charge with the regt. In one of the charges he fell
  mortally wounded, and was left on the field. Corporal Scott of the
  same regt. (who lost a leg) asserts that when the field was searched
  for the wounded and slain, the body of Sergt. Weir was found with his
  name written on his forehead by his own hand, dipped in his own blood.
  This, his comrade said, he was supposed to have done that his body
  might be found and known, and that it might not be imagined he had
  disappeared with the money of the troop. John Weir joined the Greys
  about 1798, and was a native of Mauchline, Ayrshire.”—Copied from a
  MS. in possession of the regt., and communicated by Capt. G. Tancred.

Footnote 3:

  The oldest soldier in the Greys at Waterloo. Served at Dunkirk under
  the Duke of York. D. 1852. His brother was aftds. a capt. in the same
  regt.

                           ------------------

                             6TH DRAGOONS.

                           Troop Sergt.-Maj. Wm.
                           Seney.

                             ”        ”        John
                           Laws.

                     [1]   ”        ”        Matthew
                           Marshall, W.

                           Sergt. Hugh MʻMahon.

                             ”    Johnston Marlow.

                           Private Wm. Penfold.

                             ”    Robert Potters.

                     [2]   ”    Jeremiah Brown.

Footnote 1:

  “The Enniskilleners charged in line when Marshall’s squadron dashed
  into the thickest of the enemy’s phalanx, and were cut off from the
  other troops of the regt. Marshall, while sabreing a cuirassier on his
  right, had his bridle-arm broken by a stroke from his enemy on his
  left, and had not proceeded much further when he was beset by another
  crowd of French cavalry and hurled from his horse by a lance which
  penetrated his side. While he was falling he received a heavy blow
  across the body, and another which broke his right thigh. He lay
  unconscious except when goaded into sensibility by the hoofs of the
  enemy’s horses passing over his mangled body. The ground afterwards
  becoming somewhat clear he espied a horse without any rider, towards
  which he crawled, and was about to mount, when a French trooper
  galloping up cut him down in the midst of his hopes, inflicting
  several severe wounds on his body. This part of the field being again
  occupied by the French, a French artilleryman made Marshall’s body a
  resting-place for his foot while he rammed his gun. For two days and
  three nights Marshall remained on the field with 19 lance and sabre
  wounds. On the regt. returning home he was discharged with 2s. per
  day. Resided at Belfast, where he was much respected. D. there, 28th
  Sept., 1825.”—_Scots’ Magazine._

Footnote 2:

  Born at Enniskillen 14th March, 1792. Fought at Waterloo and in the
  Kaffir, Sepoy, and Maori wars. Living at Melbourne, Australia, in
  1891.

                           ------------------

                              7TH HUSSARS.

                       Sergt.-Maj. Edward Cotton.

Had his horse killed under him at Waterloo. After being discharged from
the regt. he took up his abode at Waterloo, and became a guide to the
battlefield. Being a clever and well-educated man, he was able to
compile a very interesting little book called _A Voice from Waterloo_,
which held its own among the many accounts of the great battle. Besides
this he formed a Waterloo Museum, which has always been a great
attraction to visitors. In 1875, when the Editor was at Waterloo, the
Museum was kept by a niece of the late sergt.-maj., who d. 1st July,
1849, and was bd. in the orchard of Hougomont, by the side of Capt.
Blackwood, who fell in the battle.

                           ------------------

                          16TH LIGHT DRAGOONS.

                         Sergt.-Maj. Baxter, K.

A Pa. hero, mentioned in the records of this regt.

                           ------------------

                             18TH HUSSARS.

                          Sergt. John Taylor.

Belonged to Capt. Ellis’s troop. In the charge at Waterloo he made a cut
at the head of one of the French cuirassiers, which had no other effect
on the Frenchman than to induce him to cry out, in derision, “Ha! ha!”
and to return a severe blow at the sergt., which was admirably parried,
and then Taylor thrust his sabre into the mouth of the cuirassier, who
immediately fell, and the conqueror cried, “Ha! ha!”

                           ------------------

                           COLDSTREAM GUARDS.

              Sergt. John Graham, Light Company, 2nd Batt.

Distinguished himself in the defence of Hougomont, and by his great
personal strength was of great assistance in helping to close the
courtyard gate against the French. “At a later period of the day, when
in the ranks along the garden wall facing the wood, and when the
struggle was most severe in that quarter, he asked Lt.-Col. Macdonell’s
permission to fall out. The colonel, knowing the character of the man,
expressed his surprise at the request made at such a moment. Graham
explained that his brother lay wounded in one of the buildings then on
fire; that he wished to remove him to a place of safety, and that he
would then lose no time in rejoining the ranks. The request was granted;
Graham succeeded in snatching his brother from the terrible fate which
menaced him, laid him in a ditch in rear of the enclosure, and true to
his word, was again at his post.”—Col. Mackinnon’s _History of the
Coldstreams_. Was selected in August, 1815, for the pension granted by
the Rev. — Norcross, Rector of Framlingham, “to the most deserving
soldier at Waterloo.” D., at Kilmainham, 23rd April, 1843. He was a
native of Cloona, co. Monaghan.

                           ------------------

                            3RD FOOT GUARDS.

                     [1] Sergt.-Maj. Ralph Fraser.
                     [2]    ”    Brice MʻGregor.

Footnote 1:

  Aided in closing the gate at Hougomont. Served in Egypt in 1801. “In
  the landing at Aboukir Bay, on 8th March, the boat in which Corporal
  Fraser was, containing sixty persons, were all destroyed by the
  enemy’s fire excepting fifteen.” Served in Hanover, at Copenhagen, and
  in the Pa., and was twice badly wounded. Discharged in Dec., 1818.
  Aftds. a bedesman in Westminster Abbey. Living in 1861.

Footnote 2:

  A native of Argyllshire. Enlisted at Glasgow in 1799. Aided in barring
  the door at Hougomont, and being very strong, was of much service in
  the gallant defence of that farmhouse. Shot a cuirassier dead who
  attacked him, and rode into the courtyard on the Frenchman’s horse.
  Discharged in 1821 with a handsome pension. Appointed one of the
  Yeomen of the Guard. D. 27th Nov., 1816.

                           ------------------

                         23RD REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                      Col.-Sergt. Jonathan Thomas.

D., at the Union Workhouse, Swansea, in Dec., 1867, aged 85.

                           ------------------

                         27TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                        Private Thos. Kerrigan.

One of the few of this regt. who escaped being blown to pieces when
standing in square on the Charleroi road, 18th June, 1815. D., at Calky,
near Enniskillen, 3rd Dec., 1862. Is said to have attained the great age
of 108.

                           ------------------

                         33RD REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                          Private John Riches.

Was at the storming of Seringapatam, and is said to have been present at
both Quatre Bras and Ligny on 16th June, 1815. Aftds. a Chelsea Hospital
pensioner. D., at Attleburgh, in June, 1860.

                           ------------------

                         40TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                          Sergt. Wm. Lawrence.

Born at Bryant’s Piddle, co. Dorset, 1791. Enlisted in the 40th Foot at
age of fifteen. Served with the 1st Batt. in the expedition to Monte
Video, and throughout the Par. War. Wounded at Badajoz, where he was one
of the forlorn hope, and kept six weeks in hospital at Estremos. Soon
after made corporal. Earned Lord Wellington’s praise for the gallant
manner in which he captured three French cannon, and drove off a score
of French artillerymen with only six men of his own regt. Promoted
sergt. Narrowly escaped being killed at Waterloo by a French shell,
which exploded near Lawrence, “hurling him two yards into the air.”
About 4 o’clock P.M. on Waterloo day was ordered to the colours, in
defending which an officer and fourteen sergts. had already lost their
lives that terrible day. M., when at St. Germains, a Frenchwoman named
Marie Louise Claire, who, under Napoleon’s _régime_, had, in common with
all other “Marie Louises,” been obliged to change their Christian names,
so that the Empress might be the only one of that name in France!
Pensioned on 9_d._ a day in 1819. D., at Studland, co. Dorset, 1867.

                           ------------------

                         42ND REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                      Private Donald Davidson, W.

The following notice appeared in the _Standard_, in April or May,
1867:—“There died at the village of Ardisier, Inverness-shire, a few
days ago, an old veteran named Donald Davidson, one of the fast
diminishing band of Waterloo heroes. Donald, who, it may be mentioned,
had six toes on each foot, was born in the parish of Nairn, Nairnshire,
in the year 1792, and enlisted in the 42nd Highlanders in June, 1813. He
served with his regt. in the Pa., France, and the Netherlands, from
February, 1814, to December, 1816. He was wounded at the battle of
Toulouse, and slightly on the head at Quatre Bras. Notwithstanding, he
stuck to his regt., and was one of the gallant few who repulsed the
grand charge of cavalry in the cornfield at Waterloo. He was discharged
with 1_s._ per day of pension, and served for a long time as barrack
labourer in Fort George. He d. at the advanced age of 75 years.”

                           ------------------

                         52ND REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                         Private Patrick Lowe.

Served through the whole of the Par. War, and formed one of the forlorn
hope at Badajoz, where he personally captured the governor of the
fortress, by which he obtained a large reward. In 1848 he recd. the
silver war medal with 13 clasps; but it is said he would never wear this
medal, because he had claimed his right to 14 clasps and considered
himself injured by receiving one clasp less. He d., at Enniskillen, in
1852, aged 84.

                           ------------------

                         69TH REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                          Private John Slater.

Born at Ilkeston, co. Derby. Enlisted in the 52nd in 1803. Served
through the whole of the Par. War with that regt. Aftds. exchanged into
69th. In 1848 Slater claimed his right to the silver war medal with 14
clasps—one clasp more than Wellington obtained—but only got a medal with
12 clasps. He d. at Nottingham in 1860.

                           ------------------

                         92ND REGIMENT OF FOOT.

                 Sergt. Alexander Cameron, Piper Major.

Served in the Pa. during the whole of the late war, and for his zeal
attracted the attention of several officers of high rank. Lt.-Gen. Sir
Wm Erskine, in a letter to a friend, after the affair at Rio del
Molinos, says:—“The first intimation the enemy had of our approach was
the piper of the 92nd playing ‘Hey, Johnnie Coup, are ye waukin’ yet?’”
To this favourite air from Cameron’s pipe the streets of Brussels
re-echoed on the night of the 15th June, 1815, when the regt. assembled
to march out to the field of Waterloo. It is recorded of this gallant
Scot, on the 18th June, 1815, that “not content with piping at the head
of his regt. he marched forward with a party of skirmishers, and placing
himself on a height, in full view of the enemy, continued to animate by
playing favourite national airs.” D. at Belfast 18th Oct., 1817.—_Scots’
Magazine._

                           ------------------

                         ROYAL HORSE ARTILLERY.

                         Sergt. Daniel Dunnett.

Belonged to Capt. Whinyates’s Rocket Battery. The Waterloo historian
(Siborne) gives the following:—“A party of horse artillery proceeded
under Capt. Dansey along the Charleroi road, to the front of the centre
of the Anglo-allied line, and came into action with rockets near the
farm of La Haye Sainte, leaving its two guns in the rear under Lt.
Wright. Capt. Dansey very soon received a severe wound which obliged him
to retire; and the party, after firing a few rockets, fell back a little
to where its horses were standing. It was then commanded by a sergeant
(Daniel Dunnett), who, on perceiving the advance of the nearest French
column towards the farm, dismounted his men as coolly and deliberately
as if exercising on Woolwich Common, though without any support
whatever, laid rockets on the ground, and discharged them in succession
into the mass, every one of them appearing to take effect. The advance
of the column was checked, and was not resumed until Dunnett, having
expended all his rockets, retired with his party to rejoin the guns in
rear.”




                               APPENDIX.


                                 STAFF.

Col. C.H. Churchill was son of Maj.-Gen. Horace Churchill, and a
descendant of the Earl of Orford. In a letter to his father from “Le
Cateau, 24th June, 1815,” Churchill thus graphically describes
Napoleon’s final effort at Waterloo:—

“It was about four o’clock. The enemy had made great efforts, but our
troops foiled them everywhere. We could not follow him; he had retired
rather than be beaten back. His position was very strong. About six
o’clock we perceived formation columns, cavalry and infantry, formed in
a great mass—the enemy’s artillery was brought to a more forward
position—and again he began to cannonade us. He opened a fire, the most
tremendous ever known, I believe, in the annals of war—250 pieces, very
close, throwing shells and round shot, grape, and every instrument of
destruction. It is really not exaggeration to say we could not ride
quick over the ground for the bodies of men and horses. Under cover of
this cannonade advanced Bonaparte at the head of his Imperial Guards;
cavalry in a column on the left flank, and the Grenadiers of the Guard
on their right flank. They advanced most steadily up to our line in one
great mass. They halted and commenced firing. Our troops were literally
mowed down. The fire was so great nothing could stand.” The writer then
goes on to describe how he had two horses killed under him, and a third
disabled by a shot in the knee before the advancing French columns were
“licked back.” “The Prussians,” continues Churchill, “now came upon the
enemy’s flank, and this obliged them to hurry their retreat.”

                           ------------------

SIR DE LACY EVANS.

In Kensal Green Cemetery is a handsome altar monument to the memory of
Sir De Lacy Evans, his wife, and his brother, Maj.-Gen. Richard Evans,
C.B., Col. of the Madras Grenadier Regt. The epitaph to Sir De Lacy and
Lady Evans is as follows:—

               “Beneath this monument lie the remains of
      JOSETTE, Lady EVANS, the beloved and deeply mourned wife of
                        Gen. Sir DE LACY EVANS.
                         Born 1787. Died 1861.

     Here, too, lie the remains of Gen. Sir DE LACY EVANS, G.C.B.,
                Col. of the 21st Rl. N. Brit Fusiliers.
                         Born 1787. Died 1870.
                   He commenced his career in India.
     Fought under Wellington in the Peninsula and South of France.
                  Served with distinction in America.
                Was engaged at Quatre Bras and Waterloo.
   Commanded with marked ability the British Legion in the service of
                                 Spain.
    And in old age nobly led the 2nd British Division in the Crimea.
        During 30 years he was M.P. for the City of Westminster.
   An enterprising and skilful commander. An accomplished politician.
               His comrades mourn the chivalrous soldier,
          And many friends affectionately cherish his memory.”

Letter from Capt. (aftds. Lt.-Gen.) Alexander Macdonald, R.H.A., to Col.
Sir W. Robe, K.C.B., R.A., regarding the death of Lt. W. Robe, R.H.A.,
at Waterloo. From a copy in the possession of Col. F.A. Whinyates, late
R.H.A.:—

                                        “Amiens, _7th August, 1815_.

“MY DEAR SIR WILLIAM,—I should have written to you long ere this had not
a wound, which deprived me of the use of my arm, prevented me. As to the
fall of your son, and my esteemed friend, I can only say that few young
men have left this life more sincerely regretted, and his exertions on
the 18th will ever endear his memory to all who witnessed his noble
conduct on that day. Major Ramsay’s last words to me were as follows:
‘Did you ever witness such noble conduct as that of Brereton and Robe?’
In short, it is a most painful task to relate the history of a man whose
fall I sincerely lament, and I cannot without tears of sorrow think of
your son, and my esteemed friend Major Ramsay. About five o’clock on the
18th your son received a mortal wound, and about the same time the
following day he died at the village of Waterloo, after twice having
taken leave of me in the most friendly and affectionate manner. I was
too ill to ask him any questions; indeed, I was so distressed when I saw
him at his last moments, that I could only shake him by the hand, and in
the course of a few minutes he expired. His remains were interred in a
beautiful spot of ground in the village of Waterloo, where I intend to
raise a monument to his memory.—Yours most truly,

                                                      “A. MCDONALD.”

                           ------------------

                  REMINISCENCES OF WATERLOO [? 1895].

“Our Paris correspondent states that a correspondent of the _Gaulois_
gives an interesting account of a conversation with one of the very few
surviving spectators of the battle of Waterloo, a widow named Givron,
the hundredth anniversary of whose birth is about to be celebrated in
the little village of Viesville, Hainault. She relates that on the
morning of the day of the great battle she ran away from her parents and
made her way through the woods, being curious to see what was going on.
She was close to Hougomont when the place was attacked by the French
troops, and remained in hiding for hours, not daring to move. The
cannonade having diminished she ventured towards the farm, but fled
horror-stricken at the sight—the ground, as she expresses it, being like
red mud, so drenched was it with blood. She ran across the fields and
reached the Bois de Planchenoit, where she fell asleep, worn out by
fatigue and excitement. At dusk she was awakened by the noise of horses’
hoofs, and saw a troop of cavalry, headed by a man of short stature
mounted on a curveting grey horse. He was riding slowly on as if in a
dream, looking straight ahead and paying no heed to what went on about
him. The girl learnt on the same evening from her relatives, when she
finally reached home, that the rider was Napoleon. Madame Givron is
remarkably active, and is particularly proud of her eyesight, which, she
declares, is as good as it was seventy-five years ago. When her daughter
Marceline, who, as she says, is only seventy-two, sits down to sew, her
mother threads the needles for her. The old lady has had seven children,
and her descendants number ninety-two.”—_Morning Post._

                           ------------------

                             A CENTENARIAN.

Commissary-Gen. Downs writes to the _Army and Navy Gazette_ in July,
1891, as follows:—

“Samuel Gibson—an inmate of the Metropolitan Asylum, Caterham—is now in
his 101st year. He enlisted about the year 1803 at Sanderage, county
Armagh, as a boy in the 27th Regt., his father being at that time a
private in the Monaghan militia. Young Gibson accompanied the
Inniskillings to the Peninsula and also served with the regt. at
Waterloo. He was discharged from the army soon after on a pension of one
shilling per diem, which he afterwards commuted, receiving besides, he
states, £74. He has been an inmate of Caterham Asylum for some years,
and although unable to leave his bed he still enjoys a pipe of tobacco,
which he indulges in frequently.”

                           ------------------

                         INTERESTING SURVIVOR.

“In the village of Rolvenden, in the Weald of Kent, there is living an
old woman named Moon, who was present at the battles of Quatre Bras and
Waterloo. Her father, a col.-sergt. of the 3rd batt. Rifle Brigade,
served throughout the Peninsular war, and took part in the battles of
Badajoz, Salamanca, and other conflicts. He died of wounds received at
Waterloo some months after the battle and before he had received his
pension. Mrs. Moon was born in the Peninsula, her mother doing work for
the forces when operating there. Though Mrs. Moon is now infirm, her
intellect is clear and her memory good.”—_Morning Post_, 27th March,
1899.

NOTE BY THE EDITOR.—Mrs. Barbara Moon d. at Rolvenden in Oct., 1903. It
was stated in an obituary notice that she was four years old at the time
of the battle of Waterloo and rode in a waggon over the field on the
evening of 18th June, 1815.

                           ------------------

               THE LAST BRITISH EYE-WITNESS OF WATERLOO.

Elizabeth Watkins, of Norwich, born 31st Jan., 1810, at Beaminster, near
Bridport. Her father, one Daniel Gale, was pressed into the King’s
service just before Waterloo. Gale’s wife and child followed him to
Brussels and were in the women’s camp near the field of Waterloo. The
child remembers cutting up lint—saw many dead, and some stirring
incidents of the battle. (_Notes and Queries_, 5th Dec., 1903). A
portrait of Elizabeth Watkins recently appeared in _The Sphere_.

                           ------------------

                      AN EYE-WITNESS OF WATERLOO.

                        _From a Correspondent._

In a small cottage at the little village of Chapelle, within eye-shot of
the meeting-place of Wellington and Blücher after the most tremendous
and fateful struggle in the world’s history, there was living on June
18, 1815, a little girl, Thérèse Roland, thirteen years of age, who
witnessed all that took place on that historic day. Eighty-nine years
later she is still living there, a widow now, with her two sons of
eighty and seventy-eight, herself a bowed and wrinkled old dame of 103
years. This aged peasant, with faculties still clear and memory
unimpaired, is probably the only living witness of the death-blow dealt
to all Napoleon’s hopes on that midsummer day, which moulded the future
history of an entire continent, and altered the balance of power of the
entire world.

A representative of the _Patrie_ has recently visited the battlefield,
and obtained from this interesting old character, now Mme. Dupuis, some
reminiscences of much that happened that day. She says:—

“As a little girl, stirred and fascinated by the long lines of horsemen,
guns, and tired foot regiments passing our cottage, I stood at our door
and served out water to the ‘beaux soldats.’ Afterwards I followed them
to Waterloo. In the evening we heard the booming of great cannon, and
from the windows I could see the clouds of smoke rising into the air
like trees. I was in the mill, and the windows rattled. All night long
we heard the tramp of silent men and the creaking, stumbling guns
passing our doors. When I looked out next morning I saw wounded men
lying by the roadside. In the distance I could hear a sound like a rough
sea breaking against the rocks. There were clouds of smoke, and I saw
men galloping, and masses of my brave soldiers moving hurriedly across
the fields. Then the doctors came, and took out the bullets from the
wounds of the soldiers.... The Prussians came by, and then the English,
shouting their cries of victory.

“Not far away soldiers were digging trenches in our fields to bury the
dead. There were so many of them, so many of them”—and the old peasant
covered her face with her hands as though to shut out the terrible
picture. “I saw one woman of Gotarville cut off the fingers of a
Prussian officer, sorely hurt but still living, to secure the jewelled
rings that he wore.

“At Planchenoit, a little further away, they tell me that the brave
French were so beaten down by bayonet charges that the river ran with
blood. Near the hill above a general was killed.

“No; I did not see Napoleon, and I still regret it. Poor Napoleon!... We
did not like the English or the Prussians.... The next day we knew that
Napoleon’s power was broken, by the lines we heard the people
singing,”—and raising herself in her chair, the tottering old dame sang
in a feeble voice:—

         Les cannoniers bombardaient à feu et à flamme,
         Les cuirassiers, les gardes d’honneur, sont renversés,
         Bonaparte, enfin voilà ta fin. Il faut te rendre—
         Te voilà battu, convaincu, tu n’en peux plus!

                                                    _Pall Mall Gazette._

18th June, 1904.

                    INDEX TO COMMISSIONED OFFICERS.


 Abercromby, Hon. A., 7, 33, 107
 Acheson, Hon. Edward, 107
 Acres, John, 185
 Acton, Hen., 78
 Adair, Robt., 97
 Adam, F., 6, 26
 Adams, Richard, 123
 Adamson, Augustus F.F., 123
 Adye, S.G., 209
 Ainslie, Geo. S.H., 176
 Ainsworth, Oliver, 164
 Aird, Thos., 207
 Aitkin, Wm., 207
 Akenside, Wm., 123
 Albemarle, Earl of. _See_ Keppel
 Alderson, John, 150
 Alexander, Claude, 193
 ——, Jas., 59, 250
 Allen, Geo., 99
 Allingham, John Delancy, 62
 Allix, Chas., 97
 Alstone, Jas., 116
 Alten, C. Count, Lieut.-Gen., K.C.B., 3, 16
 Alten, V. Count, Maj.-Gen., 3, 17
 Ambrose, Jas., 233
 Amos, J.W., 236
 Anderson, Hen., 175
 ——, Matthew, 169
 ——, Robert, 245
 ——, Wm., 71st Foot, 180
 ——, ——, 1st Foot, 117
 ——, ——, C., Rl. Art., 223
 Andrews, Hen., 75
 ——, Mathias, 140
 Anglesey, Marquis of. _See_ Uxbridge, Earl of.
 Anson, Hon. Geo., 112
 Anthony, Jas., 153
 Archbold, John, 149
 Arguimbau, Lawrence, 116
 Armstrong, Abraham, 79
 ——, Andrew, 99
 ——, Archibald, 179
 ——, John, 1st Foot, 116
 ——, ——, 95th Rifles, 202
 ——, W., 19th Light Dragoons, 3, 17
 ——, ——, 6th Dragoons, 62
 Arnold, Jas., 50
 ——, Robt., 68
 Ashton, John, 112
 Askew, Hen., 97
 Askey, Thos., 165
 Austen, Hen., 212
 Austin, Wm., 169


 Babington, Ralph, 52
 Bacon, Anthony, 68
 ——, Cæsar, 93
 Bagshaw, Cæsar, 198
 Bailey, Morris Wm., 140
 Baillie, Andrew, 140
 Bain, Hen., 150
 ——, Wm., 150
 Baird, David, 112
 ——, Wm., 243
 Baker, Geo., 86
 Baldwin, Geo., 123
 ——, Robt., 179
 Banks, Clement, 176
 Banner, John, 93
 Bant, Ric., 234
 Barailler, Joseph, 179
 ——, P., 149
 Barclay, D., 7, 30, 97
 Barlow, Geo. Ulrich, 175
 Barnard, Sir A.F., K.C.B., 197
 ——, Chas. Levyns, 58
 Barnes, Sir Edw., 6, 29
 Barnet, Chas. John, 112
 Barnett, John, 180
 ——, —— Hen., 153
 Barnewell, Aylmer, 236
 Barr, Geo., 145
 Barra, J., 86
 Barrailler, Joseph, 179
 ——, P., 8, 38, 149
 Barrett, Edw., 82
 ——, J.C., 169
 Barrington, Hon. S.S., 99
 Barrs, Geo., 149
 Barry, Wm., 154
 Bartlett, Jas., 176
 ——, Wm., 176
 Barton, Alexander, 75
 ——, Chambré, B., 48
 ——, Wm., 98
 Bathurst, Hon. T. Seymour, 99
 Battersby, Geo., 52
 Batty, Robt., 98
 Baynes, Geo. M., 222
 ——, H., 209
 ——, T., 5, 22
 Beachcroft, Saml., 123
 Beamond, Saml., 48
 Beane, Geo., 221
 Beard, Thos., 233
 Beardsley, Sam., 164
 Beattie, Fredk., 65
 Beauchamp, Ric., 86
 Beaufoy, Mark, 107
 Becher, Abel, 194
 Beckwith, C., 8, 36, 197
 ——, Wm., 86
 Beere, Hen., 140
 Belcher, Robt. Tresilian, 145
 Bell, Wm., 209
 Bellairs, Wm., 82
 Belli, John Henry, 86
 Belson, Sir Chas. P., K.C.B., 135
 Bennett, Francis, 201
 ——, Wm., 146
 Bentinck, C.A.F., 7, 32, 107
 Berger, John, 46
 Berkeley, Sir G.H.F., K.C.B., 7, 30, 236
 Bernard, Hon. H.B., 52
 Bertie, Lindsey Jas., 75
 Betty, John, 132
 Biddulph, Theophilus, 62
 Bingham, John, 233
 Binney, Thos., 71
 Birtwhistle, John, 146
 Bishop, Peter, 153
 Black, Geo., 7, 32, 239
 ——, Jas., 245
 ——, J.L., 116
 ——, Saml., 62
 Blackall, Gerald, 150
 Blacklin, Ric., 117
 Blackman, John Lucie, 107
 Blackwood, Robt., 175
 Blair, John, 165
 Blakeman, Ric., 239
 Blanckley, H., 7, 32, 128
 Blane, Hugh Seymour, 113
 Blathwayt, Geo. Wm., 93
 Blennerhassett, Aldworth, 185
 Blois, Chas., 55
 Bloomfield, Hen. Keane, 243
 ——, John, 209
 Boase, John, 145
 Boates, Henry Ellis, 50
 Boldero, Hen., 123
 ——, Lonsdale, 98
 Bolton, A., 93
 ——, John, 62
 ——, Saml., 223
 ——, Thos., 117
 Booth, Wm., 82
 Bott, Chas., 207
 Bouchier, Jas., 71
 Bouverie, Everard Wm., 50
 Bowater, Edw., 112
 Bowen, Edw. Cole, 153
 ——, Robt., 107
 Bowers, Chas. Robt., 78
 ——, Mansell, 78
 Bowlby, Edward, 120
 ——, Joseph, 123
 ——, Peter, 120
 Bowles, Geo., 107
 ——, John, 135
 Boyce, John, 149
 ——, Wm., 48
 Boyd, Hygatt, 120
 Boyle, Robt., 157
 Boyse, Jaques, 145
 ——, Shapland, 78
 Bradford, Sir Hen. Hollis, 8, 35, 97
 Bradley, (——), 48
 Bramwell, John, 194
 Brander, Jas., 157
 ——, Thos. Coventry, 52
 Brannan, Chas. Myler, 123
 Brauns, A.C.G., 8, 39, 206
 Breary, Christ. Spencer, 236
 Brereton, Wm., 217
 Breton, Jno. F., 216
 Breymann, F., 7, 31
 Brice, Alex. A., 128
 Bridge, Geo. Dandridge, 185
 Bridgeland, T., 135
 Bridgeman, Hon. O., 2, 14, 98
 Bridger, Jas. Paul, 75
 Bringhurst, John Dorset, 52
 Brisbane, Thos., 170
 Broke, Sir Chas., 7, 34
 Brome, Joseph, 248
 Bromhead, Gonville, 239
 Brook, Thos., 164
 Brooke, Francis, 1st Dgn. Gds., 52
 ——, ——, 4th Foot, 120
 Brookes, Hen. Wm., 145
 Broughton, Saml., 48
 Brown, Alexander, 157
 ——, Andrew, 189
 ——, Evan M., 128
 ——, Geo., 146
 ——, Hen., 242
 ——, John, 52
 ——, Thos., 1st Foot, 98
 ——, ——, 79th Foot, 189
 Browne, Barton Parker, 71
 ——, Donald, 185
 ——, Eugene, 245
 ——, Fielding, 153
 ——, John, 120
 ——, Hon. Michael, 153
 ——, Thos. Gore, 248
 ——, Hon. Wm., 169
 ——, Wm. Fredk., 62
 Brownrigg, David, 231
 Bruce, Jas. R., 221
 ——, Robt., 99
 ——, Saml. Barwick, 231
 ——, Wm., 189
 Brugh, Adam, 161
 Brunton, Ric., 8, 37
 Buchanan, John Phillips, 86
 ——, Wm., 146
 Buck, Hen. Rishton, 149
 Buckle, Wm., 123
 Buckley, Edw. P., 98
 ——, Geo. Ric., 107
 ——, Hen., 82
 ——, Wm., 116
 Budgen, John Robt., 201
 Bull, Robt., 212
 Bullen, Jas., 141
 Bullock, Hen. R., 71
 Burgess, Francis, 239
 ——, Sam. W., 98
 Burke, Jas., 161
 ——, Joseph, 198
 Burmeister, M.A., 231
 Burnaby, Rich. B., 225
 Burnet, John, 170
 Burney, Wm., 161
 Burrell, Wm. G., 190
 Burrows, Montagu, 124
 Burton, Francis, 120
 Bury, Viscount, 1, 12, 98
 ——, Wm., 237
 Bushell, John, 120
 Busteed, Christopher, 175
 Butler, Jas., 98
 ——, Theobald, 145
 ——, Whitwell, 113
 Byam, Edw., 82
 ——, Wm., 82
 Byng, Sir John, 4, 20


 Caddell, Chas., 135
 Cahill, Patrick, 246
 Cairnes, Robt. M., 212
 Callander, Alex. Jas., 245
 ——, John, 231
 Calvert, Felix, 145
 Cameron, Alexander, 79th Foot, 189
 ——, ——, 95th Foot, 197
 ——, ——, 79th Foot, 190
 ——, Allen, 116
 ——, Angus, 190
 ——, Archibald, 190
 ——, Donald, 79th Foot, 189
 ——, ——, 1st Foot, 99
 ——, Dugald, 201
 ——, Duncan, 189
 ——, Ewen, 189
 ——, Jas., 189
 ——, John, 33rd Foot, 149
 ——, ——, 79th Foot, 189
 ——, ——, 92nd Foot, 193
 ——, Wm. G., 1st Ft. Gds., 8, 38, 98
 Campbell, Alex., 91st Foot, 1st Batt., 245
 Campbell, Alex., 91st Foot, 2nd Batt., 245
 Campbell, Arch., 59th Foot, 212
 ——, ——, 91st Foot, 1st Batt., 245
 ——, ——, 91st Foot, 2nd Batt., 245
 ——, Sir Colin, K.C.B., 8, 39, 107
 ——, Colin, 1st Foot, 116
 ——, Donald, 179
 ——, Dugald, 91st Foot, 245
 ——, ——, 91st Foot, 246
 ——, ——, 92nd Foot, 193
 ——, Ewen, 193
 ——, Geo., 169
 ——, Sir Guy, 7, 30
 ——, Jas., 51st Foot, 164
 ——, ——, 79th Foot, 190
 ——, ——, 79th Foot, 189
 ——, John, 42nd Foot, 157
 ——, ——, 44th Foot, 161
 ——, ——, 91st Foot, 245
 ——, Sir Neil, Kt., 239
 ——, Neil, 189
 ——, Norman, 180
 ——, Patrick, 169
 ——, R.P., 6, 26
 ——, Thos., 153
 ——, Wm., 8, 36, 128
 Canning, C.F., 1, 9, 112
 Carden, Hen. Robt., 55
 Carey, Tupper, 234
 Cargill, Jas. Stewart, 170
 Carmichael, Lewis, 242
 Carr, John, 82
 Carruthers, Chas. B., 135
 ——, Jas., 58
 Cartan, Thos., 83
 Carthew, Wm., 228
 Cartwright, Wm., 68
 Cassan, Thos., 145
 Castley, Jas., 75
 Cater, Thos. O., 248
 Cathcart, Andrew, 245
 ——, Hon. Geo., 1, 10
 Chadwick, Nicholas, 242
 Chalmers, Wm., 169
 Chambers, Courtney, 98
 ——, Capt. N., 2, 15, 98
 ——, Thos. Walker, 140
 ——, Wm., 90
 Chapman, Wm., 197
 Chartres, Thos., 239
 Chatterton, Jas., 75
 Chawner, Edw., 197
 Chenevix, Geo. _See_ Smith, Geo.
 Cheney, Edw., 58, 252
 Chermside, Robt. Alex., 66
 Cherry, Fredk., 207
 Childers, M., 3, 18, 71
 Chisholm, Donald, 157
 ——, Jas. John, 193
 ——, Stewart, 233
 Christie, B., 4, 19
 ——, Jas., 161
 Church, Jas., 198
 Churchill, C.H., 2, 14, 98
 Clabon, Edw., 149
 Clark, Alex. Kennedy, 55
 ——, Jas., 170
 ——, John, 240
 Clarke, Chris., 176
 ——, Isaac Blake, 58, 250
 ——, John, 194
 ——, ——, F., 165
 ——, J.P., 135
 ——, Patrick, 141
 ——, Pryce, 240
 ——, Wm., 1st Foot, 116
 ——, ——, 4th Foot, 120
 ——, Wm. Aldworth, 154
 Clark-Kennedy. _See_ Clark, A.K.
 Claus, Wm., 239
 Clayhills, Alex., 128
 Clayton, Wm. Robt., 50
 Clements, Hon. Robt., 98
 Clerke, Wm. Hen., 169
 Clifton, Arthur Benj., 55
 Clinton, Sir Hen., 2, 15
 Clive, Edw., 98
 Clues, Josiah, 48
 Clusky, Michael, 62
 Clyde, John, 128
 Coane, Hen., 185
 Coates, Jas., 179
 ——, Wm., 240
 Cochrane, Andw. Coutts, 113
 ——, Robt., 201
 ——, Thos., 201
 Cockburn, Jas., 242
 Cocksedge, Jas. Coppin, 83
 Coen, John, 135
 Colborne, Sir John, K.C.B., 169
 Coles, Geo., 209
 ——, Ric., 71
 Colleton, Thos. Wm., 135
 Collins, Benj. Marshall, 120
 ——, John, 162
 Colquhoun, Robt., 99
 Colquitt, Goodwin, 97
 Colthurst, Jas. Robt., 145
 Colville, Sir Chas., 3, 16
 Colvin, Andrew, 243
 Constant, John, 79
 Cooke, Maj.-Gen. G., 3, 18
 ——, Peter, 161
 ——, Ric. Harvey, 97
 Cooper, Alf., 123
 ——, Leon M., 117
 Coote, John, 180
 ——, Robt., 90
 Copley, Robt., 180
 Cotter, Geo. Sackville, 175
 Cottingham, Thos., 170
 Cowell, John Stepney, 107
 Cowen, H., 94
 Cowper, John, 242
 Cox, Chas. T., 179
 ——, John, 197
 ——, Philip Zachariah, 93
 ——, Saml., 46
 Coxen, Edw., 201
 Coxens, Stephen, 93
 Craddock, Thos., 132
 Crauford, Thos. _See_ Crawford, Thos.
 Craufurd, Alex. Chas. (Volunteer), 75
 ——, Donald, 213
 ——, Thos. _See_ Crawford
 Crawford Alex. Spiers, 190
 ——, Jas. Arch., 242
 ——, Thos., 112
 Crichton, Nath. Day, 86
 Croft, Thos. Elmsley, 99
 Crofton, W., 6, 27, 239
 Croker, Ric., 90
 Cromie, Michael T., 221
 Cross, John, 169
 Crouchley, Joseph, 94
 Crowe, John, 145
 Crummer, Jas. H., 135
 Cumming, Alexander, 157
 Cuppage, Burke, 223
 Currie, E., 7, 31
 Curtis, Wm., 99
 Curzon, Hon. W., 7, 32, 175
 Cutcliffe, John Mervin, 93
 Cuyler, A., 3, 18, 107
 ——, Chas., 175


Dallas, Alex. R.C., 234 ——, Chas. R.K., 146 Dalmer, Francis, 128 ——,
Thos., 128 Dalrymple, Leighton C., 82 Dalton, Francis, 46 Dalwig,
Conrad, 83 Damer. _See_ Dawson, Hon G.L. Dance, Chas. Webb, 93 Daniel,
John, 65 ——, Robt., 140 ——, Wm. Barker, 233 Dann, Robt., 59 Dansey,
Chas. C., 215 Darling, W., 7, 31 Dashwood, Chas., 112 Davidson, Geo.,
157 Davies, David, 145 ——, J.H., 97 Dawkins, F., Capt., 2, 15, 98 ——,
Geo. A.F., 82 ——, Hen., 107 Dawson, Chas., 169 ——, Hon. G.L., 8, 36, 52
——, Hon. Lionel C., 90 ——, Wm., 59, 250 Day, Jas., 220 Deacon, Thos.,
185 Deane, Wm., 90 Deares, Jas., 135 Dease, Jas., 231 Delancey, Sir Wm.
Howe, 7, 33 Denecke, Geo. M.D., 231 Denham, Dixon, 239 Dent, Abraham,
242 Des Vœux, Benfield, 71 Dewes, John, 136 Dick, Robt. Hen., 157
Dickson, Sir Alex., K.C.B., 209 ——, Chas. Lenox, 175 ——, Sir Jeremiah,
7, 35 Diggle, Chas., 169 Dillow, Thos., 93 Dinwiddie, Gilbert, 234
Dirom, John Pasley, 99 Disbrowe, G., 3, 18, 98 Disney, Brabazon, 93
Ditmas, John, 132 Dixon, Francis, 201 ——, Hen., 82 Dobbs, Wm., 116
Dobson, Wm., 46 Dodwell, Geo., 93 Doherty, Geo., 78 ——, Joseph, 78 ——,
Patrick, 78 Dorville, Philip, 55 ——, Ric., 66 Douglas, Chas., 242 ——,
Francis Jas., 107 ——, John Jas., 82 ——, Neil, 189 ——, Robt., 65 ——,
Robt., 91st Foot, 246 ——, Hon. Sholto, 62 ——, Sir Wm., K.C.B., 245
Dowbiggin, Wm. H., 75 Dowling, Joseph, 185 Down, Ric., 62 Doyle, Chas.
Simon, 237 D’Oyly, Sir Francis, 97 ——, Hen., 97 Drake, Edw., 141 ——, Wm.
Tyrwhitt, 50 Draper, Thos., 231 Drewe, E.W., 132 Drinkwater, Thos., 48
Dromgoole, Nich. F., 236 Drought, John H., 78 Drummond, Barclay, 112 ——,
Geo., 197 ——, P., 209 ——, Wm., 112 Drury, Geo., 150 Duberly, Jas., 71
Ducat, Dugald, 246 Dudgeon, Robt., 116 Dumaresq, H., 4, 20 Dunbar,
Alexander, 157 Duncan, Edw., 242 Dunlevie, Gillespie, 161 Dunn, Geo.,
129 ——, John, 129 ——, Robt., 250 Dunnicliffe, Hen., 227 Duperier, Hen.,
90 Durand, Fredk. Holland, 154 Dyas, Joseph, 164 Dyneley, Thos., 214

 .sp 2
 .ix
 Eason, Robt. Prescott, 135
 Eastwood, Chas. Bedford, 185
 Eaton, Chas., 201
 Edgcombe, Hon. Ern. A., 99
 Edgell, Chas. Jas., 120
 Edwards, David J., 213
 Eeles, Chas., 4, 19, 204
 ——, Wm., 204
 Egan, Carberry, 245
 Egerton, R. Maj., 2, 13
 Einem, Capt., 3, 17
 Elkington, J.G., 141
 Elley, Sir John, 7, 29, 50
 Elliott. Rich. Chas., 140
 ——, Wm., 48
 ——, ——, Hen., 164
 Ellis, Chas. Parker, 98
 ——, Conyngham, 153
 ——, Edw. Thos., 129
 ——, Sir Hen. Walter, K.C.B., 128
 Ellison, Robt., 98
 Elphinstone, Jas. D., 65
 ——, Wm. Keith, 149
 Elrington, J., 112
 Elton, Wm., 52
 Elwes, John Raleigh, 179
 Emery, Hen. Gresley, M.D., 231
 English, Thos., 135
 Enoch, J., 128
 Erskine, E.S., 7, 31
 ——, Geo. F., 75
 ——, John F.M., 99
 Estorff, Baron, 3, 17
 Evans, De Lacy, 4, 19
 ——, John, 141
 ——, Mathew, 228
 Evanson, Wm. Alleyne, 239
 Evatt, G., 7, 31
 Evelyn, Geo., 112
 Evers, Geo., 231
 Eyre, Rich. Cocks, 201


 Fairfield, Edw. B., 112
 Falconar, G.H., 58, 250
 Fane, Mildmay, 161
 Farmer, Thos., 128
 Farrant, Wm., 236
 Fawson, John, 242
 Fazackerley, Jas., 150
 Fead, Geo., 97
 Feilde, F., 120
 Felix, Orlando, 197
 Felton, Thos., 66
 Fenn, John, 207
 Fensham, G., 128
 Fenton, Thos. Chas., 58, 254
 Fenwick, Thos. Lisle, 245
 Fernandez, John L., 120
 Ferrier, Arch., 193
 Ferrior, Saml., 46
 Field, Jeremiah, 48
 Fielding, Geo., 128
 Finlayson, D., 150
 Finnie, Wm., 117
 Finucane, Jas., 140
 Fisher, Wm., 153
 Fiske, Geo., 228
 Fitzgerald, E.T., 8, 37
 ——, Gerald, 132
 ——, Jas., 145
 ——, Richd., 48
 FitzGibbon, Gerald, 129
 Fitzmaurice, John Geo., 197
 FitzPatrick, Percy, 165
 Fitzroy, Lord Chas., 7, 32, 98
 ——, C.A., 6, 28, 50
 Flamanck, John, 164
 Floyd, Hen., 68
 Fludyer, Geo., 99
 Fogo, T. Macmillan, M.D., 233
 Foot, Geo., 222
 Foote, Robt., 237
 Forbes, Alex., 189
 ——, Hon. Hastings, 112
 ——, Hon. Jas., 107
 ——, Hon. Walter, 107
 Ford, Fredk., 153
 Forlong, Jas., 150
 Forster, Hen., 213
 Fortescue, Wm. Faithful, 132
 Foster, Chas., 55
 Foulkes, John, 153
 Fowler, Rich., 201
 Frankland, F.W., 3, 17
 Franklyn, Roger, 175
 ——, Thos. Decimus, 153
 Fraser, Alex., 165
 ——, A.L., 157
 ——, C., 123
 ——, Geo., 239
 ——, Hugh Andrew, 157
 ——, Jas. John, 7th Hussars, 2, 13, 65
 ——, Jas., 79th Foot, 189
 ——, John, 179
 ——, Malcolm, 189
 ——, Thos., 240
 ——, William, 157
 Frazer, Lieut.-Col. Sir Augustus, 209
 Frederick, Edw., 164
 Freear, R.W., 140
 Fremantle, J., 1, 9, 107
 French, Martin, 90
 Frere, Rich. B., 197
 Fry, John, 201
 ——, Wm. D., 150
 Fryer, Chas., 128
 Fuller, Francis, 242
 ——, Wm., 52
 Fullerton, Jas., 204
 Fynan, Moore F., 240


 Gairdner, J.P., 197
 Galliers, Wm., 117
 Gape, Jas., 58, 252
 Gardiner, John, 197
 ——, Sir Robt., K.C.B., 214
 Gardner, Andrew, 132
 ——, John, 99
 Garland, John, 185
 Gatty, Hen., 233
 Gavin, Wm., 180
 Gawler, Geo., 169
 Geale, John, 78
 Gerard, Arthur, 120
 ——, Geo., 157
 Gerrard, Thos., 93
 Gerstlacher, E., 7, 32
 Gibbs, John, 165
 Gibney, Wm., 83
 Gibson, J.B., 170
 Gilbert, Francis Yarde, 229
 ——, Roger P., 135
 Gilborne, Edw., 179
 Gilder, Fredk., 99
 Glen, Alex., 116
 Glendinning, Thos., 207
 Glyn, Hen., 154
 Glynne, Andrew Eugene, 153
 Going, John, 52
 Gold, C., 209
 Goldsmid, Albert, 75
 Gomm, Sir Wm., 8, 35, 107
 Gooch, H., 107
 Good, Saml., 113
 Goodenough, Steph., 55
 Goodman, S.A., 7, 33
 Gordon, Hon. Sir Alex., 1, 10, 112
 ——, Alex., 107
 ——, ——, 92nd Foot, 193
 ——, Jas., 194
 ——, John Robert, 65
 ——, ——, Rolfe, 90
 ——, Robt., 157
 ——, Thos., 1st Foot, 116
 ——, ——, 193
 ——, Wm., 116
 Gore, Arthur, 30th Foot, 140
 ——, ——, 33rd Foot, 149
 ——, Hon. Chas., 4, 19
 ——, Ralph, 149
 Gough, Rich., 46
 Goulburn, Fredk., 78
 Gowan, John, 140
 Graham, Chas., 116
 ——, Hen., 52
 ——, Jas. Regd. Torin, 58, 254
 Grant, Alex., 179
 ——, Colquhoun, 8, 35
 ——, Sir Colquhoun, 5, 23, 82
 ——, Jas., 90
 ——, Sir Jas. Robt., M.D., 231
 ——, John, 157
 ——, Robert, 231
 ——, Wm. Alex., 179
 ——, ——, Chas., 193
 Gray, C.G., 5, 26, 204
 Greaves, Jos. Edw., 52
 Greenock, Lord, 8, 35
 Greenwood, John, 66
 Gregorie, Chas., 78
 Grenfell, Wm., 65
 Greville, Algernon, 99
 Grey, John, 10th Hussars, 68
 ——, ——, 54th Foot, 239
 Grier, Robt., 161
 Griffith, Edwin, 82
 ——, John, 75
 ——, Joseph. _See_ Griffiths, Henry
 ——, Thos., 117
 Griffiths, Hen., 82
 ——, Hen. Fredk., 107
 ——, John. _See_ Griffith, John.
 ——, ——, Rogers, 170
 ——, W.A., 128
 Gronow, R.H., 98
 Grose, Edw., 97
 Grove, Hen., 93
 Gubbins, James, 78
 Guillamore, Viscount. _See_ O’Grady, Standish
 Gunning, Geo., 55
 ——, ——, Orlando, 68
 ——, John, 231
 Gunthorpe, J., 5, 25, 98
 Gurwood, John, 2, 15, 68


 Hadden, Wm. Fredk., 62
 Hagan, Jas., 243
 Haggup, Wm., 197
 Haigh, John, 149
 ——, Thos. D., 149
 Haines, Gregory, 234
 Halkett, Sir Colin, 6, 27
 Hall, Geo., 169
 ——, —— D., 206
 ——, John, 72
 Halliday, Andrew, 231
 Halpin, Oliver, 162
 Hamerton, John M., 161
 Hames, Chas., 145
 Hamill, Edw., 52
 Hamilton, Alex., 140
 ——, —— Duke, 237
 ——, Andrew, 6, 29
 ——, Archd. J., 58, 251
 ——, G.H., 7, 32
 ——, Jas. Inglis, 58
 ——, Wm. C., 68
 ——, —— Fredk., 112
 Hancox, Skinner, 82
 Handcock, Rich., 132
 ——, Tobias, 132
 Hankin, Thos. Pate, 58, 250
 Hanrot, Francis Gastry, 113
 Hanson, Wm. Crosbie, 179
 Harding, Robt., 214
 Hardinge, Sir Hen., K.C.B., 97
 ——, Rich., 220
 Hardman, Saml., 68
 Hardy, Thos., 50
 Hare, John, 132
 ——, Wm. Hen., 164
 Harford, J., 7, 32
 Harley, Pharaoh, 154
 Harris, Isaac Watkins, 128
 ——, T. Noel, 6, 28
 ——, Wm., 86
 ——, —— Geo., 185
 Harrison, Geo., 190
 ——, Hugh, 145
 ——, John, 16th Lt. Dgns., 87
 ——, ——, 1st Foot, 99
 ——, Richard, 140
 ——, Wm., 175
 Hart, J., 149
 ——, John, 52nd Foot, 170
 ——, Thos., 146
 Hartford, Hen., 242
 Hartley, Jas. Campbell, 123
 Harty, J.M., 149
 Harvey, Wm. H., 224
 Hassard, Alex., 62
 Havelock, W., 3, 16
 Hawker, Jas., 209
 Hawkins, Hen., 112
 Hawley, Ben. B., 164
 ——, Robt. Toovey, 52
 Hawtyn, Joseph, 128
 Hay, Alex., 86
 ——, Jas., 86
 ——, Lord, 5, 25
 ——, —— James, 3, 17, 97, 99
 ——, Patrick, 185
 ——, Wm., 75
 Head, Francis Bond, 229
 Hearn, Wm. Marcus, 161
 Hearne, Geo. Hen., 120
 Heavieside, Rich., 140
 Hedding, Wm. Levitt, 236
 Heise, A., 3, 16
 Hemmings, Wm., 93
 Hemsley, Hen., 154
 Henderson. _See_ Mercer, Douglas
 ——, Archibald M., 180
 ——, James, 179
 ——, Wm., 132
 Hennis, Wm. How., 227
 Hepburn, Francis, 112
 Hervey, F.E., 7, 34
 ——, Jas., 107
 Hesilrige, Robt. Greville, 185
 Hesketh, Robt. B., 112
 Hesse, Chas., 90
 Hewetson, John, 236
 Hewett, Wm., 123
 Hewitt, Robt., 194
 Heydon, William, 75
 Heyland, Arthur Rowley, 153
 Heyliger, Peter Augustus, 65
 Heyt, Robt., 198
 Hibbert, Geo., 153
 ——, John N., 52
 Hichins, Richard, 233
 Hicks, Geo., 194
 ——, John, 145
 Hildebrand, John, 236
 Hill, Lord Arthur, 1, 10
 ——, Chas., 240
 ——, Col. Clement, 2, 13, 50
 ——, Edw. Embury, 135
 ——, H., 93
 ——, J. Humph. Edw., 128
 ——, Joseph, 175
 ——, Lord, G.C.B., 2, 13
 ——, Sir Thos. Noel, 7, 30, 97
 ——, Sir Robt. Chambré, 50
 ——, Rowley F., 243
 ——, Saml., 180
 ——, Wm. Hen., 242
 Hilliar, G., 8, 38
 Hilliard, Hen., 135
 Hincks, John, 216
 Hobbs, Thos., 193
 Hobhouse, Benj., 175
 Hodder, Edw., 176
 Hodge, Edw., 65
 Hodges, Geo. Lloyd, 78
 Hodgson, Ellis, 68
 ——, Wm., 150
 Holbeck, Edw., 62
 Holland, Thos. E.H., 120
 Hollis, Matthew, 185
 Holman, Chas., 170
 Holmes, Geo., 132
 ——, —— W., 193
 ——, Rich. Birt., 124
 ——, Robt. Pattison, 128
 ——, S., 6, 26
 Home, A., 6, 27
 ——, Francis, 112
 Hood, Jas., 245
 Hope, Jas., 193
 ——, John Chas., 201
 Horan, Thos. J., 145
 Horton, Geo. W., 180
 Hoste, Sir Geo., 229
 Hotham, Beaumont Lord, 107
 Hovenden, Nichs., 242
 Howard, Hon. Fredk., 68
 ——, Jas. Arnot, 150
 ——, Robt., 140
 Hoysted, Fredk. W., 242
 Hudson, Rich., 153
 Hughes, Geo., 185
 ——, Robt., 140
 Humbley, Wm., 201
 Hume, Gustavus T., 227
 ——, John R., 231
 Humphreys, Wm. H., 228
 Hunter, Wm., 108
 Hunter-Blair, Thomas, 6, 27, 245
 Huntley, Wm. Warburton, 52
 Hurd, Saml., 99
 Hurford. _See_ Harford
 Hutchesson, Thos., 248
 Hutchinson, Francis, 239


 Impett, John, 180
 Ingilby, Wm. B., 214
 Ingle, Chas. Wm., 175
 Ingram, Geo., 135
 ——, John, 116
 Innes, Alexr., 157
 ——, Hector, 193
 ——, Peter, 189
 Irby, Hon. Hen. Edw., 48
 Ireland, Saml., 132
 Irvine, Wm. D’Arcy, 52
 Irving, Jacob Æ., 78
 ——, John Æ. _See_ Irving, Jacob Æ.
 ——, W., 135
 Irwin, David, 66
 ——, Henry, 240
 ——, Wm., 135
 Isaacson, Egerton C., 164


 Jackson, Basil, Royal Waggon Train, 207
 Jackson, Basil, Royal Staff Corps, 8, 38, 206
 Jackson, Jas., 3, 16
 ——, Joseph, 170
 Jacob, Geo. Thomson, 99
 Jagger, Joseph, 228
 Jago, Darell, 222
 Jagoe, Jonathan, 145
 James, John, 141
 ——, —— Haddy, 46
 ——, Philip Haughton, 71
 ——, Wm., 112
 Jenkins, John, 71
 Jenks, Geo. Saml., 69
 Jessop, J., 8, 37, 161
 Jeyes, Saml., 83
 Johnson, Hen., 128
 Johnson, Robt. _See_ Johnston, Robt.
 Johnston, Elliott Dunkin, 197
 ——, Robt., 93
 ——, Wm., 197
 Johnstone, Chas., 179
 ——, Geo., 5, 25
 ——, W., 51st Foot, 165
 ——, Wm. Fredk., 98
 Jolliffe, Chas., 128
 Jones, Arthur, 179
 ——, Capt., 5, 24
 ——, Hen., 162
 ——, John, 87
 ——, Pryce, 170
 ——, Rich., 153
 ——, Wm., 40th Foot, 154
 ——, ——, 51st Foot, 164
 Jordan, Moore, 228


 Kater, Wm., 132
 Keane, E., 6, 28, 65
 Keightley, John, 123
 Keith, Hen. Duncan, 176
 Kellett, R.J. N., 201
 Kelly, Allan, 239
 ——, D., 8, 36, 185
 ——, Edw., 46
 ——, Rich., 28th Foot, 135
 ——, ——, 54th Foot, 239
 ——, T.R., 55
 Kempt, Sir Jas., 4, 18
 Kennedy, Ewen, 190
 ——, Francis, 164
 ——, Jas. Grant, 116
 ——, J. Shaw. _See_ Shaw
 ——, John M., 185
 Kenny, Chas., 169
 ——, Matthias, 233
 Kenyon, Abraham, 48
 ——, Jas. P.M., 48
 Keoghoe, Wm., 237
 Keowen, Wm., 123
 Keppel, Hon. Geo. Thos., 124
 Kerr, Jas., 62
 ——, Robt., 207
 Kerrison, Sir Edw., 65
 Kett, Chas. Geo., 227
 Keyt, John Thos., 164
 Kincaid, John, 197
 Kinchant, F.C., 58
 King, Chas., 86
 Kingsley, Mich. Toler, 164
 Kirby, Thos. Cox, 239
 Kirwan, Euseby Stratford, 120
 Knight, Chas., 149
 Knox, Robt. Spencer, 245
 Krause, Wm. Hen., 165
 Kynock, John, 189


 Lake, Chas., 112
 Lambe, Peter K., 243
 Lambert, Sir John, 5, 22
 Lamont, Norman, 246
 Lane, Abraham, 75
 ——, Geo., 116
 ——, Hen., 82
 Langton, Algernon, 2, 15
 ——, Edward, 169
 Lascelles, Chas. F.R., 98
 ——, Hen., 99
 Latouche, David, 141
 Lautour, Peter Aug., 93
 Lavens, Patrick H., 136
 Law, Robert, 179
 Lawder, Rynd, 146
 Lawrence, Brook, 78
 ——, Saml. Hill, 145
 Lawson, Douglas, 248
 Layton, Jonathan, 197
 Leach, Jonathan, 197
 Leacroft, Robt., 239
 Leaper, Wm., 189
 Leatham, Jas., 52
 Leathes, Hen. M., 216
 Leaver, Robt., 150
 Le Blanc, Francis, 201
 Lee, Hen., 197
 Leebody, Wm., 129
 Leech, Geo., 240
 Leeke, Wm., 170
 Lemoine, Wm., 226
 Lennox, Lord Geo., 1, 10
 ——, John, 59, 250
 Leslie, Jas., 239
 ——, Kewan Izod, 189
 L’Estrange, Anthony R., 180
 ——, Edm., 4, 21, 179
 Levinge, Chas., 120
 Lewes, John, 93
 Lewin, Carique, 179
 Leyne, Rich., 185
 Lilly, Thos., 129
 Lind, Lawrence, 246
 ——, Montague, 46
 ——, Robt., 179
 Lindsay, Hen., 175
 Lindsey, W.H. Bingham, 68
 Linton, John, 62
 Lintott, John, 164
 Lister, Wm., 197
 Little, Wm., 193
 Llewellyn, Rich., 135
 Lloyd, Edw. B., 86
 ——, Jas. Rich. Llewis, 90
 ——, John Y., 185
 ——, M. Stoughton H., 239
 ——, Wm., 224
 Lock, Hen., 165
 Lockhart, John Eliott, 75
 Lockwood, Purefoy, 140
 Loedel, Hen. Peter, 233
 Logan, Geo., 193
 ——, Joseph, 201
 ——, Robt., 194
 ——, Thos. Galbraith, 79
 Long, Wm., 179
 Longden, John, 149
 Lonsdale, Jas., 120
 ——, Wm., 120
 Louis, Mathew, 212
 Love, Fredk. Wm., 170
 ——, Geo. Harley, 169
 ——, Jas. Fredk., 169
 Lowe, Wm. Lawson, 185
 Luard, Geo., 90
 ——, John, 86
 Lucas, J., 146
 Luttrell, Francis Fownes, 98
 Lutyens, Benj., 71
 ——, Daniel, 71
 Lye, Benj. Leigh, 71
 Lygon, Hon. Edw. P., 48
 Lynam, J., 201
 ——, Joseph, 149
 ——, W., 136
 Lyon, Sir Jas., 5, 24
 Lyons, Wm., 231


 Macalester, Jas., 78
 Macalister, Chas., 236
 ——, Wm., 236
 Macara, Sir Robt., K.C.B., 157
 McArthur, Chas., 189
 ——, John, 190
 Macartney, Wm., 170
 McAuley, J.W., 231
 ——, Wm., 52
 Macbean, Forbes, 225
 MacBean, Wm., 185
 McCabe, Thos. P., 204
 McCann, Thos., 161
 McClintoch, Hugh, 146
 McConchy, Jas., 146
 McConnell, John R., 185
 McCullock, John Garlies, 201
 ——, —— Shaw, 145
 McDearmid, Duncan, 186
 Macdonald, Lt.-Col. A., 209
 ——, Alex., 217
 ——, ——, M.D., 233
 McDonald, Angus, 92nd Foot, 194
 ——, ——, 95th Foot, 202
 Macdonald, Donald, Major 92nd Foot, 193
 Macdonald, Donald, Lieut. 92nd Foot, 193
 Macdonald, Donald, 40th Foot, 153
 ——, Donald, 42nd Foot, 157
 Macdonald, George, 132
 ——, John, 23rd Foot, 128
 McDonald, John, 91st Foot, 245
 Macdonald, Robt., 116
 ——, Ronald, 193
 Macdonell, Anthony, 237
 ——, Jas., 107
 McDonell, Ric., 193
 McDonnell, Geo. _See_ Macdonald, George
 McDonough, Thos., 236
 Macdougall, Alex., 86
 McDougall, John, 245
 ——, Kenneth, 157
 McDowall, Joseph, 207
 McDuffie, Donald, 90
 McGlashan, J., 5, 24
 MacGregor, Jas., 242
 Machell, John Thos., 90
 McInnes, Alex., 48
 McIntosh, Dan., 157
 ——, Donald, 158
 Macintosh, Thos., 193
 McIntyre, Aug. J., 179
 ——, Wm., 149
 McKay, Donald, 157
 ——, Joseph, 117
 Mackay, Robt., 189
 ——, Thos., 62
 McKenzie, Donald, 157
 Mackenzie, Geo., 123
 ——, Hugh, 180
 ——, John, 79th Foot, 190
 ——, ——, 95th Foot, 198
 Mackie, Geo., 193
 McKinlay, John, 193
 McKinnon, Dan., 107
 Mackworth, D., 2, 14
 McLachlan, Andrew, 245
 ——, Geo. M., 246
 Maclean, Allan T., 78
 ——, Arch. John, 185
 McLean, Chas, Jas., 190
 MacLeod, Hen. G., 8, 37, 236
 McLeod, Swinton, 158
 McMillan, Hen., 58, 250
 Macnab, Duncan, 170
 M’Nabb, Alex., 140
 McNair, Jas., 169
 MacNamara, Thos., 201
 McNeil, Roderick, 93
 ——, Thos., 236
 McPhee, Donald, 189
 McPherson, Alex., 92nd Foot, 193
 Macpherson, Alex., 59th Foot, 242
 ——, Donald, 158
 McPherson, Duncan, 79th Foot, 189
 ——, ——, 92nd Foot, 194
 ——, John M.R., 194
 ——, Mungo, 157
 Macready, Ed. Nevil, 141
 Madden, Edw., 201
 Maddocks, Wm., 189
 Madox, Hen., 62
 Magniac, Ric., 55
 Mahon, Walt. Geo., 164
 Mainwaring, Fredk., 164
 Maitland, P., 5, 25
 Makepeace, Chas., 243
 Malcolm, John, 42nd Foot, 157
 Maling, John, 231
 Mallock, John McGr., 87
 Mandilhon, Philip, 239
 Manley, Chas., 132
 Mann, Jas., 116
 Manners, Lord Robt., 68
 ——, Robt., 226
 Manning, Wm., 153
 Mansfield, R., 5, 24, 82
 March, Earl of, 1, 11, 169
 Marcon, Edw., 239
 Marlay, Geo., 123
 Marr, Chas., 243
 Marschalk, H., 6, 27
 Marshall, Wm., 189
 Marten, Thos., 48
 Martin, Benj., 120
 ——, Hen., 51st Foot, 164
 ——, ——, 44th Foot, 161
 ——, John, 93
 ——, Ric., 136
 Massey, Hugh, 116
 ——, Hon. John, 55
 Massie, Thos., 170
 Master, Ric., 98
 Mathewson, Alex., 240
 Matthews, Jas., M.D., 231
 ——, John Powell, 124
 ——, Wm. M’Donald, 120
 Maule, Geo. Silvester, 227
 Maunsell, John E., 221
 May, Jas. Frere, 170
 ——, Sir John, 209
 Mayne, Ric., 140
 ——, Wm., 46
 ——, —— F., 242
 Meacham, Wm. Prescott, 135
 Meares, Ric., 48
 Meighan, Michael Wm., 145
 Menzies, Arch., 157
 Mercer, Alex. Cavalié, 216
 ——, Douglas, 112
 Metcalfe, Hen., 146
 Methold, Edw., 128
 Middleton, H., 236
 ——, Thos. Falkiner, 52
 Mill, Jas., 13th Lt. Dns., 78
 ——, ——, 40th Foot, 153
 Millar, Hen., 153
 ——, John, 132
 Miller, Fiennes S., 62
 ——, Geo., 201
 ——, John Fitzwilliam, 116
 ——, Wm., 97
 Milligan, Alex., 204
 ——, Robt., 71
 Milliken, John Jas., 206
 Millingen, J. Gideon Van, M.D., 231
 Mills, John, 58, 253
 Milne, Jas., 128
 Milnes, Wm. Hen., 97
 Minchin, Francis, 164
 ——, Wm., 79
 Mitchell, Edw., 170
 ——, Hugh Hen., 164
 ——, J.J., 8, 37
 ——, Jas., 193
 Mitton, Robt., 124
 Moffat, Jas., 66
 Moffatt, Abraham, 180
 Molesworth, Anthony O., 248
 Molloy, John, 197
 Monckton, Hon. C.T., 86
 Money, Arch., 71
 Moneypenny, Thos., 141
 Monins, Eaton, 170
 ——, Wm., 90
 Monro, John, 129
 Montagu, Hen., 113
 ——, Hon. John, 107
 ——, Willoughby, 248
 Montague, John, 170
 Montgomerie, Hugh B., 112
 Moore, Geo., 170
 ——, Jas. S., 71
 ——, Hon. Robt., 107
 ——, Robt., 153
 ——, Saml., 135
 ——, Wm. G., 8, 38, 98
 Moorhead, Chas., 180
 Moorhouse, J.W., 112
 Moray, W., 5, 24
 Morgan, John, 233
 Morice, Chas., 175
 Morragh, Wm., 120
 Morrison, Arch., 116
 Moss, John Irving, 78
 Mostyn, Thos., 132
 Mountsteven, Wm., 136
 Mudie, Chas, 116
 Mulholland, Ric., 120
 Munro, Geo. Gunn, 157
 Murdock, Jas. C., 245
 ——, Peter, 236
 Mure, Geo., 99
 Murkland, Jas., 149
 Murphy, Jas., 154
 Murray, Dennis, 87
 ——, Geo. Home, 86
 ——, Hon. Hen., 90
 ——, Thos., 245
 Muter, Joseph, 62
 Muttlebury, Geo., 175
 Myers, Arthur, 65
 Mylne, Thos., 189


 Napier, Chas., 223
 Nash, John, 190
 Nassau-Usingen, Prince of, 1, 10
 Naylor, Jas. Frank, 52
 Neilly, Wm., 153
 Nepean, Wm., 86
 Nettles, Wm., 170
 Neville, Parke Percy, 140
 Newenham, Robt. B., 123
 Newland, Robt., 216
 Newton, Wm., 162
 Neyland, Geo., 86
 Nicholson, Benj. Walt., 140
 Nickelson, J., 123
 Nicolay, Wm., 206
 Nisbett, Robt., 78
 Nixon, James, 98
 ——, Robt., 135
 ——, Wm. Richmond, 169
 Norcott, Amos Goodsill, 201
 Northey, Edw. Ric., 169
 Norton, Fletcher, 99
 Nugent, Edw., 240
 ——, Geo., 86


 Oakes, Hen. Thos., 170
 O’Flaherty, Francis, 128
 Ogilvy, Wm., 169
 Ogle, Jas. Gordon, 149
 O’Grady, Standish, 65
 O’Halloran, Theophilus, 140
 O’Hara, Paterson, 242
 Oldershaw, Hen., 175
 Oldfield, John, 229
 O’Malley, Geo., 161
 ——, Jas., 72
 Ommaney, Cornthwaite, 55
 O’Neil, Hen., 207
 ——, John, 116
 Onslow, Phipps, 220
 Orange, Prince of, 1, 11
 Ord, Robt. H., 215
 Orme, Humphrey, 71
 Ormsby, Arthur, 123
 Orr, John, 157
 Osbourne, John, 236
 Osten, Wm., 86
 Otway, Wm., 75


 Pack, Sir Dennis, 4, 21
 Packe, Geo. Hussey, 78
 ——, Robt. Christopher, 50
 Pagan, Saml. Alex., 149
 Page, Chas., 185
 Pakenham, Wm., 209
 Palmer, Harry, 128
 Pardoe, Edw., 98
 ——, Thos., 207
 Parker, John B., 220
 ——, —— E.G., 248
 ——, Stephen, 175
 Parkinson, Edw., 149
 ——, Robt. 207
 Parry, Jas., 135
 Parsons, John Whitehill, 68
 Paton, Jas., 246
 Pattison, Fred Hope, 149
 Payne, Edw., 58, 251
 Pearson, Robt., 52
 Peat, Ric. Josiah, 193
 Pennington, John, 82
 Percy, Hon. Hen., 1, 10
 Persse, Wm. Nicholas, 239
 Perston. David, 190
 Peters, Edw. Jas., 65
 Petre, Hen. Wm., 62
 Phelips, Edw., 71
 Phelps, Jas. Hen., 164
 ——, Saml., 224
 Philipps, Grismond, 128
 Philips, Fred. Chas., 82
 Phillimore, Robt. Wm., 98
 Phillips, Gismond. _See_ Philipps Grismond
 Phillips, Robt., 153
 Philpot, Edw., 228
 Phipps, Paul, 55
 Picard, John Kirkby, 50
 Picton, Sir Thos., 2, 14
 Pidgeon, Joseph T., 179
 Pigot, Brooke, 175
 Pilcher, Daniel, 90
 Pilkington, Abraham, 242
 ——, Wm., 239
 Pillon, John, 239
 Pittman, Wm., 242
 Polhill, Wm., 86
 Ponsonby, Hon. F.C., 75
 ——, Sir Wm., 4, 19
 Poole, Jas., 58, 252
 ——, Wm. H., 225
 Portarlington, John, Earl of, 93
 Potenger, Herbert, 237
 Potts, Jos. Hen., 239
 Powell, Harry Wayland, 98
 ——, Jas., 233
 Power, David, 161
 Powling, John, 189
 Pratt, John, 140
 Preedy, Robt., 242
 Prendergast, Edmund, 141
 ——, Jeffrey, 113
 Price, B., 2, 15
 Pringle, Geo., 223
 ——, John Wm., 229
 Prior, Thos., 90
 Probart, Chas., 204
 Prosser, Thos., 55
 Purcell, Chas., 234
 ——, John, 237
 Pym, Geo., 78


 Quentin, Geo., 68
 Quicke, Geo., 52
 ——, Thos. N., 52
 Quill, Hen., 145
 Quincey, John, 90


 Radclyffe, Chas. Edw., 55
 Rainsforth, Wm., 236
 Raleigh, Walter, 233
 Ramsay, Thos., 123
 ——, Wm. Norman, 217
 Randall, Geo., 46
 Rawson, Wm., 236
 Rea, Wm. Jas., 116
 Read, F., 8, 38
 ——, Francis, 206
 ——, Hen., 164
 Reddock, Alexander, 161
 Redmond, Geo., 240
 Reed, Samuel, 179
 ——, Thos., 75
 ——, Wm., 123
 Reeve, John, 97
 Reid, John, 239
 ——, Thos., Rl. Art. Drivers, 228
 ——, ——, 33rd Foot, 149
 Reignolds, T., 4, 20, 58
 Reynell, Thos., 179
 Reynolds, Ric., 136
 ——, Thos., 185
 Riach, John, 186
 ——, Wm. A., 190
 Rice, Saml., 164
 ——, Stephen, 65
 Richards, Loftus, 179
 Richardson, G., 120
 ——, Jas. Archd., 86
 ——, John, 153
 ——, Wm., 120
 ——, ——, Stewart, 46
 Richter, Capt., 5, 24
 Ricketts, Wm. Hen., 62
 Riddlesden, John B., 50
 Ridesdale, Geo., 190
 Ridgeway, John Allen, 201
 Ripley, Wm., 169
 Robb, Illay, 153
 Robbins, Thos. Wm., 65
 Robe, W.L., 217
 Roberts, Harry Hervis, 164
 ——, John, 179
 ——, ——, 228
 Robertson, Alex., 1st Foot, 117
 ——, ——, 73rd Foot, 185
 ——, Fulton, 189
 ——, Jas., 42nd Foot, 157
 ——, ——, 79th Foot, 190
 Robinson, Benj., 75
 ——, Gilmour, 242
 ——, Isaac, 87
 ——, Jas., 145
 ——, Philip Vyvian, 176
 Robson, Geo., 170
 ——, Jas., 198
 Rochfort, Chas., 201
 Roe, John, 140
 Rogers, Robert Naylor, 141
 ——, Thos., 226
 Rooke, H.W., 7, 30, 112
 ——, Jas., 7, 32
 Ross, Alex., 124
 ——, Andrew Clark, 243
 ——, Donald, 202
 ——, Ewen, 193
 ——, Sir Hew D., 220
 ——, Jas., 164
 ——, Jas. Kerr, 193
 ——, John, 51st Foot, 164
 ——, ——, 95th Foot, 204
 ——, Wm., 123
 Ross-Lewin, Henry, 145
 ——, Thos., 145
 Rotten, Jas. Ric., 71
 Routh, Randal Isham, 234
 Rowan, Chas., 169
 ——, Wm., 169
 Rowlls, Wm. Hen., 90
 Roy, Neil, 175
 Rudd, Ric., 153
 Rudge, Edw., 233
 Rudyerd, Saml., 224
 Ruffo, Paul, 62
 Rumley, John, 140
 Russell, Hon. Francis, 1, 11
 ——, John, 245
 ——, Robt., 161
 Rutherford, Hen., 236
 Ryan, Matthew, 140
 Ryding, Wm., 55


 St. John, Berkeley, G.F., 165
 ——, Joseph, 99
 Saltoun, Alex., Lord, 97
 Sandham, Chas. F., 222
 Sandilands, Philip, 217
 Sandwith, Wm. Oliver, 153
 Sandys, Lord. _See_ Hill, Lord Arthur.
 ——, Edwin, W.T., 75
 Sannermann, H.C., 69
 Saunders, Robt. J., 248
 Scarfe, Samuel, 236
 Schreiber, Geo., 71
 ——, Jas. Alf., 71
 Scoones, Edw., 169
 Scott, Francis, 202
 ——, Geo., 40th Foot, 154
 ——, ——, 91st Foot, 245
 ——, Ewing, 170
 ——, Robt., 202
 ——, ——, Horssman, 116
 ——, Thomas, 226
 Scovell, Sir Geo., 8, 36
 Seaton, Lord. _See_ Colborne, John.
 Seddall, John, 50
 Sedley, John Sumner, 206
 Selway, Benj., 108
 Semple, Matthew, 135
 Serjeantson, Wm., 136
 Seward, Chas., 176
 Seymour, Capt. H.B., 2, 12, 90
 Shakespear, Arthur, 68
 Shannon, Alex., 124
 Sharpin, Wm., 223
 Shaw, Chas., 170
 ——, James, 8, 36
 ——, Wm., 201
 Shawe, Wm. Cunliffe, 50
 Shedden, John, 169
 Sheean, Thos. Bowen, 201
 Shelton, J. Wm., 135
 Shelver, Thos., 52
 Shenley, Godfrey H., 204
 ——, Wm., 198
 Sherwood, Isaac, 82
 Shewell, Edw., 236
 Ship, John, 94
 Shipley, T., 55
 Shirley, Wm., 65
 Short, Chas., 107
 Shuldham, Lemuel, 58
 Sicker, Geo., 71
 Sidley, Anthony G., 128
 ——, Geo., 129
 ——, Richard, 75
 Simkins, Jas., 136
 Simmons, Geo., 197
 Simpson, C., 113
 ——, Edw., 233
 ——, Jas., 98
 ——, Wm. Davidson, 164
 Sinclair, Donald, 140
 ——, Jas., 225
 ——, John, 189
 ——, Thos. Aubrey, 161
 Skuce, John, 113
 Slade, John H., 75
 Sleigh, James Wallace, 71
 Slessor, John, 236
 Slingsby, ——, 46
 Slow, David, 50
 Small, Geo., 145
 Smith, Alex., 245
 ——, Andrew, 246
 ——, Chas., 33rd Foot, 150
 ——, ——, 95th (Volunteer), 198
 ——, Edw., 207
 ——, Geo., 2nd Ft. Gds., 108
 ——, ——, Roy. Hor. Gds., 50
 ——, H.G., 5, 22, 197
 ——, James Ramsay, 123
 ——, ——, Webber, 213
 ——, John G., 75
 ——, Ralph, 128
 ——, Thos., 23rd Foot, 129
 ——, ——, 27th Foot, 132
 ——, ——, 95th Foot, 201
 ——, Wm., 11th Lt. Dns., 71
 ——, ——, 71st, 180
 ——, ——, R.H.A., 212
 ——, ——, 91st, 245
 ——, ——, Slayter, 68
 Smyth, Chas., 4, 21, 197
 ——, Jas. Carmichael, 229
 Snodgrass, John J., 170
 Somerset, Lord Edw., 4, 21
 ——, —— Fitzroy, 1, 9, 97
 ——, H., Lieut., 4, 22, 90
 ——, Lord John, 1, 11
 Soutar, David, 180
 Sowerby, Thos., 107
 Spalding, John, 180
 Spearman, Chas., 223
 Sperling, John, 229
 Squire, Will., 120
 Stables, Edw., 97
 Stacpoole, Ric., 239
 ——, —— John, 124
 Stainforth, Geo., 129
 Standen, Geo. Douglas, 112
 Stanhope, Hon. Jas., 97
 Stanway, Frank, 229
 Stapylton, H.C., 68
 Staveley, Wm., 206
 Stawell, Samson, 75
 Steed, Geo., 55
 Steele, Hen., 72
 ——, Samuel L., 94
 Stenton, Francis, 236
 Stephens, Edw., 145
 Steuart, Chas., 245
 ——, Robt., 185
 ——, Wm., 245
 Stevens, Matthew, 176
 ——, Thos., 117
 ——, Wm., 146
 Stevenson, Chas. Butler, 55
 Stewart, Alex., 146
 ——, Allen, 198
 ——, Archd., 197
 ——, Arthur, 180
 ——, Chas., 179
 ——, Duncan, 157
 ——, Geo., 116
 ——, Jas., 246
 ——, John, 42nd Foot, 158
 ——, ——, 92nd Foot, 194
 ——, ——, 69th Foot, 175
 ——, Robt., 73rd Foot. _See_ Steuart.
 ——, Roger, 157
 ——, Ronald, 170
 ——, Wm., 82
 ——, Wm. H., 71
 Stilwell, John, 197
 Stirling, Wm., 52
 Stoddart, Edw., 150
 Stopford, Hon. Edw. 112
 ——, Wm. H., 222
 Storer, Ric., 164
 Story, Geo., 46
 Stothert. W., 4, 20, 112
 Stoyte, John, 116
 Strachan, Jos. Wm. H., 185
 Strange, Alexr., 78
 Strangeways, Thos., 128
 Strangways, Thos. Fox, 215
 Straton. _See_ Muter, Joseph
 Streatfield, Thos., 97
 Stretton, Sempronius, 153
 Strong, W.B., 161
 Stuart, Charles. _See_ Steuart
 ——, Hon. Wm., 97
 ——, Rob. Thomson, 136
 Stupart, Francis, 58, 252
 Sturges, Wm., 55
 Sumner, Edw., 107
 Swabey, Wm., 214
 Swann, Fredk. Dashwood, 98
 Sweeney, John Paget, 52
 Sweeten, Benj., 170
 Swetenham, Clement, 86
 Swinburne, Thos. Robt., 98
 Swinfen, Francis, 86
 Sword, Alex., 245
 Sykes, John C., 55
 Symes, Joseph, 116


 Talbot, Jas., 99
 ——, Wm., 132
 Tallon, Jas., 69
 Tappenham, Gilhow J., 239
 Tathwell, Tathwell Baker, 50
 Taylor, Francis, 239
 ——, Thos., 132
 ——, ——, Wm., 68
 ——, Wm., 4th Foot, 120
 ——, ——, Med. Staff, 231
 Terry, Hen., 124
 Teulon, Chas., 135
 Thackwell, Joseph, 82
 Thain, Wm., 150
 Thoburn, Robt., 236
 Thomas, Chas., 97
 ——, C.W., 240
 ——, John, 237
 ——, Wm., 117
 Thompson, Henry Walker, 180
 ——, John, 190
 Thomson, Alex., 229
 ——, Jas. Crooke, 117
 Thorean, John, 153
 Thornhill, Ric., 154
 ——, Wm., 2, 12, 65
 Thoyts, John, 50
 Thwaites, Wm., 164
 Tibbs, Samuel J., 234
 Tidy, Francis Skelly, 123
 Tighe, Daniel, 99
 Tincombe, Francis, 140
 Tinling, Wm. Fredk., 99
 Todd, John, 180
 Tomkins, Wm., 161
 Tomkinson, Wm., 86
 Tompkins, Newland R., 236
 Toole, Wm. H., 145
 Torrens, Henry, 7, 34
 Torriano, Wm., 180
 Towers, ——, 46
 ——, Fredk., 65
 Townsend, John, 212
 Townshend, Hon. H.T.P., 97
 Trafford, Sigismund, 55
 Trevor, Arthur Hill, 149
 ——, Edw., 226
 Trigg, John, 59, 250
 Trimmer Wm., 246
 Tripp, Baron, 1, 11
 Trotter, T., 58
 Troward, Thos., 164
 Troy, Thos., 50
 Tucker, John, 132
 Tudor, Chas., 93
 Turner, Michael, 52
 ——, Wm., 78
 Turnor, Wm., 123
 Twinberrow, Ralph J., 161
 Twining, Wm., 231
 Tyler, J., 2, 15
 Tyndale, Chas. Wm., 164


 Unett, Geo. W., 248
 Uniacke, Robt., 65
 Urquhart, Chas. Gordon, 201
 Uxbridge, Earl of, 2, 12, 65


 Vandeleur, John, 75
 ——, Sir John, 3, 17
 Vane, Hen., 107
 Varley, Jonas, 50
 ——, Thos., 50
 Veall, Wm., 242
 Verner, Edw. Donovan, 233
 ——, Wm., 65
 Vernon, Hon. H.S.V., 98
 Vernor, Robt., 58, 253
 Vickers, Gentle, 204
 Vigoreux, Chas. A., 140
 Vincent, Richard, 62
 Vivian, Sir Hussey, 6, 28
 Vyner, Chas. Jas., 98
 Vyvian, Philip. _See_ Robinson, Philip Vyvian


 Waddell, Wm., 55
 Wakefield, Joseph, 78
 Walcot, Edmund T., 213
 Waldegrave, John, Earl, 239
 Waldie, Jas. Hen., 90
 Walker, Leslie, 179
 Wall, Chas. Wm, 236
 ——, J.L., 154
 ——, Thos. B., 93
 Wallace, Houston, 75
 ——, Jas. Maxwell, 93
 ——, John, 78
 ——, Robt., 52
 Wallett, Chas., 145
 Walley, Wm., 128
 Wallington, J.C., 68
 Walsh, Jas., 245
 ——, John Prendergast, 201
 Walton, Wm. Lovelace, 107
 Ward, Adam, 215
 Warde, Francis, 220
 ——, J.R., 113
 Warren, Wm. Ouseley, 141
 Waters, J., Lt.-Col., 7, 30
 ——, Marcus Ant., 229
 Watkis, Thos., 227
 Watmough, Peter, 50
 Watson, Andrew, 150
 ——, Hon. Geo. John, 50
 ——, J. Lewis, 175
 ——, Sam. Wm., 99
 Waymouth, Sam., 48
 Webb, Vere, 201
 Webber, Wm., 221
 Webster, H., 1, 12,
 ——, Jas. Carnegie, 161
 ——, Ric., 165
 Wedgwood, Thos., 113
 Wellington, Duke of, 1, 9, 50
 Wells, Fortescue, 224
 Wemyss, Jas., 58, 252
 West, Chas., 112
 Westby, Edw., 58
 Westmore, Ric., 149
 Westwood, Lyttleton, 123
 Weyland, Ric., 86
 Whale, John, 46
 Wharton, Wm., 185
 Wheler, Trevor, 86
 Whichcote, Geo., 169
 Whinyates, Edw. C., 215
 White, Andrew Douglas, 229
 ——, Fredk. B., 186
 ——, J.L., 123
 Whiteford, John, 82
 Whitney, Benj., 161
 Whitty, Edw., 145
 Whymper, Wm., 108
 Wightwick, Edm. Martin, 175
 Wigston, R.H., 112
 Wilder, Jas., 236
 Wildman, Edw., 65
 ——, John, 65
 ——, T., 2, 13, 65
 Wilkie, Peter, 193
 Wilkins, Geo., 35th Foot, 236
 ——, ——, 95th Foot, 201
 Wilkinson, Geo., 228
 ——, Hen., 153
 ——, John Fredk., 135
 Will, Andrew, 193
 Willett, Augustus Saltern, 62
 Williams, Jas., 162
 ——, John, 23rd Foot, 129
 ——, ——, 73rd Foot, 186
 Williamson, John, 141
 ——, J.S., 209
 Wilson, Alexr., 161
 ——, Christian, 123
 ——, Geo. David, 120
 ——, John A., 225
 ——, Rich. Goodwin B., 226
 Winchester, Robt., 193
 Windowe, Saml., 55
 Windsor, Edw. Chas., 55
 Winterbottom, John, 169
 Winterscale, John, 180
 Witney, John, 179
 Wodehouse, Philip, 82
 Wood, Chas., 68
 ——, Edm. Wm., 227
 ——, Fredk., 71
 ——, Col. Sir Geo., Kt., 209
 ——, John Manley, 123
 Woodberry, Geo., 90
 Woodford, Alexr. Geo., 107
 ——, J. Geo., 8, 35, 97
 Woodgate, Robt., 239
 Woolcombe, Wm., 180
 Woolriche, Stephen, 231
 Worsley, Thos. Taylor, 204
 Wray, Hen. Boyd. _See_ Wray, Hugh Boyd
 Wray, Hugh Boyd, 141, 153
 Wright, Amherst, 215
 ——, Thos., 8, 37, 206
 ——, Wm., 198
 Wyatt, John Barwis, 237
 Wylly, A., 7, 31
 Wyndham, Chas., 58, 251
 ——, Hen., 107
 Wynne, Thos., 207


 Yonge, Wm. Crawley, 170
 Yorke, C., 6, 27, 169
 Young, Jas., 157
 ——, Wm., 116
 ——, ——, Hen., 246




                           Transcriber’s Note

There were many minor lapses in punctuation, particularly in the heavily
abbreviated notes, which have been silently corrected. Capitaliziation,
and hyphenation, especially in abbreviations, was inconsistent, and has
been retained.

On p. 108, the number of the first note was missing in the printed
version, and has been restored.

 p. 11           Worthy and wi[t/g]ht                   Corrected.

 p. 49    n. 8   Retd. in 1741                          _sic_
                                                        Presumably
                                                        1841.

 p. 118          [“]and, although suffering             _sic._

 p. 125   n. 9   Ciudad R[i/o]drigo                     Corrected.

 p. 226   n. 1   [ ] p., 1840                           h or f missing.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Waterloo Roll Call, by Charles Dalton



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WATERLOO ROLL CALL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


