The Project Gutenberg eBook of Histories of two hundred and fifty-one divisions of the German army which participated in the war (1914-1918)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Histories of two hundred and fifty-one divisions of the German army which participated in the war (1914-1918)

Author: United States. War Department. General Staff

Release date: September 24, 2017 [eBook #55620]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORIES OF TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-ONE DIVISIONS OF THE GERMAN ARMY WHICH PARTICIPATED IN THE WAR (1914-1918) ***

                               HISTORIES
                                   OF
      TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-ONE DIVISIONS OF THE GERMAN ARMY WHICH
                  PARTICIPATED IN THE WAR (1914-1918)
  COMPILED FROM RECORDS OF INTELLIGENCE SECTION OF THE GENERAL STAFF,
  AMERICAN EXPEDITIONARY FORCES, AT GENERAL HEADQUARTERS : : CHAUMONT,
                            FRANCE : : 1919


[Illustration: UNITED STATES OF AMERICA WAR OFFICE]

                               WASHINGTON
                       GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                  1920
                                   ❦




                              WAR DEPARTMENT

                             Document No. 905

                     _Office of The Adjutant General_


                            ADDITIONAL COPIES

 OF THIS PUBLICATION MAY BE PROCURED FROM THE SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS
               GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON, D. C.

                                    AT

                            60 CENTS PER COPY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.


                                                                     Page.
 Introduction                                                          7
 Alpine Corps                                                          8
 Bavarian Cavalry Division                                            12
 Bavarian Ersatz Division                                             13
 Jaeger Division                                                      16
   1st Guard Division                                                 18
   1st Guard Reserve Division                                         22
 Guard Ersatz Division                                                26
 Guard Cavalry Division                                               29
   1st Division                                                       30
   1st Reserve Division                                               33
   1st Landwehr Division                                              36
   1st Bavarian Division                                              39
   1st Bavarian Reserve Division                                      42
   1st Bavarian Landwehr Division                                     45
   1st Cavalry Division                                               47
   1st Naval Division                                                 48
    2d Guard Division                                                 50
    2d Guard Reserve Division                                         55
    2d Division                                                       59
    2d Landwehr Division                                              62
    2d Bavarian Division                                              64
    2d Bavarian Landwehr Division                                     68
    2d Cavalry Division                                               69
    2d Naval Division                                                 70
    3d Guard Division                                                 72
    3d Division                                                       76
    3d Landwehr Division                                              78
    3d Bavarian Division                                              80
    3d Reserve Division                                               83
    3d Naval Division                                                 86
   4th Guard Division                                                 88
   4th Division                                                       92
   4th Ersatz Division                                                96
   4th Landwehr Division                                              99
   4th Bavarian Division                                             101
   4th Cavalry Division                                              104
   5th Guard Division                                                105
   5th Division                                                      108
   5th Reserve Division                                              112
   5th Ersatz Division                                               115
   5th Landwehr Division                                             117
   5th Bavarian Division                                             120
   5th Bavarian Reserve Division                                     123
   5th Cavalry Division                                              126
   6th Division                                                      127
   6th Reserve Division                                              131
   6th Bavarian Division                                             134
   6th Bavarian Reserve Division                                     138
   6th Bavarian Landwehr Division                                    142
   6th Cavalry Division                                              144
   7th Division                                                      145
   7th Reserve Division                                              149
   7th Landwehr Division                                             153
   7th Cavalry Division                                              156
   8th Division                                                      157
   8th Landwehr Division                                             160
   8th Bavarian Reserve Division                                     162
   8th Cavalry Division                                              166
   9th Division                                                      167
   9th Reserve Division                                              171
   9th Landwehr Division                                             174
   9th Bavarian Reserve Division                                     176
   9th Cavalry Division                                              179
  10th Division                                                      180
  10th Reserve Division                                              184
  10th Ersatz Division                                               188
  10th Landwehr Division                                             191
  10th Bavarian Division                                             194
  11th Division                                                      197
  11th Reserve Division                                              201
  11th Landwehr Division                                             204
  11th Bavarian Division                                             206
  12th Division                                                      211
  12th Reserve Division                                              215
  12th Landwehr Division                                             219
  12th Bavarian Division                                             222
  13th Division                                                      225
  13th Reserve Division                                              229
  13th Landwehr Division                                             233
  14th Division                                                      236
  14th Reserve Division                                              240
  14th Landwehr Division                                             244
  14th Bavarian Division                                             246
  15th Division                                                      249
  15th Reserve Division                                              254
  15th Landwehr Division                                             258
  15th Bavarian Division                                             260
  16th Division                                                      262
  16th Reserve Division                                              266
  16th Landwehr Division                                             271
  16th Bavarian Division                                             273
  17th Division                                                      275
  17th Reserve Division                                              279
  17th Landwehr Division                                             283
  18th Division                                                      285
  18th Reserve Division                                              289
  18th Landwehr Division                                             293
  19th Division                                                      295
  19th Reserve Division                                              299
  19th Ersatz Division                                               303
  19th Landwehr Division                                             306
  20th Division                                                      308
  20th Landwehr Division                                             312
  21st Division                                                      314
  21st Reserve Division                                              318
  21st Landwehr Division                                             322
   22d Division                                                      324
   22d Reserve Division                                              327
   22d Landwehr Division                                             332
   23d Division                                                      333
   23d Reserve Division                                              337
   23d Landwehr Division                                             341
  24th Division                                                      343
  24th Reserve Division                                              347
  24th Landwehr Division                                             350
  25th Division                                                      351
  25th Reserve Division                                              355
  25th Landwehr Division                                             359
  26th Division                                                      361
  26th Reserve Division                                              365
  26th Landwehr Division                                             369
  27th Division                                                      370
  28th Division                                                      374
  28th Reserve Division                                              378
  29th Division                                                      382
  29th Landwehr Division                                             386
  30th Division                                                      388
  30th Bavarian Reserve Division                                     392
  31st Division                                                      395
   32d Division                                                      399
   33d Division                                                      402
   33d Reserve Division                                              405
  34th Division                                                      409
  35th Division                                                      413
  35th Reserve Division                                              416
  36th Division                                                      418
  36th Reserve Division                                              422
  37th Division                                                      425
  38th Division                                                      429
  38th Landwehr Division                                             433
  39th Division                                                      436
  39th Bavarian Reserve Division                                     440
  40th Division                                                      442
  41st Division                                                      446
   42d Division                                                      451
   43d Reserve Division                                              454
  44th Reserve Division                                              458
  44th Landwehr Division                                             462
  45th Reserve Division                                              464
  45th Landwehr Division                                             468
  46th Reserve Division                                              469
  46th Landwehr Division                                             473
  47th Reserve Division                                              474
  47th Landwehr Division                                             477
  48th Reserve Division                                              479
  48th Landwehr Division                                             483
  49th Reserve Division                                              485
  50th Division                                                      489
  50th Reserve Division                                              493
  51st Reserve Division                                              497
   52d Division                                                      500
   52d Reserve Division                                              504
   53d Reserve Division                                              507
  54th Division                                                      511
  54th Reserve Division                                              514
  56th Division                                                      517
  58th Division                                                      521
  75th Reserve Division                                              525
  76th Reserve Division                                              528
  77th Reserve Division                                              531
  78th Reserve Division                                              534
  79th Reserve Division                                              537
  80th Reserve Division                                              541
  81st Reserve Division                                              544
   82d Reserve Division                                              547
   83d Division                                                      550
  84th Division                                                      554
  85th Landwehr Division                                             558
  86th Division                                                      560
  87th Division                                                      563
  88th Division                                                      566
  89th Division                                                      569
  91st Division                                                      571
   92d Division                                                      573
   93d Division                                                      575
  94th Division                                                      577
  95th Division                                                      579
  96th Division                                                      580
 101st Division                                                      582
  103d Division                                                      584
 105th Division                                                      589
 107th Division                                                      592
 108th Division                                                      595
 109th Division                                                      598
 111th Division                                                      600
 113th Division                                                      603
 115th Division                                                      606
 117th Division                                                      609
 119th Division                                                      612
 121st Division                                                      616
  123d Division                                                      620
  183d Division                                                      623
 185th Division                                                      627
 187th Division                                                      630
  192d Division                                                      633
 195th Division                                                      636
 197th Division                                                      639
 199th Division                                                      642
 200th Division                                                      645
 201st Division                                                      648
  202d Division                                                      651
  203d Division                                                      654
 204th Division                                                      657
 205th Division                                                      660
 206th Division                                                      662
 207th Division                                                      665
 208th Division                                                      668
 211th Division                                                      671
 212th Division                                                      674
 213th Division                                                      676
 214th Division                                                      679
 215th Division                                                      682
 216th Division                                                      684
 217th Division                                                      687
 218th Division                                                      689
 219th Division                                                      691
 220th Division                                                      693
 221st Division                                                      696
  222d Division                                                      699
  223d Division                                                      702
 224th Division                                                      705
 225th Division                                                      707
 226th Division                                                      710
 227th Division                                                      712
 228th Division                                                      715
 231st Division                                                      717
  232d Division                                                      719
  233d Division                                                      721
 234th Division                                                      723
 235th Division                                                      725
 236th Division                                                      727
 237th Division                                                      729
 238th Division                                                      731
 239th Division                                                      733
 240th Division                                                      735
 241st Division                                                      737
  242d Division                                                      739
  243d Division                                                      741
 255th Division                                                      744
 301st Division                                                      746
  302d Division                                                      748




                             INTRODUCTION.


The following pages contain the record of the organization and service
of the 251 divisions of the German Army during the years 1914, 1915,
1916, 1917, and 1918, or during as many of these years as they
existed—for a number of them were created after the war had started. The
record of each has been known as a “divisional history.”

The history of an enemy division is a summary of all the information
obtained from all sources. It includes the latest composition—that is,
the regiments and other units that make up the division; a record of its
past engagements; its recruitment and racial features; commanders;
present strength; and morale. On a basis of these factors the division’s
fighting quality is rated on a standard of classes adopted by General
Headquarters and noted in the history. The data is collected and filed
daily at various troop headquarters and eventually in the Enemy Order of
Battle subsection of the General Staff, Intelligence Section at the
General Headquarters. The information comes chiefly from the front-line
troops, resulting from their observation, reconnaissance, and the
interrogation of the prisoners they take. This evidence is often
fragmentary and inconclusive, being gathered as more or less
disassociated items, here and there along the whole front. But when it
is consolidated and collated it becomes of great value and warrants
deductions which may be depended upon.

Prisoners’ statements and captured documents are the source of almost
all the information contained in a divisional history. The outline of
the past engagements of a division is known from the Battle-Order
records. Prisoners add to this specific account of successes, citations,
failures, internal disturbance, etc. The divisional composition is
established by prisoners, and in the case of the smaller divisional
units from addresses on captured letters. The effective strength is
deduced from prisoners’ stories of recent losses incurred and drafts of
new men arriving. In estimating the quality of a division the
Intelligence Section considers principally the conditions under which
the enemy command has used it in previous military operations.

All this information is kept posted up to date so that a history of
present value can be written without delay and dispatched to our front-
line troops opposite whom a new or additional enemy unit has appeared or
is about to appear.

The use to our troops of these histories is obvious. Much of the
information contained is of direct value to our commanders. The
strength, morale, and fighting qualities of the opposing divisions are,
of course, an important factor in our plans and operations. Other items,
such as the names of the enemy commanders, assist the examining officer
in checking the veracity and accuracy of prisoners’ statements. It has
been often observed that the more the intelligence officer knows or
appears to know of the prisoner’s organization the better results he
obtains from his questions. The uses to which information of the enemy
may be put have proved so various and unexpected that the principle is
established that no fact about the enemy is too unimportant to be
recorded.

In preparing this set of Histories of German Divisions the histories
published by French General Headquarters have been used for the years
prior to 1918. For the last year of the war the histories were written
by the Second Section of the General Staff, General Headquarters, A. E.
F., from the American records. These included all information from
American sources and also that which was received from Allied armies.




                             Alpine Corps.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav. Jag.   │1 Bav. Jag.   │1 Bav. Jag.   │Body Inf.
              │              │Body Inf.     │              │1 Bav. Jag.
              │2 Jag.        │2 Jag.        │2 Jag.        │2 Jag.
              │              │3 Jag.        │              │3 Jag.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │203 F. A. Rgt.               │2 Mountain F. A. Abt. Detch.
              │                             │  of the 187, 203, and 204 F.
              │                             │  A. Rgts.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │102 Pion. Co.
              │                             │105 Pion. Co.
              │                             │106 Pion. Co.
              │                             │175 Mountain T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │201 Mountain M. G. Detch.    │201 Mountain M. G. Detch.
              │202 Mountain M. G. Detch.    │202 Mountain M. G. Detch.
              │205 Mountain M. G. Detch.    │205 Mountain M. G. Detch.
              │209 Mountain M. G. Detch.    │209 Mountain M. G. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │Cyclist Btn. (dissolved in
              │                             │  June).
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav. Jag.   │Body Inf.     │1 Bav. Jag.   │Body Inf.
              │              │1 Bav. Jag.   │              │1 Bav. Jag.
              │              │2 Jag.        │              │2 Jag.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │3 Sqn. 4 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │7 Art Command:
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │ 203 F. A. Rgt. (1 Abt.)     │ 204 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 6 Mountain A. Abt.          │ 1 Abt. 1 Bav. Res. Ft. A.
              │                             │  Rgt.
              │                             │ 6th Mountain Art. Abt.
              │                             │  (Staff and 1, 2, and 17
              │                             │  Btries.).
              │                             │ 1401 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1402 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1403 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                  │9 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
              │ 102 Pion. Co.               │ 102 Pion. Co.
              │ 283 Pion. Co.               │ 283 Pion. Co.
              │ 175 T. M. Co.               │ 175 Mountain T. M. Co.
              │ 204 Bav. T. M. Co.          │ 102 Searchlight Section.
              │ 102 Bav. Searchlight        │622 Signal Command:
              │  Section.                   │
              │ 622 Tel. Detch.             │ 622 Tel. Detch.
              │ 88 Div. Wireless Detch.     │ 133 Bav. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │201 Ambulance Co.            │201 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │239 Ambulance Co.            │239 Ambulance Co.
              │202 Field Hospital.          │201 Field Hospital.
              │203 Field Hospital.          │44 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │18 Bav. Field Hospital.      │18 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │444 M. T. Col.               │695 Bav. M. T. Col.
              │695 M. T. Col.               │
              │790 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1915.

The Alpine Corps was formed in May, 1915.


ITALY.

1. At the end of May, 1915, it was sent by way of Innsbruck to the
Trentino, where it remained until October 16 (vicinity of Campitello).
It took part in several smaller actions (particularly on Sept. 24).


FRANCE.

2. On October 17 it left Bozen and went to France by way of Innsbruck,
Neu-Ulm, Stuttgart, Deux-Ponts, and detrained at Laonnois on the
Mezieres-Rethel line on October 19.

3. It remained in this area until October 25. At that time it was
transferred to Serbia by way of Mezieres, Germershein, Augsburg, Munich,
Vienna, Budapest, Temesvar. It detrained at Weisskirchen on October 29.


SERBIA.

4. The Alpine Corps advanced in Serbia by way of Kragujevac and Kraljevo
as far as Novipasar (near the Montenegrin frontier); from that place to
Mitrovica. Elements of the Alpine Corps remained south of Uskub until
the end of March, 1916.


                                 1916.


FRANCE.

1. On March 21, 1916, the Alpine Corps was taken to Hungary by way of
Belgrade, and then to France. Itinerary: Budapest, Breslau, Dresden,
Leipzig, Cologne, Aix-la-Chapelle, Liege, Charleville.

2. It went into line on the front east of Rheims (the Leib Regiment at
Cernay) on April 1.


VERDUN.

3. Relieved at the beginning of May, it went to rest in the vicinity of
Charleville. About May 30 it went to the Spincourt area by way of Sedan.
At the beginning of June it went into action at Verdun north of the Vaux
Fort, northeast of Fleury, and took part in the attacks launched in this
sector during the month of June (attack of June 23 upon Thiaumont).

4. After reorganization, at the end of June or the beginning of July,
the Alpine Corps came back into line near Fleury on July 11.


ARGONNE.

5. After having lost 71 per cent of its Infantry in the various attacks
at Verdun, the Alpine Corps was withdrawn on August 12 and took over the
sector Fontaine-aux-Charmes-Vauquois, in the Argonne. The 3d Jaeger
Regiment was taken from it and entered into the composition of the 200th
Division (Carpathian Corps).

6. In the first half of September the Alpine Corps left the Argonne and
entrained for Roumania.


ROUMANIA.

7. At the end of September it went into action in the vicinity of
Hermannstadt, then in the vicinity of Brasso. On December 10 it reached
Ploesci; it was at Rimnicu-Sarat on the 24th. Upon the stabilization of
the Roumanian front it occupied the front of Panciu-Focsani. During the
active period in Roumania the Leib Regiment lost heavily.


                                 1917.

1. Relieved northwest of Focsani on April 6, 1917, the Alpine Corps was
sent to Hungary, in the vicinity of Karlsburg. After a rest of three
weeks it was transferred to the western front. Itinerary: Karlsburg (May
10), Szegdin, Budapest, Vienna, Salzburg, Rosenheim, Munich, Strassburg,
Colmar, Neu-Breisach.


UPPER ALSACE.

2. On June 15 it went into line on the Alsatian front (Rhone-Rhine
Canal, Aspach).

3. On July 20 it was withdrawn from the front and sent to rest.


ROUMANIA.

4. At the beginning of August it was again sent to Roumania. It took
over its old sector near Focsani and received the Russo-Roumanian
attacks launched between Briala and Panciu.


ITALY.

5. In September it was sent to the Italian front.


IZONZO.

6. On October 24 it attacked on both sides of the Tolmino and took
possession of Mont Cucco on the 25th. It rested in November.


MONTE TOMBA.

7. On November 25 it was engaged at Monte Tomba, and on December 12 on
the slopes of Monfenera, with the exception of the 1st Jaeger Regiment,
which was in reserve.

8. Relieved between December 15 and December 20, it remained behind the
lines until the middle of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The Leib Regiment and the 1st Regiment of Jaegers are Bavarian,
recruited principally from upper Bavaria. The 2d Regiment of Jaegers is
purely Prussian.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The discipline and firmness of the commanding officers make the Alpine
Corps an elite body, of a genuine combat value.


                                 1918.


LORRAINE.

1. In January the Alpine Corps entrained for Alsace (itinerary Salzburg,
Munich, Ulm, Friburg, Saverne); then went to rest in the region of
Sarreburg.

2. It remained here undergoing training until the 10th of April.

3. It was sent to Flanders, via Metz, Sedan, Namur, and detrained near
Lille on the 12th.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

4. The division was engaged northeast of Bailleul from the 14th to the
18th. It then rested east of Lille until the 23d. It reentered the line
on the Kemmel-Locre front, where it remained until about the 10th of
May, when it was withdrawn, after having suffered heavy losses.

5. It moved then to the Ghent region, where it rested until the end of
July. It then rested near Tourcoing until the 8th of August. It
entrained at Tourcoing and Tournai on the 8th and went to St. Quentin
via Ham.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

6. The division entered line in the Hallu-Fransart-Hattencourt sector
north of Roye on the 11th. On the 27th it fell back along the Somme
Canal near Bethencourt. It was withdrawn from line the beginning of
September.

7. It came back to line almost immediately north of Peronne in the
Moislain sector; on the 7th it was thrown back upon Longavesnes-Epehy-
Villers-Guislain, where it was withdrawn on the 23d, after losing
heavily (861 prisoners).

8. Elements of the Alpine Corps were identified at Walincourt in rear of
the front on October 10.


BALKANS.

9. Sent to the eastern front, the Alpine Corps reinforced the troops in
the Balkans near Nish in October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The Alpine Corps was considered one of the best German units. It showed
its worth by retaking the village of Hallu on the 11th of August, and
while counterattacking at Moislains on the 2d of September.
Nevertheless, the morale was lowered. The Alpine Corps comprised about
3,500 Infantry combatants early in August. It lost about 700 prisoners
in August and September.




                       Bavarian Cavalry Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │1 Bav. Cav.            │1 Heavy Reiter.
                        │4 Bav. Cav.            │1 Bav. Ulan.
                        │                       │2 Bav. Ulan.
                        │5 Bav. Cav.            │1 Bav. Light Cav.
                        │                       │6 Bav. Light Cav.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │5 Bav. Horse Art. Abt.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│Pion. Detch.
                        │1 Bav. M. G. Btry.
                        │300 Bav. T. M. Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │Glatz Landst. Inf. Btn. (VI/9).
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

1. The units of this division were used on police duty in the Ukraine
and in Roumania in the spring of 1918. A part of the division was
serving in the Crimea in the early summer. It continued in that general
area through the year.


                                 VALUE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                       Bavarian Ersatz Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │3 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │4 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │15 Bav.  │         │15 Bav.  │         │15 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │59 Ldw.  │28 Ers.  │59 Ldw.  │28 Ers.  │59 Ldw.  │28 Ers.
              │         │         │         │         │         │
              │         │120 Ldw. │         │120 Ldw. │         │81 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │Ers. Cav. Detch. (1
              │                   │                   │  Bav. C. Dist.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │1 Ers. Abt. F. A.  │
              │                   │  (1 Bav. C. D.).  │
              │                   │2 Ers. Btry. 8 Bav.│
              │                   │  F. A. Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │2 Ldw. Pion. Co. (2
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Bav. C. D.).
              │                   │                   │3 Ldw. Pion. Co. (3
              │                   │                   │  Bav. C. D.).
              │                   │                   │1 Bav. Mining Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │1 Bav. Heavy T. M.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport    │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │      1918[1]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │3 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │18 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │15 Bav.  │         │4 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │28 Ers.  │         │15 Bav.
              │         │         │         │  Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 6 Bav. Res. │1 Sqn. 6 Bav. Res.
              │  Schutz. Cav. Rgt.│  Cav. Schutzen
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │1 Bav. C. Dist.    │
              │  Ers. Cav. Abt.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │19 Bav. Art.
              │                   │  Command:
              │ Bav. Ers. F. A.   │ Bav. Ers. F. A.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:        │13 Bav. Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Bav. Ldw. Pion. │4 Bav. Ldw. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 6 Bav. Ldw. Pion. │6 Bav. Ldw. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 1 Bav. Mining Co. │5 Bav. Res.
              │                   │  Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 100 Bav. T. M. Co.│100 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │ 5 Bav. Res.       │551 Bav. Tel.
              │  Searchlight      │  Detch.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 551 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │9 Bav. Ambulance   │9 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │40 Bav. Field      │40 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │41 Bav. Field      │41 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │33 Bav. Vet.       │33 Bav. Vet.
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport    │767 M. T. Col.     │767 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 1:

  Composition at the time of dissolution.


                                HISTORY.

                               (Bavaria.)


                                 1914.

The Bavarian Ersatz Division consisted, at the outbreak of the war, of
the three mixed Bavarian Ersatz brigades, Nos. 1, 5, 9 (12 battalions),
which detrained on August 17 and 18 in the region of Schelestadt. But
afterwards this designation indicated a composite division (Benzino
Division) formed from the 3d Bavarian Reserve Brigade and the 59th
Landwehr Brigade (28th Ersatz, Baden) and the 120th Landwehr Regiment
(Wurttemberg).


VOSGES.

1. The Benzino Division was first engaged in the Vosges (St. Marie
Ridge, St. Die, Laveline) until September.


HAYE.

2. After a rest in the Valley of the Bruche, it entrained at the end of
September for Mars-la-Tour and reinforced the 3d Bavarian Corps in the
St. Mihiel area.


                                 1915.


WOEVRE.

1. The Benzino Division occupied the area east of St. Mihiel (Spada to
Apremont) during the entire year 1915. In November it took the name of
Bavarian Ersatz Division.

2. The division rested in Lorraine from December, 1915, to the end of
February, 1916.


                                 1916.

At the beginning of February, 1916, the 120th Landwehr Regiment was
replaced by a Prussian Regiment, the 81st Landwehr.


WOEVRE.

1. On February 28, 1916, the Bavarian Ersatz Division took over the
sector of Fresnes-en-Woëvre-Ronvaux. It remained there until the end of
October, 1916. On October 17, the 4th Bavarian Reserve Regiment left the
division temporarily to go to Galicia, to the 199th Division, and came
back in November.


SOMME.

2. From October 25 to November 15 the Bavarian Ersatz Division took part
in the battle of the Somme east of Gueudecourt, with the exception of
the 81st Landwehr, which was definitely detached from the division.

3. Transferred to the Aisne, it went into line in the vicinity of
Craonne at the end of November.


                                 1917.


AISNE.

1. On the Aisne front, east of Craonne, the Bavarian Ersatz Division
received the French offensive of April, and its conduct gained the order
“Pour le Mérite” for its general.

2. Relieved at the end of April, it occupied a sector in the Apremont
Wood from the middle of May to the end of August.


YPRES.

3. On September 1 it was in Belgium, where it was engaged on both sides
of the Ypres-Menin road until September 25. The 3d Battalion of the 4th
Bavarian Reserve Regiment was almost destroyed on September 20.


GALICIA.

4. At the beginning of October the division was transferred to the
eastern front and sent into line southeast of Tarnopol in December.

5. At the end of autumn 1917, the 28th Ersatz Regiment (Baden) was
withdrawn from the division and replaced by the 18th Bavarian Reserve.
The division was then entirely Bavarian.


                              RECRUITING.

The Bavarian Ersatz Division is recruited from the 1st and 2d Bavarian
Corps districts.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The Bavarian Ersatz Division is a very mediocre division.


                                 1918.


VERDUN.

1. The division held the quiet Verdun sector until July 12, when it was
relieved by the 231st Division.


VESLE.

2. It was moved to the Vesle front and on July 25 relieved the 40th
Division near Oulchy-le-Chateau. It remained in this sector until August
12, when it was withdrawn and sent to rest in the vicinity of Maubeuge.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. On September 1 it proceeded to Mauchault and during the first days of
September relieved the 88th Division in line near Perthes. It was in the
fighting between September 23 and October 3 in Champagne, losing about
2,000 men in that engagement.

4. The division was so reduced in strength that it was dissolved shortly
after its retirement from line in October. The 18th Bavarian Reserve
Regiment was dissolved and the men drafted to the 15th Bavarian
Division. The 15th Bavarian Reserve Regiment was also dissolved.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was used only in defensive
sectors during 1918.




                            Jaeger Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918        │       1919
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │11 Jag.  │         │         │5 Ers.   │11 Jag.
              │         │12 Jag.  │         │         │         │12 Jag.
              │         │13 Jag.  │         │         │         │13 Jag.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │1 Sqn. 10 Drag.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │Staff, 2 Ulan Rgt.
              │                   │                   │Staff, 8 Bav. Light
              │                   │                   │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │203 F. A. Rgt.     │24 F. A. Rgt.      │224 Art. Command:
              │  (Wurtt.)         │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 24 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 3 Abt. 24 Res. Ft.
              │                   │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 780 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 793 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1,050 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │422 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ Gd. Pion. Detch.
              │                   │                   │  (Casuals).
              │                   │                   │ 5 Pion. Detch.
              │                   │                   │  (Casuals).
              │                   │                   │ 9 Pion. Detch.
              │                   │                   │  (Casuals).
              │                   │                   │ 174 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 215 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │901 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 805 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 901 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 48 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │524 Ambulance Co.  │                   │241 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │34 Field Hospital.
              │                   │                   │16 Res. Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │                   │143 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │670 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1917.

The Jaeger Division appears to have been formed about November, 1917.

In November and December the Division was engaged on the Italian front
at Monte-Tomba. Relieved at the beginning of January, 1918, it was sent
to rest.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The Jaeger Division is a very good Division.


                                 1918.

1. The division again entrained March 20 and was transported to the area
northeast of St. Quentin by way of Strasbourg, Treves, Cologne, Liege,
Namur, Charleroi, Maubeuge, Bohain. From there it marched to the region
south of Chaulnes and rested three weeks.


SOMME.

2. It was in line in the Villers-Bretonneux sector from April 27 to May
19–20. After its withdrawal from line it rested southwest of Guise
(Bernot, Hauteville) from 25th to 30th. The division marched toward the
front by Ham (May 30) and arrived in the neighborhood of Lassigny on
June 7–8.


OISE.

3. The division was engaged near Lassigny (Le Plessier) on June 9 and
advanced as far as Elincourt. It was relieved about mid-June.

4. It rested between St. Quentin and Guise for a time, and was then
railed to Alsace (near Mulhausen), where it rested during four weeks. It
entrained at Mulhausen about July 24–27 and was moved to Liesse
(northeast of Laon) on July 30. From there it marched toward the front
north of Soissons.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

5. The division was engaged at Soissons and Pommiers, then at Bieuxy-
Juvigny, from August 2 to 28. It rested for two weeks and returned to
line at Gouzaucourt on September 12. Between September 27–30 it was
forced to fall back on La Vacquerie and Gonnelieu. It was relieved at
the end of the month after suffering very heavy losses.


CAMBRESIS.

6. On October 6–7 the division was reengaged south of Cambrai
(Walincourt). It fell back on Briastre by Caudry and on the 15th retired
from the front. It rested from October 15 to 22. On the 12th the
division is known to have received a reinforcement of 600 men.

7. It was engaged southwest of Le Quesnoy from October 22 to November 1,
losing numerous prisoners on the 24th. After a short rest it was again
in line at Etreux and south of Le Quesnoy on November 4–5. It retreated
by Pont-sur-Sambre on November 6.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was used as an attack
division in the Matz offensive, but in general the division was used to
replace assault divisions and hold an important sector.




                          1st Guard Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Gd.    │1 Ft. Gd.│1 Gd.    │1 Ft. Gd.│1 Gd.    │1 Ft. Gd.
              │         │3 Ft. Gd.│         │3 Ft. Gd.│(2 Gd.)  │2 Ft. Gd.
              │2 Gd.    │2 Ft. Gd.│2 Gd.    │2 Ft. Gd.│         │4 Ft. Gd.
              │         │4 Ft. Gd.│         │4 Ft. Gd.│         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │Gd. Regt. (Massow):
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │1st, 2d, 3d, 4th
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.
              │                   │                   │Body Gd. Hus. Regt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │2d Sqn. 6th Drag.
              │                   │                   │  Regt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1st Gd. Brig.:     │1st Gd. Brig.:     │1st Gd. Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 1st Gd. Rgt.      │ 1st Gd. Rgt.      │ 1st Gd. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │ 3d Gd. Rgt.       │ 3d Gd. Rgt.       │ 3d Gd. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1st Gd. Eng. Btn.: │1st Gd. Eng. Btn.:
              │                   │ Field Co. Gd.     │ 1st Gd. Pion. Co.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 1st Gd. Pontoon   │ 1st Gd. T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Engs.            │
              │                   │ 4th Gd. Tel.      │ 1st Gd. Pontoon
              │                   │  Detch.           │  Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 1st Gd. Tel.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Gd.    │1 Ft. Gd.│1 Gd.    │1 Ft.
              │         │2 Ft. Gd.│         │2 Ft.
              │         │4 Ft. Gd.│         │4 Ft.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1st Sqn. Body Gd.  │3 Sqn. Body Gd.
              │  Hussar Regt.     │  Hus. Rgt.
              │3d Sqn. Body Gd.   │
              │  Hussar Rgt.      │
              │2d Sqn. 6th Dragoon│
              │  Regt.            │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1st Gd. Art.       │1st Gd. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 1st Gd. Rgt.      │ 1 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (less 4 and 5
              │                   │  Abt.).
              │                   │ 1 Abt. L. Gd. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 870 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1099 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1128 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1st Gd. Eng. Btn.: │Gd. Pion. Btn.:
              │ 5th Gd. Pion. Co. │ 1 Co. Gd. Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 1st Gd. T. M. Co. │ 5 Co. Gd. Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 1st Gd. Pontoon   │ 23 Searchlight
              │  Ens.             │  Section.
              │ 1st Gd. Tel.      │1 Gd. Signal
              │  Detch.           │  Command:
              │                   │ 1 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 45 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Field Hospital.    │1 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │1st Ambulance Co.  │4 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │6 Field Hospital.
              │                   │1 Gd. Vet.
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │35 M. G. Btn.      │
              │Sharpshooter Co.   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. Detrained on the 11th and 12th of August in “Prussian Wallonia,” at
Weismes and neighboring stations. Entered Belgium August 13, via
Stavelot; crossed the Meuse at Huy on the 18th. The 23d it fought at
Fosse and St. Gerard, after having crossed the Sambre at Jemmapes.
Fought at Fournaux on the 24th. Was engaged, August 29, between Guise
and Vervins (le Sourd, Leme).


MARNE.

2. It fought next on the Marne (St. Gond marsh).

3. It was in Artois near Hebuterne the end of September.


FLANDERS.

4. In November the 1st Bde. was in Flanders (Gheluvelt); the 2d Bde.
remained at Hebuterne. From the beginning of the campaign until January
19, 1915, the 3d Ft. Gd. Regt. suffered casualties of 49 officers and
2,707 men.


                                 1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The beginning of January the 1st Bde. went from Gheluvelt to
Champagne.

2. The beginning of February the 2d Bde. rejoined the 1st.

3. In March the division went to Alsace, where the whole Guard Corps was
brought together again.


RUSSIA.

4. In April the division went to Russia (Galicia), detraining at Bochnia
the 22d.

5. It fought at Tarnow and Krasnoslaw, skirted Brest-Litowsk, and pushed
on to Krobin. The losses of the 3d Ft. Gd. Regt. in Russia (May 15-Aug.
31) were 17 officers and 2,116 men. The 1st Ft. Gd. Regt. lost 53
officers and 3,005 men.


FRANCE.

6. Brought back by stages to Warsaw; entrained about the 15th of
September for the western front. Itinerary: Thorn, Posen, Frankfort-on-
the-Oder, Berlin, Cassel, Giessen, Coblentz, Treves, Luxemburg, Namur,
Charleroi.


ARTOIS.

7. Reassembled at Charleroi, the division was alerted September 25, and
engaged on the Artois front (Folie). Losses of the 1st Ft. Gd. Regt. in
the fighting of the end of September amounted to 1,522.

8. Relieved October 20, it took over the Lassigny-Beuvraignes sector.


                                 1916.

1. The division remained in the calm Lassigny sector until July 20,
1916.

2. After some days rest in the neighborhood of Nesles, the division went
by stages to the Peronne region, where it was put in reserve.


SOMME.

3. August 15 it relieved, in the course of the battle of the Somme, what
was left of the 1st Bavarian Reserve Division.

4. The division lost heavily (5,000 men, only 300 of whom were
prisoners) during the attacks of the 19th and 20th of August and at the
time of the costly defense of Clery (Sept. 3), and therefore it was
relieved.

5. Reassembled in the Catelet region, and having received
reenforcements, it went back into line south of the Somme, in the
Biaches-Barleux sector. Its losses there were considerably less.


                                 1917.

1. The division was withdrawn from the Biaches-Barleux sector the end of
January.

2. It reformed, went through a course of training, and then proceeded to
the Guiscard region. During February, 1917, it received 500
reenforcements (1917 class, recuperated men). In March its depot was
empty (all the men having been sent to the division).

3. The beginning of April the division reassembled in the Sissonne
region.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

4. As early as April 12, before the French attack on the Aisne front, it
was alerted. April 17 it was engaged in the Ailles-Hurtebise sector.
There it went through the attack of May 5. (Losses, 2,500 to 3,000 men
for the whole division, only 141 prisoners.)

5. Relieved a few days later, it took over a sector in the Argonne
(Grand Courte-Chaussee), where it remained the month of June.


RUSSIA.

6. On July 4 it left for Russia. (Itinerary: Namur, Liège, Aix-la-
Chapelle, Duesseldorf, Minden, Hanover, Berlin, Frankfort-on-the-Oder,
Posen, Lodz, Brest-Litowsk, Kovel, Lemberg, Ozidow; it detrained July
9.)

7. The division participated in the counterattack against the Russians,
and later in the attack of Riga.


FRANCE.

8. It was brought back to France in the middle of October. (Entrained at
Riga Oct. 16. Itinerary: Koenigsberg, Posen, Halle, Cassel, Coblentz,
Sedan, Novion-Porcien; detrained near Rethel, Oct. 21.)

9. The division took over the Marquise sector in Champagne the end of
October.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 1st Guard Division may be considered one of the very best German
divisions. Excellent conduct under fire.

It displayed on the Aisne as well as on the Somme energy and
determination while on the defensive.

Among its heavy losses there was an exceedingly small number of
prisoners.

Again on the Aisne (April-May, 1917), it displayed remarkable military
qualities.

It received important reenforcements of the younger classes (15–16–17),
30 per cent from the class of 1917.

Its normal value was reduced temporarily on account of the arrival of
elements which had never been under fire (June, 1917).

Prisoners taken in the Argonne (June, 1917) seemed less keen for
fighting.


                                 1918.


FRANCE.

1. The division remained in line until the 21st of January.

2. It was withdrawn at that date and put through a course of training in
open warfare until March 1, when it entered line east of Reims
(relieving 203d Division), remaining in until the 15th in order to
become familiar with the terrain.


SOMME.

3. It remained in close support north of Montdidier, and finally entered
line March 28 near Hangest-en-Santerre, fighting until April 5, and
giving a good account of itself.


CHIMAY.

4. The division went through another course of training in the Chimay
area until May 27.


AISNE.

5. The division entered line in the Grivesnes sector. It fought very
well in this the Aisne offensive, immediately after which its commander,
Prince Eitel Friedrich, was promoted from colonel to major general, but
suffered exceedingly heavy losses. It was withdrawn June 7, going to
rest in the Charleroi region, where it remained until July 16.


MARNE.

6. It entered line on that date east of Dormans, and despite stubborn
resistance by the French succeeded in making some headway. July 22–23 it
moved slightly to the west, relieving the 6th Bavarian Reserve Division
near Passy-sur-Marne. It moved back, giving ground to the Allied counter
offensive, and was finally withdrawn from line north of Fere-en-
Tardenois August 5.


CRECY-AU-MONT.

7. The division rested then until August 25 in the vicinity of Rethel,
and then came into line near Crecy-au-Mont and fought until September 6.


ARGONNE.

8. September 20 the division moved eastward and relieved the 53d Reserve
Division in the Varennes sector, where it was when (Sept. 26) it was
swamped by the opening of the American Meuse-Argonne offensive. It did
not resist as strongly as it might have, and so the 5th Guard Division
moved to its support. Withdrawn on the 29th, it, in turn, returned
October 3 to support the 5th Guard. It was finally withdrawn on the 8th
after it had most of its battalions reduced to one company. It left
1,788 prisoners in our hands; its total losses probably being about
4,000.


CHAMPAGNE.

The division was identified in line farther to the west October 14 at
Olizy, and near Chestres on the 21st. It remained in line in this region
contesting the French advance until the Armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Throughout the war the division was rated as one of the very best German
shock divisions. During the last year it fought a great deal and, until
the last stages, very well. It suffered severe losses, and finally, due
to the lack of effectives, it was found impossible to refill its
depleted ranks; its morale deteriorated and it did not fight well.




                      1st Guard Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │2 Gd.    │         │2 Gd.    │         │2 Gd.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │15 Res.  │64 Res.  │15 Res.  │64 Res.  │         │64 Res.
              │         │93 Res.  │         │93 Res.  │         │
              │Gd. Res. Snipers   │Gd. Res. Snipers   │         │
              │  Btn.             │  Btn.             │         │
              │                   │                   │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Gd. Res. Dragoons  │Gd. Res. Drag. Rgt.│Gd. Res. Dragoon
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │  Rgt. (z Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Gd. Res. F. A.   │1 Gd. Res. F. A.   │1 Gd. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │3 Gd. Res. F. A.   │3 Gd. Res. F. A.   │3 Gd. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │2d and 3d Field    │2d and 3d Field
   Liaisions. │                   │  Cos. (1 Eng. Btn.│  Cos. (1 Eng. Btn.
              │                   │  28).             │  28).
              │                   │1 Gd. Res. Pontoon │1 Gd. Res. Pontoon
              │                   │  Engs.            │  Engs.
              │                   │1 Gd. Res. Tel.    │1 Gd. Res. Tel.
              │                   │  Detch.           │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │5 Gd. T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.    │1 Gd.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │2 Gd.    │         │2 Gd.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │64 Res.  │         │64 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │1 Sqn.   │Drag.
              │         │         │  Gd.    │  Rgt.
              │         │         │  Res.   │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Gd. Res. Drag. Rgt.│1 Sqn. Gd. Res.
              │  (1st Sqn.).      │  Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │7 Gd. Art. Command.│8 Gd. Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │1 Gd. Res. F. A.   │ 1 Gd. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt. (9          │  Rgt.
              │  Batteries).      │
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 1 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (Staff, 7,
              │                   │  8, and 13
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 701 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1269 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1328 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(z) Eng. Btn.      │28 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisions. │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 2d and  3d Cos. 28│ 2 Co. 28 Pions.
              │  Pion.            │
              │ 5 Gd. T. M. Co.   │ 3 Co. 28 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 401 (Gd.) Tel.    │ 61 Searchlight
              │  Detch.           │  Section.
              │                   │401 Gd. Signals
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 401 (Gd.) Tel.
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │ 17 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │266 Ambulance Co.  │266 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │395 Field Hospital.│389 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │395 Field Hospital.
              │                   │401 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │701 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. At the beginning of the war the 1st Guard Reserve Division forming,
together with the 3d Guard Division, the Guard Reserve Corps swept into
Belgium—as part of the 2d Army under von Buelow—the 16th of August,
crossed the Meuse at Ardenne (massacres) the 20th, and pushed on as far
as Namur. On the 29th the two divisions (Guard Reserve Corps) were
brought back to Aix-la-Chapelle, and left for east Prussia September 1.


POLAND.

2. The beginning of October the Guard Reserve Corps, attached to the
Southern Army Group, took part in the invasion of the southern part of
Poland, fought at Opatow (Oct. 4), and suffered severe losses at Lodz
while retreating from the Russian armies.

3. During the winter of 1914–15 it fought on the Bzura.


                                 1915.


POLAND.

1. In February, 1915, the Guard Reserve Corps was split up. The 1st
Guard Reserve Division was sent to the north of the Vistula, in the
Mlawa-Prasnysz region. By the 6th of March the 1st Guard Reserve
Infantry Regiment had already had its thirty-ninth engagement there
(letter).

2. In March the 93d Reserve Regiment was attached to the 4th Guard
Division (new). During the summer of 1915 the 1st Guard Reserve Division
was engaged in the operations to the north of the Vistula (von
Gallwitz’s army).


SMORGONI.

3. The pursuit of the Russians brought the division as far as the
neighborhood of Smogorni-Vishnev, where it took part in violent fighting
and where it was relieved the middle of September.


FRANCE.

4. During the early days of October it entrained at Grodno for the
western front. (Itinerary: Warsaw, Posen, Berlin, Hanover, Aix-la-
Chapelle, Liège, Cambrai.)


CAMBRAI.

5. It went into rest cantonments on the banks of the Scheldt between
Marcoing and Bouchain (November-December).


                                 1916.

1. The 1st Guard Reserve Division and the 4th Guard Division then formed
the reconstituted Guard Reserve Corps.

2. During January and February, 1916, the division was employed on
defensive works in the Wytschaete-Messines sector; it also held a sector
in that region. At the same time it underwent a course of training in
the neighborhood of Cambrai.


ARTOIS.

3. The beginning of May the division took over the sector south of
Neuville-St. Vaast.


SOMME.

4. At the end of July it was engaged on the Somme (Belloy-Barleux).

5. After August 19 it spent some days at rest near Cambrai, and came
back into line until September 8 between the Mouquet Farm and
Martinpuich. It suffered local attacks, in which it was constantly
pushed back with heavy losses.


FLANDERS.

6. After a rest in the neighborhood of Cambrai it was sent to a calm
sector to the north of Ypres, near the Ypres-Pilkem road.


SOMME.

7. November 5 the division returned to the Somme (Warlencourt) where it
spent the winter of 1916–17.


                                 1917.


SOMME.

1. In March, 1917, the 1st Guard Reserve Division commenced the
withdrawal movement on the Hindenburg Line, leaving prisoners in rear-
guard actions (PysGrevillers region). It was withdrawn from the front
about March 20 to go to rest near Tournai.

2. The 1st Guard Reserve Division and the 4th Guard Division then became
independent divisions.


ARTOIS.

3. April 25 the division took over the Oppy-Gavrelle sector and fought
off the British attacks.

4. Relieved the beginning of May, it was sent to rest at Templeuve, and
was later employed in the construction of defensive works near Cambrai
(May).


FLANDERS.

5. The 1st of June it was carried to Tourcoing, and from there to
Warneton, June 8 it went into line to the east of Messines, where it
relieved the 3d Bavarian Division, very much worn out the day before. It
was itself withdrawn as early as the 12th.


ARTOIS.

6. The division then went back to Artois and held the Moeuvres-Pronville
front (June 21–22 to Aug. 16) taking part in no important action.


LENS.

7. After some days rest at Douai, it became reengaged August 21, on the
Lens front, in a series of very heavy conflicts following the attack of
August 15. The 64th Reserve Infantry Regiment was particularly
exhausted. Gas attacks caused it to suffer equally heavy losses in
September and December.

8. The division remained in this sector until the end of 1917. In
November it sent some elements to reinforce the Cambrai front against
the British attack.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was recruited in all provinces of Prussia, like the rest of
the Guard. Despite their numbers, the 64th and 93d Reserve Infantry
Regiments do not come (to any considerable extent) from the 3d and 4th
Corps Districts. The 93d Reserve Infantry Regiments came from what was,
before its dissolution, a “guard landwehr battalion (Magdeburg)” (seal
of pay book).

The 1st Guard Reserve Division is not above the average German division
in value. The Alsatians in its ranks were withdrawn and sent to Russia
in 1916, but there are still numerous Poles, who do not constitute an
element of strength. It seems much less to be feared than most of the
Prussian organizations that do not have the “Litze” (braiding), less,
too, than the Wurttemburgers of the 13th Corps District and the better
Bavarian troops. (British document, February, 1918.)


                                 1918.


LENS.

1. The 1st Guard Reserve Division was relieved in the Lens sector by the
220th Division the first of the year and was withdrawn, remaining at
rest in this region until it relieved the 220th Division, February 4.


CARVIN.

2. The division was relieved by the 220th Division February 20 and went
to the Carvin area, where it went through a course of training in open
warfare so as to become the assault division of the Souchez Group.


SOMME.

3. The opening day of the March 21 offensive the division was identified
at Lagnicourt (northeast of Bapaume). It was very probably “leap-
frogged” by some other division the next day, but it reappeared the 27th
near Bucquoy, in a straight line with the advance taken as a whole. It
suffered exceedingly heavy losses, finally having to utilize its
pioneers as Infantry.


LA BASSÉE.

4. April 20 the division was withdrawn from the Somme front and marched
to Givenchy (just north of the La Bassée Canal) the next day, where it
relieved the 4th Ersatz Division. It fought there until about May 21,
giving a good account of itself, considering its weakened condition, and
as a result its brigade commander was promoted a lieutenant general, and
the division commander received Pour le Mérite.


GRAMMONT.

5. The division moved to the Grammont area, where it underwent a course
of training with artillery and aeroplanes in preparation for a coming
offensive.


LA BASSÉE.

6. It relieved the 38th Division at Festubert, north of the La Bassée
Canal July 5; it was relieved July 14 by the 18th Reserve Division.

7. The division rested in the Fauquissart area, and then relieved the
12th Reserve Division north of Hinges the night of August 2–3. It was
relieved about August 26 by extension of front of the neighboring
divisions.


CAMBRAI.

8. The 2d of September the division reinforced the front north of the
Arras-Cambrai Road. About the 10th it side-slipped south, for it was
identified southwest of Moeuvres. It remained here, suffering heavy
casualties (450 prisoners), and was relieved by the 7th Cavalry Division
during the night of September 22–23.

9. It remained in this region, however, and was thrown back into line in
attempt to stem the British advance, being identified at Bourlon
September 28; withdrawn about October 5.

10. The division returned October 16–17, relieving the 30th Division
east of Neuvilly, and was withdrawn about the 20th.

11. November 4 it was identified north of Landrecies. It took part in
the general retirement, being identified south of Berlaimont November 5,
and east of Maubeuge on the 9th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 1st Guard Reserve Division was rated as in the first of four
classes. During 1918 it did not fight brilliantly, but it was always to
be depended upon. It was called upon to fight much in heavy engagements,
and suffered very severe losses.




                         Guard Ersatz Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │           1914–15           │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │1 Gd. Mixed   │1 Gd. Ers.(1, │1 Gd. Mixed   │6 Gd. (former
              │  Ers.        │  2, and 6 Gd.│  Ers.        │  1 Gd. Ers.).
              │              │  Bde. Ers.   │              │
              │              │  Btns.).     │              │
              │              │2 Gd. Ers.    │              │7 Gd. (former
              │              │  (3,4 and 5  │              │  2 Gd. Ers.).
              │              │  Gd. Bde.    │              │
              │              │  Ers. Btns.).│              │
              │5 Gd. Mixed   │357 (5 Ers.   │5 Gd. Mixed   │357.
              │  Ers.        │  Btn. 2d C.  │  Ers.        │358.
              │              │  Dist. and 5 │              │
              │              │  Ers. Btn. 1 │              │
              │              │  C. Dist.).  │              │
              │              │358 (6, 7, and│              │
              │              │  8 Ers. Btns.│              │
              │              │  2d C.       │              │
              │              │  Dist.).     │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │Gd. Ers. Cav. Detach.        │1st Sqn. Gd. Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │1st Ers. Abt. (1st and 2d Gd.│7th Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │  F. A. Rgt.).               │
              │38th F. A. Rgt.              │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Co. Gd. Ers. Pion. Btn.    │301 (Gd.) Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │1 Ers. Co. 2 Pion. Btn.      │302 Pion. Co.
              │                             │7 Gd. T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │32 Ldw. Btn. 2d C. Dist.     │81 Labor Btn.
              │  (1915).                    │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │Gd. Ers.      │6 Gd.         │Gd. Ers.      │6 Gd.
              │              │7 Gd.         │              │7 Gd.
              │              │399.          │              │399.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │5th Sqn. 2d Gd. Uhlan Regt.  │5 Sqn. 2 Gd. Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │6th Gd. Art. Command:        │6 Gd. Art. Command:
              │                             │
              │ 7 Gd. F. A. Rgt.            │ 7 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 89 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 759 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 814 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 886 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Eng. Btn.:                   │501 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 301 (Gd.) Pion. Co.         │ 301 Gd. Pion. Co.
              │ 302 Pion. Co.               │ 302 Pion. Co.
              │ 7 Gd. T. M. Co.             │ 49 Searchlight Section.
              │ 292 Searchlight Section.    │551 Signals Command:
              │ 551 Gd. Tel. Detch.         │ 551 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 36 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │62 Ambulance Co.             │63 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │133 Field Hospital.          │133 Field Hospital.
              │134 Field Hospital.          │134 Field Hospital.
              │209 Vet. Hospital.           │209 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │761 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                1914–15.

Formed in August, 1914, by grouping the Guard Ersatz Battalions and the
Ersatz Battalions of the 2d Corps District, the division detrained at
Saverne August 19. In reserve during the battle on the 20th, it crossed
the frontier on the 23d with the 6th Army, fought southeast of Lunéville
the first days of September, and toward the end of the same month it
went to Haye (Woevre).


HAYE.

1. There it formed part of the Ersatz Corps and held various sectors of
the region until March, 1916 (St. Baussant, Flirey, Bois de Mort-Mare,
etc.).


                                 1916.

1. In March, 1916, the 1st Guard Ersatz Mixed Bde. (6th and 7th Guard
Regiments) left the Apremont region to go to the north of Combres and to
the south of Fresnes-en-Woevre.


VERDUN.

2. After a rest of 10 days at St. Marie aux Chênes (Apr. 24-May 3) it
went to the front north of Verdun. May 11–12 it entered line in the
Bois-Nawé (west of Douaumont), where it took part in several attacks
(notably that of May 25). It rested in June, and fought again, beginning
July 1, to the southeast of the Thiaumont works.

3. The 5th Guard Ersatz Mixed Bde. which had remained in the Montsec
region, entrained at Vigneulles-St. Benoît (July 23–26), detrained at
Spincourt, and during the night of August 3–4 entered line to the east
of Fleury. Together with the 1st Bde., it took part in the attack of
August 5, and both suffered heavy losses.

4. The Guard Ersatz Division was withdrawn from line the end of August,
after having lost 50 per cent of its infantry before Verdun.


FLIREY-EN-HAYE.

5. After a rest in the region west of Spincourt it went back into line
to the north of Flirey-en-Haye; it remained there until about the 5th of
November.

In September the 357th and the 358th Infantry Regiments were attached to
the Bavarian Ersatz Division and the 214th Division, respectively. The
Guard Ersatz Division received in exchange a regiment newly formed from
companies taken from the 6th and 7th Guard and the 357th Infantry
Regiments.


COTE DU POIVRE.

6. The division rested in November, leaving December 18 to go to the
region north of Côte du Poivre, following the French attack of December
15.


                                 1917.

1. About January 15, 1917, the Guard Ersatz Division was withdrawn from
the Verdun front and sent to Champagne (St. Hilaire sector).

2. Relieved toward the end of March, the division was sent to reserve in
the Chateau-Porcien region, which it quitted April 12.


AISNE.

3. April 16 and the days following elements of the division
counterattacked toward Bermericourt; then relieving (Apr. 18) the
remnants of the 21st Division, the Guard Ersatz Division went through
the French attack of May 4. It left this front soon after.

4. May; rest in rear of the Champagne front.


RUSSIA.

5. After a stay in a sector in Haye to the north of Flirey (from the
beginning of June to the middle of July), the division was carried to
the eastern front (July 23–27). (Itinerary: Sarrebrucken, Kreuznach,
Frankfort, Leipsic, Cottbus, Glogau, Warsaw, Grodno, Vilna.)

6. The Kaiser reviewed the division July 29. From the 1st to the 17th of
August it was trained in open warfare near Vilna.


RIGA.

7. Taken to Chavli (Aug. 28), then to the Gross-Ekkau region, the
division entered line in the Uxkuell region and participated in the Riga
offensive, entering Riga September 3–4.


FRANCE.

8. September 8 the division entrained for the western front. (Itinerary:
Chavli, Kovno, Eydtkuhnen, Insterberg, Posen, Cottbus, Leipsic,
Frankfort, Thionville, Briey.) It encamped near Spincourt, and then,
about October 10, entered line to the north of Bezonvaux.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The Guard Ersatz Division was recruited all over Prussia just as all the
other Guard divisions.

Good division. The 6th and 7th Guard Regiments are not to be considered
as tried troops. The 399th Infantry Regiment seems to have but a slight
combative value.

The men are said to have shown dissatisfaction when they left Russia for
the western front. Desertions are said to have taken place en route.
(Inter. pris. Dec. 15–17.)


                                 1918.


VERDUN.

1. The division remained north of Verdun until February 20, when it was
relieved and went to Damvillers, entrained, and went to the Arlon area
and was trained until March 15.


SOMME.

2. It entrained at Arlon on that date and traveled via Charleroi to
Mons, where it arrived the following day. By night marches the division
passed through Maubeuge-Bavai-Englefontaine-Fontaine au Bois-Bazuel-Le
Cateau-Busigny-Bohain-Fresnoy-Péronne, without taking part in any
fighting. It came into line March 25–26, and was heavily engaged at
Proyart the 27th.


HANGARD.

3. The division was withdrawn about April 6, after having large
casualties, and reinforced the front near Hangard the night of April
9–10, not being relieved until about May 4. Flanking divisions extended
their fronts.


MONS.

4. It rested northwest of Mons until the end of June.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. It then went to reserve in Champagne, and entered line west of
Auberive July 15. It was withdrawn on the 21st.


OULCHY LE CHATEAU.

6. The division was identified in line north of Oulchy le Chateau July
29, where it fought until withdrawn, about August 9.


ALSACE.

7. It went into rest cantonments at Helfrantzkirch (northeast of Basle),
and remained there until September 25.


YPRES.

8. Prisoners of the division were captured southwest of Roulers, and
they stated that it entered line October 5–6. The division remained in
line fighting stubbornly, but to no purpose, until withdrawn, November
7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Reliable information is to the effect that the Guard Ersatz, the Guard
Cavalry, and the Jaeger Divisions bore the title “Oberste Heeresleitungs
Angriffsdivisionen,” and that they were held under the direct control of
the Supreme Command. Nevertheless, the Guard Ersatz has always been
considered as being in the second of four classes.




                        Guard Cavalry Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Infantry.              │5 Ldw. Inf.            │
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │11 Cav.                │1 Cuirassier.
                        │                       │8 Drag.
                        │14 Cav.                │5 Uhlan.
                        │                       │8 Hus.
                        │                       │11 Hus.
                        │38 Cav.                │2 Mounted Jag.
                        │                       │6 Mounted Jag.
                        │                       │4 Cuirassier.
                        │                       │Gd. Cuirassier (1 Sqn.
                        │                       │  of 4 Mounted Jag.).
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │132 Art. Command:
                        │ 3 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
                        │ 226 F. A. Rgt.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│412 Pion. Btn.:
                        │ 307 Pion. Co.
                        │ 2 Ers. Pion. Co.
                        │ 183 Wireless Detch.
                        │ 286 and 385 T. M. Cos.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│257 Ambulance Co.
                        │302 Field Hospital.
                        │315 Field Hospital.
                        │286 Vet. Hospital.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │Balloon Sqn. No. 33.
                        │290 Reconnaissance Flight.
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

1. The division left the eastern theater in the middle of March. It was
reconstituted in the camp at Zossen (south of Berlin), and was then
moved to the Maubeuge area, where it underwent six weeks’ training for
open warfare. It now consisted of 9 dismounted regiments, grouped in 3
brigades, 2 companies of pioneers, and a trench mortar company.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. About May 28 the division relieved the 23d Division east of the
Suippe. It was relieved about July 2, and on the 15th returned to
strengthen the battle front near Souain. It was relieved about July 20.


SOISSONS.

3. The division was moved to the Soissons area, and on August 22
relieved the Jaeger Division east of Soissons. It retired from the front
about September 5.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. On September 23–24 it relieved the 15th Bavarian Division north of
Prosnes, and was thereafter constantly in line in Champagne. The
direction of its final retreat lay through Herpy (Nov. 1), St. Ferguex
(5th), Rethel (6th), and Rocquigny (7th).


                                 VALUE.

The division was rated as second class. It was reported to be one of the
General Headquarters attack divisions held under direct control of the
Supreme Command. After the failure of the July offensive east of Reims
the division was constantly on the defensive.




                             1st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1.       │1 Gren.  │1.       │1 Gren.  │1.       │1 Gren.
              │         │41.      │         │41.      │         │41.
              │2.       │3 Gren.  │2.       │3 Gren.  │2.       │3 Gren.
              │         │43.      │         │43.      │         │43.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Uhlan. Regt.     │        (?)        │        (?)
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Brig.:           │1 Brig.:           │1 Brig.:
              │16 F. A. Rgt.      │16 F. A. Rgt.      │16 F. A. Rgt.
              │52 F. A. Rgt.      │52 F. A. Rgt.      │52 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Eng. Btn. (1 C.  │1 Eng. Btn. (1 C.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  Dist.):          │  Dist.):
              │                   │ Field Co. 1 Pion. │ 271 Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │  (Oct., 1917).
              │                   │ 1 Pontoon Engs.   │ 1 Pontoon Engs.
              │                   │ 1 Tel. Detch.     │ 1 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 1 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 3d Co. 1 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │100 Labor Btn.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1.       │1 Gren.  │1.       │1 Gren.
              │         │3 Gren.  │         │3 Gren.
              │         │43.      │         │43.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3d Sqn. 8 Uhlan.   │3 Sqn. 8 Uhlan.
              │  Regt.            │  Regt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(z) Art. Commandt: │1 Art. Command:
              │16 F. A. Rgt.      │ 16 F. A. Rgt.
              │52 F. A. Rgt.      │ 1 Abt. 10 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (Staff. 1,
              │                   │  3, and 4 Btries.)
              │                   │ 1083 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1095 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1096 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│112 Eng. Btn.:     │110 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 3d Co. 1 Pions.   │ 3 Co. 1 Pions.
              │  (z).             │
              │ 271 Pion. Co.     │ 271 Pion. Co.
              │ 1 T. M. Co.       │ 1 T. M. Co.
              │ 1 Tel. Detch.     │ 108 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 305, 311, 312, and│1 Signal Command:
              │  392 Searchlight  │
              │  Sections.        │
              │                   │ 1 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 43 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │4 Ambulance Co.    │4 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │13 Field Hospital.
              │1 Vet. Hospital.   │16 Field Hospital.
              │                   │1 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │534 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │66 M. G. S. S.     │
              │  Detch.           │
              │54, 55, 56, and 57 │
              │  Light M. G.      │
              │  Sections.        │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                1914–15.

Along with the 2d Division, the 1st Division forms the 1st Army Corps
(Koenigsberg).


RUSSIA.

1. The 1st Army Corps was engaged on the Russian front at the very
beginning of the war.

2. Up until November the 1st Division participated in the operations of
East Prussia, and notably in the battle of Tannenberg (Aug. 27–29).

3. In December the two divisions of the 1st Corps separated. The 2d
Division remained in the north; the 1st Division went to the 9th Army,
from December, 1914, to January, 1915 (Bzura-Rawka), then to the Army of
the South, operating in the Carpathians and on the Dniester, from
February, 1915, to February, 1916.


                                 1916.


FRANCE.

1. The division went to France in March, 1916. The 41st Infantry
Regiment detrained March 13 near Metz; the 48th Infantry Regiment at
Hagondange March 5.


VERDUN.

2. The division was put in line near Vaux April 20, fought in the bois
de la Caillette in May, in the bois de Vaux Chapitre, and the bois Fumin
in June and July. It suffered enormous losses there. In the 1st Company
of the 41st Infantry Regiment, the numbers on the pay books passed from
1,359 (Apr. 10) to 1,674 (July 19), indicating the arrival of at least
316 reinforcements. From the beginning of the war until July, 1916, the
regiment had received an average of 1,360 men per company.


RUSSIA.

3. At the end of July, 1916, the 1st Division, leaving behind the 41st
Infantry Regiment, which fought before Verdun in August, was once more
taken to the eastern front, where it formed part of the Carpathian
Corps.


                                 1917.


BUKOVINA.

1. In July, 1917, the division was in the Kirlibaba-Dorna-Vatra region.
Beginning July 27, it followed up the retreating Russians, halting,
early in August, in the Sereth region.


FRANCE.

2. The division entrained, the beginning of December, near Czernowitz,
and was carried to the French front. (Itinerary: Kolomea, Stanislau,
Lemberg, Tarnow, Oppeln, Breslau, Dresden, Leipsic, Halle, Cassel,
Coblentz, Treves.) Ordered to Lorraine, it was sent to the region east
of Etain, relieving the 13th Reserve Division and occupying the sector
in front of Moulainville (Dec. 27; still there Jan. 23, 1918).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Theoretically, the regiments of the 1st Division are recruited in East
Prussia, but since the 1st Corps District, sparsely populated and of
restricted size, could not keep it up alone, the elements coming from
outside this district are numerous. During the stay on the eastern front
Alsace-Lorrainers were used in considerable number. While in France the
division’s ranks were filled up with the aid of the abundant resources
of Brandenburg and Silesia (3rd and 4th Corps Districts); consequently,
the division does not display to any degree the local character like the
majority of the German divisions.

The 1st Division was on the Russian front from August, 1914, until
December, 1917, with the exception of the period April-July, 1916,
during which it was engaged before Verdun.

The troops of the division fraternized with the Russians for about three
weeks in April, but this came to an end early in May with the arrival
opposite them of new Russian troops, who received their advances with
bullets. (Inter. pris., Jan. 24, 1918.)


                                 1918.


WOEVRE.

1. The division remained in line in the Verdun sector until relieved by
the 11th Bavarian division about February 15.

2. It moved to the Conflans area, where it went through a course of
training in open warfare in order to fit itself to become an assault
division. At this time, too, it exchanged its Alsatians for Prussians of
the 78th Reserve Division.


SOMME.

3. March 27 the division reinforced the front at Bray, north of the
Somme. It fought until the 30th, and lost to such an extent that its
companies, which had been filled up while in the Conflans area, were
reduced to an average strength of 40 men.

4. It was withdrawn March 30, and rested immediately in rear of the
position it had held in line until about April 19.

5. The following day the division went back into line just south of the
Somme, and immediately suffered heavily. It was relieved May 2 by the
24th Reserve Division.

6. The division went to rest in the Peruwelz area, and then had some
more training in the same region.


CHAMPAGNE.

7. Early in July the division was identified in reserve near Hirson.

8. July 16 it entered line near St. Hilaire, and was withdrawn the 20th.


RHEIMS.

9. It was immediately thrown into line in the Bois de Vrigny, where it
fought in an attempt to prevent the Allies from annihilating the German
troops in the Soissons-Chateau Thierry-Rheims pocket.


LAON.

10. About August 10 the division was withdrawn and went to rest in the
region of Laon.


LAFFAUX.

11. September 3 it relieved the 27th Division near Laffaux, and, being
surprised by a French attack, lost heavily (2,300 prisoners).

12. September 16 it was relieved by the 29th Division.


RHEIMS.

13. The division came back into line near Betheny (northeast of Rheims)
on October 2 and was withdrawn about the 8th.


ST. FERGEUX.

14. It reentered line in the St. Fergeux region October 14, and was
again withdrawn the 29th.


LIART.

15. November 7 the division was identified near Liart (south of Rocroi),
and remained in line until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class.




                         1st Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Res.   │1 Res.   │1 Res.   │1 Res.   │1 Res.   │1 Res.
              │         │3 Res.   │         │3 Res.   │         │3 Res.
              │72 Res.  │18 Res.  │72 Res.  │18 Res.  │72 Res.  │18 Res.
              │         │59 Res.  │         │59 Res.  │         │59 Res.
              │1 Res.   │Jag. Btn.│1 Res.   │Jag. Btn.│1 Res.   │Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Res. Uhl. Rgt. (3│1 Res. Uhl. Rgt.   │1 Res. Uhl. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
              │1 Res. Ers. Cav.   │1 Res. Ers. Cav.   │
              │  Rgt. (3 Sqns.).  │  Regt.            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │1 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │1 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │2 Eng. Btn. No. 1: │4 Field Co. 2d
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Pion. Btn.
              │                   │ Res. Co. 1 Pion.  │201 T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Btn.             │
              │                   │ 1 Res. Pontoon    │1 Res. Pontoon
              │                   │  Engs.            │  Engs.
              │                   │ 1 Res. Tel. Detch.│1 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Res.   │1 Res.   │1 Res.   │1 Res.
              │         │3 Res.   │         │3 Res.
              │         │59 Res.  │         │
              │1 Res.   │Jag. Btn.│         │59 Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Res. Uhl. Rgt. (.│4 Sqn. 2 Gd. Ulan
              │  Sqns.).          │  Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │1 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │2 Abt. 1 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │1363 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1390 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1393 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│301 Eng. Btn. (.): │301 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. Pion. Btn.  │ 4 Co. 2 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 1 Co. Pion. Btn.  │ 1 Co. 34 Res.
              │                   │  Pions.
              │ 201 T. M. Co.     │ 201 T. M. Co.
              │ 348 Searchlight   │ 31 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ Tel. Detch.       │401 Signals
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 401 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 158 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │501 Ambulance Co.  │501 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │399 Field Hospital.│399 Field Hospital.
              │9 Res. Field       │9 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │137 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                1914–15.


RUSSIA.

1. The 1st Reserve Division was on the Russian front from August, 1914,
until November 1, 1917, at which time it entrained for France.


EAST PRUSSIA-POLAND.

2. In 1914 it and the 36th Reserve Division formed the 1st Reserve Corps
(Gen. Otto von Buelow). It took part in the operations of East Prussia
(Hindenburg’s Army), in the Lodz maneuver (Von Mackensen’s Army), and in
the combats on the Bzura.

3. In February, 1915, the division was in the Prasnysz region, northeast
of the Bohr-Narew line.


COURLAND.

4. In May, as part of Eichhorn’s Army, it took part in the raid on
Courland.


                                 1916.


GALICIA.

1. It was on the Dvina in the Friedrichstadt region until July.

2. In August it was identified in Galicia, in Bothmer’s Army, opposed to
the Broussiloff offensive. Here it had heavy losses. (The 11th Company
of the 3d Infantry Regiment, in particular, was reduced to 30 men.)
During September the division was reinforced. The depot at
Friedrichstadt, near Warsaw, was completely emptied to make good its
losses.


COURLAND.

3. Toward the end of September elements of the division were in line
near Friedrichstadt, along the Dvina, in a calm sector. The 18th Reserve
Infantry Regiment was attached to the newly formed 225th Division.


                                 1917.

1. January 5, 1917, the division was taken to the Mitau region, where it
helped stop the Russian attack. Losses in this sector were light, but
there was considerable discontent due to the cold.

2. The division was relieved about the 15th of March and sent to the
neighborhood of Gross-Eckau, near Mitau, where it rested two months.


RIGA.

3. The middle of May it was put back into line before Riga. It took part
in the offensive against that city in September, stayed there from the
3d to the 7th of September, and then took up again its march toward the
east. It organized its positions about 70 kilometers from Riga, near
Hintzenberg (or Hildersberg?) (near Wenden) and established itself
there.


FRANCE.

4. Relieved the end of October, it entrained near Wenden for the western
front (Itinerary: Riga, Mitau, Kovno, Eidtkuhnen, Insterburg, Thorn,
Posen, Lissa, Breslau, Cottbus, Leipsic, Erfuhrt, Frankfort-on-the-Main,
Sarrebruecken, Thionville, Sedan, Vouziers.) It detrained November 6 at
Semide (southeast of Vouziers).


CHAMPAGNE.

5. After a rest of two days, the division went into line in the St.
Hilaire sector (east of Vaudesincourt-Auberive).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was recruited in East Prussia and, as a result of
insufficient local resources, from divers other localities—a great many
Alsace-Lorrainers during the sojourn on the Russian front.

The 1st Reserve Division has taken part in all the important attacks
which have taken place on the eastern front since the beginning of the
war. It seems, however, from interrogation of deserters (in Champagne,
November, 1917), that the cadres and men were little prepared for war as
it was waged on the western front.


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The division remained in line east of Auberive until relieved by the
23d Division April 30.


MONTDIDIER.

2. May 13–14 it relieved the 76th Reserve Division in the Givesnes
sector.

3. It was relieved August 4, but came back into line on the 10th a
little farther to the north, in the region of Hangest-en-Santerre. It
was withdrawn a few days later and rested several days in the
neighborhood.

4. August 19 it relieved the 75th Reserve Division near Beuvraignes. It
fought until relieved September 2.


ST. QUENTIN.

5. After 10 days’ rest it relieved the 21st Division near Le Verguier,
northwest of St. Quentin. It was withdrawn on the 20th.


RIBEMONT.

6. October 1 the division relieved the 208th Division near Ribemont.
Withdrawn October 31.


DOMPIERRE.

7. It came back into line November 7 and remained until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division has suffered very heavily, notwithstanding the fact that,
until about the 10th of August, it had taken no part in any really
important actions this year. On the 18th of September the 1st Reserve
Regiment was almost wiped out, its three battalion officers being
captured with their staffs. It had also suffered a great many casualties
the 9th and 10th of August. It is difficult to estimate the strength of
its companies, owing to the fact that it is still in an active sector,
but it is probably not over 50 rifles.

In the main the recruitment is East Prussian. There have been many
Alsace-Lorrainers in its ranks, but since many of these have deserted
there are probably not a great many of them left. For the most part the
men are between 25 and 35 years old, but there are many older men and
something less than 10 per cent of the division is made up by recruits
of the 1919 class. It is again to be noted that the division was not
employed in any of the German offensives this year.

Its conduct was remarkable in no way during the division’s participation
in the heavy fighting around Hangest, Beuvraignes, and to the north of
St. Quentin. During the early part of the year, when the division was in
line in Champagne, there were a great many desertions, especially among
the Alsace-Lorraine element. There have also been many cases of mutiny,
especially in the 59th Reserve, the worst of the three regiments. About
the middle of August a batch of some 500 recruits started out from the
interior for the division. To sustain the morale of the men, these
recruits were told they were going to simply support the artillery.
Notwithstanding this, less than 250 men remained when the draft reached
its true destination—the front lines. The men are very tired of the war,
but on the whole seem resigned to the necessity of doing their duty.

The 1st Reserve is rated as a third-class division.




                         1st Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │6 Mixed  │34 Ldw.  │6 Ldw.   │34 Ldw.  │34 Ldw.  │31 Ldw.
              │  Ldw.   │         │         │         │         │
              │         │49 Ldw.  │         │49 Ldw.  │         │37 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │         │84 Ldw.
              │34 Mixed │31 Ldw.  │34 Mixed │31 Ldw.  │         │
              │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │         │
              │         │84 Ldw.  │         │33 Ldw.  │         │
              │         │         │         │84 Ldw.  │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │90 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.  │2d Sqn. 10 Drag.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │2d Sqn. 10 Drag.   │
              │                   │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │96 F. A. Rgt.      │128 Art. Command:
              │                   │219 F. A. Rgt.     │ 96 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Co. 23 Pion. Btn.│(401) Eng. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │2 Co. 23 Ers. Pion.│ 1 Co. 1 Ers. Pion.
              │                   │  Btn.             │  Btn.
              │                   │                   │ 3 Co. 26 Ers.
              │                   │                   │  Pion. Btn.
              │                   │                   │ 301 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 279 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │ 501 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │215 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │2 Ldw. Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │                   │9 Ldw. Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │                   │201 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │34 Ldw.  │31 Ldw.  │34 Ldw.  │31 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │33 Ldw.  │         │33 Ldw.
              │         │84 Ldw.  │         │84 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2d Sqn. 12 Horse   │3 Sqn. 12 Horse
              │  Jag.             │  Jag. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │96 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │782 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1036 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1047 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │401 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │                   │ 1 Ers. Co. 1
              │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │ 2 Ldw. Co. 2 C.
              │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │ 301 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 142 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │501 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 501 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 190 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │215 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │                   │146 Field Hospital.
              │                   │
              │                   │279 Field Hospital.
              │                   │
              │                   │201 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                1914–15.

Called Jacobi’s Division at the beginning of the war, and a part of the
1st Landwehr Corps, the 1st Landwehr Division fought under this corps on
the eastern front. It was first called the 10th Landwehr Division,
taking the name of 1st Landwehr Division in July, 1915. It comprised the
6th Mixed Landwehr Brigade (34th and 49th Landwehr Regiments) and the
34th Mixed Landwehr Brigade (31st and 84th Landwehr Regiments).


EAST PRUSSIA-POLAND.

1. First engaged in East Prussia (Angerburg, Gumbinnen, August, 1914, to
January, 1915), Jacobi’s Division took part in the operations between
Mariampol and Suwalki. Early in March, 1915, it was before Lomza; then
in the Ossowiec region on the Bobr. It was at this time that the
division became known as the 1st Landwehr Division, and the 33d Landwehr
Regiment was attached to it.

2. At the beginning of August the division was in the Kalvariia region,
Suwalki. It took part in the summer offensive, but remained in support,
never doing any actual fighting.


COURLAND.

3. After a rest on the Little Berezina, it went to Courland, going into
line in the Uxkuell region (October).


                                 1916.

1. The division remained to the south of Riga until the end of July,
1916.


VOLHYNIA.

2. In August it went to Volhynia, where it took over the Borovno sector
(on the Stokhod) and held it for more than a year, until about November,
1917. The 6th Landwehr Brigade was taken away and remained in the Mitau
region (April, 1916). Since then the division has been composed of only
three regiments.


                                 1917.


VOLHYNIA.

1. Relieved in the Borovno sector toward the end of 1917, went to rest
in the vicinity of Kovel. In January, 1918, the division received
reinforcements from the 9th Landwehr Regiment (dissolved) and also from
the 20th Landsturm Regiment. It had already had men of the 1919 class
since November, 1917. Still more arrived in February, 1918, when the
division was on the point of departing for Belgium.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In theory, the 31st and 84th Landwehr Regiments were recruited in the
9th Corps District; the 33d Landwehr Regiment in the 1st Corps District.
Latterly, however, widely diversified elements have been introduced—men
of the 20th Landsturm Regiment (18th Corps District); from the 9th
Landsturm Regiment (2d Corps District); also men from the 3d, 7th, and
17th Districts (class 1919). There is, too, a considerable number of
Alsace-Lorrainers (33d Landwehr Regiment).

The 1st Landwehr is a mediocre division, composed of old men and of
others that have little military value. (March, 1918.)


                                 1918.


BELGIUM.

1. The division was then taken to the western front, and after some time
spent in reserve (it was probably trained in the methods of warfare
employed on the western front, although there is no evidence to
establish it) it relieved the 35th Division near Merckem, March 20. It
was relieved about April 19 by elements of the 83d Division.

2. April 26 it was identified in the St. Julien-Hooge sector, replacing
part of the 236th Division, which side slipped to the south. In an
unsuccessful attack during this time it suffered exceedingly heavy
losses.


ALSACE.

3. The division was relieved by the 6th Cavalry Division during the
night of July 27–28 and went to rest in the Vosges.

4. About October 3 the division relieved the 30th Bavarian Reserve
Division near Aspach le Bas.


WOEVRE.

5. It was withdrawn from this sector soon afterwards to be thrown in to
meet the American advance east of the Meuse, being identified west of
Flabas October 16. They lost heavily, staying in until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 1st Landwehr is rated as a third-class division. Still, although
many of its younger men were sent to other divisions just before it came
to the western front, it did rather well, its commanding officer having
been promoted after its participation in the battle of the Lys, and the
division as a whole having been lauded several times in the official
communiques.




                         1st Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav.   │Body Inf.│1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │2 Bav.
              │         │1 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │         │1 Bav.
              │2 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │         │24 Bav.  │         │24 Bav.
              │         │16 Bav.  │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Bav. Light Cav.  │                   │8 Bav. Light Cav.
              │                   │                   │  (3 Sqns).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Bav. Brig.:      │1 Bav. Brig.:      │1 Bav. Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 1 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 1 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 1 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 7 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 7 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 7 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Bav. Eng. Btn.   │1 Bav. Eng. Btn. (1│1 Bav. Eng. Btn. (1
   Liaisons.  │  (1st and 3d Field│  and 3 Field      │  and 3 Field
              │  Cos.).           │  Cos.):           │  Cos.):
              │                   │ 1 Bav. Pontoon    │ 1 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Engs.            │
              │                   │ 1 Bav. Tel. Detch.│ 1 Bav. Pontoon
              │                   │                   │  Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 1 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.
              │         │1 Bav.   │         │2 Bav.
              │         │24 Bav.  │         │24 Bav.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Bav. Light Cav.  │2 Sqn. 8 Bav. Light
              │  (2d and 3d Sqns).│  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Bav. Art.        │1 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 1 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 1 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 9 Bav. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 123 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 146 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 158 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 3 Bav. Pion. │1 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Cos.             │
              │                   │
              │1 Bav. T. M. Co.   │ 1 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │1 Bav. Searchlight │ 3 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │1 Bav. Tel. Detch. │ 1 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │1 Bav. Pontoon     │ 1 Bav. Searchlight
              │  Engs.            │  Section.
              │                   │1 Bav. Signal
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 1 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 40 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Bav. Ambulance   │1 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │Field Hospital.    │3 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │4 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. At the beginning of the war the 1st Bavarian Division, forming, with
the 2d Bavarian Division, the 1st Bavarian Corps, was part of the 6th
Army (Bavarian Crown Prince). It detrained at Sarrebruecken (Aug. 8–9),
crossed the frontier, sacked Badonviller the 12th, and withdrew to the
north of Sarrebruecken the 17th. It fought at Sarrebruecken the 20th. In
liaison on the left with the Badeners of the 14th Corps, it crossed the
frontier and advanced to Nossoncourt and Xaffévillers (Sept. 6) via
Baccarat. September 12 the division, having been withdrawn, was
reassembled at Peltre (near Metz). It then entrained at Metz the 14th
and 15th, and detrained near Namur, reaching Péronne the 24th.


SOMME.

2. In the last days of September, 1914, at the time of the “race to the
sea,” the two divisions of the 1st Bavarian Corps were in the 2d Army
(Von Buelow), which operated on the Somme in the Péronne region. They
became heavily engaged notably at Combles (Oct. 24) and at Maricourt
(Dec. 17). By November 4 the 1st Bavarian Regiment had had casualties of
63 officers and 2,090 men since the beginning of the war. (Casualty
list.)


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. The 1st Bavarian Division was kept in line on the Somme (Dompierre-
Maricourt) until October, 1915. Its composition was changed—the Body
Infantry Regiment went to the Alpine Corps, the 16th Infantry to the
10th Bavarian Division. In return, the 24th Infantry (a new formation)
was received.

2. The division was taken to the region north of Arras (Neuville-Souchez
sector), where it remained almost seven months (October, 1915-May,
1916).


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. About May, 1916, the division was relieved to the west of Vimy and
sent to the Verdun front, where it took part in the battles near
Douaumont (May 23), and in those of June 1 and 8.

2. Re-formed in the Romagne-sous-les-Côtes area, it reentered line about
June 22 for new attacks. During this offensive the division suffered
severely. It was relieved at the beginning of July.

3. After a short rest behind the Verdun front the division reoccupied
the Apremont-St. Mihiel sector, remaining there until October 11, when
it was reconstituted, receiving large reinforcements (recuperates and
men of the 1916 class).


SOMME.

4. Taken to the Caudry sector (near Cambrai), it was engaged on the
Somme (Sailly-Saillisel, Morval) October 13 to end of November, where
its losses were once again exceedingly heavy.

5. The division reappeared in the region of St. Mihiel (Bois d’Ailly-
Forêt d’Apremont sector) the beginning of December, and remained there
until the early days of May, 1917.


                                 1917.


PLATEAU DE CALIFORNIE.

1. Entrained about May 7 at Vigneulles, it proceeded to the Laon region,
where it was in reserve (May 8–12). The following day it took over the
sector west of Hurtebise, where it participated in several attacks (May
20-June 17), losing heavily therein.

2. The division was relieved June 21 and went to rest south of Mezieres
(La Francheville, etc.), where it was reconstituted.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. July 25 it went back into line on the Champagne front (sector south
of Ste. Marie-a-Py); it did not take part in any important engagements
there.

4. The division was withdrawn December 27.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was recruited in the southern part of Bavaria. The presence
of contingents from the Bavarian Alps was responsible for the withdrawal
of the Body Regiment to form the Alpine Corps.

Despite the losses it suffered during May and June in the Hurtebise
sector, the 1st Bavarian Division may still be considered a good
division. It has had time to reconstitute itself during the long calm
period spent in Champagne (July 25-Dec. 27, 1917).


                                 1918.


ARGONNE.

1. Withdrawn from line, the division was put through a course of
training. It relieved the 80th Reserve Division north of Vauquois
February 17.

2. It was relieved by the 80th Reserve Division about the 1st of March.


ST. QUENTIN.

3. The opening day of the March offensive the division reinforced the
front south of St. Quentin. It was withdrawn the next day.

4. March 23 it came back into line north of Chauny. It was withdrawn
about the 30th.


LASSIGNY.

5. April 6 it relieved the 3d Bavarian Division west of Lassigny. It was
in turn relieved by the 3d Bavarian Division on the 12th.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. Having suffered a great deal in the fighting on the Somme, the
division was taken to a quiet sector in Champagne, relieving the 52d
Reserve Division May 1 north of Souain. About June 30 it was relieved by
the 30th Division.

7. It reinforced the front near Souain July 15. It was withdrawn about
the 31st.


SOISSONS.

8. The division entered line northeast of Soissons August 11.


NOYON.

9. It was relieved by the Jaeger Division about August 19, and moved to
the west, taking over the Cuts sector, southeast of Noyon, August 20,
and was withdrawn the 22d.


COUCY-LE-CHATEAU.

10. August 31 the division was identified at Folembray, northwest of
Coucy-le-Chateau; withdrawn about September 12.


CHAMPAGNE.

11. About September 27 it took over the Manre sector, southeast of
Vouziers, where it remained, fighting, until the signing of the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 1st Bavarian is rated as a first-class assault division; it was
utilized as such throughout 1918. It fought well; its losses were
severe.




                     1st Bavarian Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │2 Bav.   │         │2 Bav.   │         │2 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │2 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │         │3 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │12 Bav.  │         │12 Bav.  │         │
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Bav. Res. Cav.   │1 Bav. Res. Cav.   │1 Bav. Res. Cav.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Bav. Res. F. A.  │1 Bav. Res. F. A.  │1 Bav. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Bav. Res. Eng.   │2d and 4th Bav.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  Btn.             │  Res. Pion. Cos.
              │                   │1 Bav. Res. Pont.  │201 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Eng.             │
              │                   │1 Bav. Res. Tel.   │1 Bav. Res. Pont.
              │                   │  Detch.           │  Engs.
              │                   │                   │1 Bav. Res. Tel.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │2 Bav.   │         │2 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │3 Bav.   │         │3 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Bav. Light Cav.  │3 Sqn. 3 Bav. Light
              │  Rgt. (3d Sqn.).  │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │13 Bav. Art.       │13 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 1 Bav. Res. F. A. │ 1 Bav. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 1 Bav. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (Staff, 1, 2, and
              │                   │  4 Btries.)
              │                   │ 101 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 145 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 147 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│17 Bav. Eng. Btn.: │17 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Bav. Res. Pion. │ 1 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 3 Bav. Res. Pion. │ 17 Bav. Res. Pion
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 17 Bav. Res. Pion.│ 201 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │  Co.              │
              │ 201 T. M. Co.     │ 18 Bav.
              │                   │  Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │1 Bav. Res.        │401 Bav. Signals
              │  Searchlight      │  Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │401 Bav. Tel.      │ 401 Bav. Tel.
              │  Detch.           │  Detch.
              │                   │ 106 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │15 Bav. Ambulance  │15 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │45 Bav. Field      │45 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │48 Bav. Field      │48 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │49 Bav. Field      │
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │750 M. T. Col.     │750 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. The Bavarian Reserve Division (1st Bavarian Reserve Corps, with the
5th Bavarian Reserve Division) was at the beginning of the war part of
the 6th Army (Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria), and detrained in Lorraine
August 13–14. After having helped to check the French offensive in
Lorraine, participated in the battle of August 20, entered Luneville,
and after having fought at Einville, early in September, it went to rest
in the vicinity of the Paris-Avricourt railroad, and later march to Metz
by stages.


ARRAS.

2. September 27–28 the division entrained at Metz and was carried to
Cambrai. Entering line between Douai and Arras, it fought at Izel,
Gavrelle, Rouvroy (Oct. 2–3). On the 5th its right wing was at Souchez,
the whole 1st Bavarian Reserve Corps being then in line north of Arras.
October 23 the two divisions of the corps attacked violently along the
Carency-Roclincourt front; they remained in line until June, 1915, the
1st Bavarian Division being between Roclincourt and Écurie.


                                 1915.


NEUVILLE-ST. VAAST.

1. In May, 1915, the 1st Bavarian Reserve Division was engaged at
Neuville-St. Vaast, when it was reinforced by two battalions of the 99th
Reserve Infantry Regiment. The 2d Bavarian Reserve Regiment suffered
casualties of 14 officers and 1,413 men (casualty list).


LE LABYRINTHE.

2. In June the division fought at the Labyrinth.

3. It continued to hold the sector north of the Scarpe, but moved toward
the south in December, the front of the 1st Bavarian Reserve Corps
extending as far as Blaireville.


                                 1916.

1. The division remained in line east of Arras, straddling the Scarpe
until August, 1916. From May to August, it comprised the 12th Bavarian
Reserve Regiment, instead of the 3d Bavarian Reserve Regiment, loaned
temporarily by the 5th Bavarian Reserve Division.


SOMME.

2. Withdrawn August 8, it went to the Somme. It was engaged the 12th in
the Clery sector, and was relieved as early as the 15th by the 1st Guard
Division after having suffered heavily.

3. The second fortnight in August the division was at rest near Cambrai.
The end of that month and early in September, some elements of the
division were engaged near Clery and Martinpuich in order to facilitate
reliefs.


AISNE.

4. About the middle of September the 1st Bavarian Reserve Corps was
withdrawn from the region of the Somme and sent to the Aisne, where the
1st Bavarian Reserve Division occupied a sector to the west of Craonne
until the beginning of December.

5. Brought back north of the Somme, it sent some elements into line in
the Beaumont-Hamel sector (north of the Ancre, December-January).


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. After sometime at rest, the division went back into line February 27
to the north of Arras (Roclincourt-Neuville-St. Vaast). April 9 it
received the full shock of the British attack—lost the villages of
Thelus and Bailleul and 1,500 prisoners.


LA BASSÉE.

2. Relieved about the 15th of April, the division rested, and then
entered line north of the La Bassée Canal (east of Festubert). It
remained here five months, taking no part in any important engagements
but suffering losses as a result of gas attacks.


FLANDERS.

3. It left for Belgium October 6–7, and took over the Zandvoorde sector
(southeast of Ypres) on the 8th.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 1st Bavarian Reserve Division is a good division, but its combatant
value can not be compared to that of the active Bavarian divisions.


                                 1918.

1. Here it remained in line until February 11, when it was relieved by
the 239th Division and withdrawn to rest in the Menin area, before it
had suffered many casualties.


DIXMUDE.

2. March 9 it relieved the 54th Reserve Division in the Dixmude sector.
It was relieved on the 22d by the extension of the fronts of the
neighboring divisions.

3. It marched to Zedelghem the same day, and reached Seclin on the 23d.
The 28th it came into reserve near Douai. It was undoubtedly intended to
reinforce the German attack on the Arras front on the 28th, but as this
was a complete failure, it returned to the Carvin area.


LYS.

4. April 9 the division reinforced the front near Richebourg-St. Vaast,
and took part in the initial attack on the Lys battle front the same
day. It advanced through Lacouture, Vieille-Chapelle, and had reached
Zelobes April 10. After the first day’s fighting it met with a strong
resistance and suffered heavily. It was relieved near Robecq by the
239th Division, April 18.


LOOS.

5. April 27 the division relieved elements of the 207th Division east of
Loos (south of the La Bassee Canal).


YPRES.

6. It was relieved by the 16th Division about September 27, marched to
Carvin, which it left September 29, and entrained at Seclin for Heule,
whence it marched into line via Moorseele. It was identified near
Roulers October 4. It was relieved by the 6th Cavalry Division October
16.

7. After a rest of only a few days the division came back into line on
the 23d to the south of Deynze, whence it was withdrawn about October
31. It did not return to line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 1st Bavarian Reserve Division took part in no real fighting with the
exception of the Lys offensive, in which it did nothing to distinguish
itself. It would seem that the division does not deserve to be rated
higher than third in a scale of four classes.




                    1st Bavarian Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │13 Bav.  │8 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │4 Bav.
              │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.
              │         │10 Bav.  │         │5 Bav.   │         │5 Bav.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │         │         │
              │14 Bav.  │15 Bav.  │14 Bav.  │15 Bav.  │9 Bav.   │6 Bav.
              │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Mixed  │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │  Ldw.   │
              │         │122 Ldw. │         │122 Ldw. │         │7 Bav.
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Ldw.
              │60 Mixed │60 Ldw.  │13 Bav.  │8 Bav.   │13 Bav.  │8 Bav.
              │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.
              │         │71 Ldw.  │         │10 Bav.  │         │10 Bav.
              │         │         │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │         │60 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1st Sqn. 2d Bav.   │1st Sqn. 2d Bav.
              │                   │  Corps Dist. Ldw. │  Corps Dist. Ldw.
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │2 Ldst. F. A. Abtl.│2 Ldst. F. A. Abtl.│1 Bav. Ldw. F. A.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Ldw. Pion. Co.   │18 Bav. Res. Pion.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Co.
              │                   │(2d Bav. Corps     │3 Bav. Ldw. Pion.
              │                   │  Dist.).          │  Co.
              │                   │                   │301 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │38 Railway Const.
              │                   │                   │  Co.
              │                   │                   │Ldst. Inf. Btn.,
              │                   │                   │  Rosenheim (3d
              │                   │                   │  Btn. 1 Bav. Corps
              │                   │                   │  Dist.).
              │                   │                   │Ldst. Inf. Btn., 2d
              │                   │                   │  Augsburg (10th
              │                   │                   │  Btn. 1 Bav. Corps
              │                   │                   │  Dist.).
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │9 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │4 Bav.
              │  Ers.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.
              │         │6 Bav.   │         │6 Bav.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │7 Bav.   │         │7 Bav.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1st Sqn. 8 Bav.    │1 sq. 8 Bav. Light
              │  Light Cav. Rgt.  │  Cav. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │1 Bav. Ldw. F. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │1 Bav. Ldw. F. A.  │
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(24 Bav.) Eng. Btn.│24 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │18 Bav. Res. Pion. │ 18 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │1 Bav. Ldw. Pion.  │ 1 Bav. Ldw. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │301 Bav. T. M. Co. │ 24 Bav.
              │                   │  Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │501 Bav. Tel.      │ 4 Bav. Res.
              │  Detch.           │  Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │501 Bav. Signals
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 501 Bav. Tel.
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │ 191 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │21 Bav. Ambulance  │21 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │62 Bav. Field      │61 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │62 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │325 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │154 Labor Btn.     │
              │                   │
              │168 Labor Btn.     │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. The origin of the 1st Bavarian Landwehr Division dates from the
stabilization of the Lorraine front after the check of the Germans
before Grand-Couronne in September, 1914.

2. At the beginning of the war the different elements which were to
enter into the composition of the division were employed in Lorraine in
rear of the combatant troops. The 71st Landwehr Regiment came from the
war garrison of Strasburg.

3. These elements grouped in three brigades forming the 1st Bavarian
Landwehr Division, were brought up to the front early in September and
put into line in the Château-Salins sector (from Jallaucourt to the
Rhine-Marne Canal).


                                 1915.


LORRAINE.

1. From that time on the division occupied the same front in Lorraine,
on each side of the Rhine-Marne Canal, broadening or narrowing its front
according to the number of troops in line in the region.

2. During the summer of 1915 its limit was carried to the southeast
gradually as far as the Luneville-Avricourt railway, next to the region
south of Leintrey; to the northeast as far as the western ledge of the
Foret de Bezange.

3. In May, 1915, the 60th Landwehr Bde. was detached from the division,
and replaced by the 5th Bavarian Landwehr Bde. (4th and 5th Bavarian
Landwehr Regiments) coming from the 10th Ersatz Division.


                                 1916.


LORRAINE.

1. South of Leintrey—western edge of the Foret de Bezange. In January,
1916, the 14th Bavarian Landwehr Bde. was detached from the 1st Bavarian
Landwehr Division; the 122d Landwehr Regiment (Wurttemburg) passed to
the 2d Landwehr Division; the 15th Bavarian Landwehr Regiment to the
39th Bavarian Landwehr Division. The brigade was replaced by the 9th
Bavarian Landwehr Bde. (6th and 7th Bavarian Landwehr Regiments). The
division thus became entirely Bavarian; it was increased, shortly after,
by the addition of the 60th Reserve Regiment, which was later
(September) attached to the 221st Division.

2. In July, 1916, the 13th Bavarian Landwehr Bde. was withdrawn from the
division and replaced by battalions of Landsturm.


                                 1917.


LORRAINE.

1. In January, 1917, the division’s sector was shortened—it was limited
on the southeast by the western edge of the Foret de Paroy. In March it
ended northwest of Juvrecourt. In June it extended itself once more to
the southeast, fixing itself finally in July between Juvrecourt and the
eastern edge of the Foret de Paroy; the limits have not varied since
then.

2. About the first of the year the 5th Bavarian Landwehr Regiment passed
to the 2d Bavarian Landwehr Division (new formation—Russian front).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 1st Bavarian Landwehr Division established itself on the Lorraine
front in September, 1914, after the hard fighting in that region had
ceased. It executed some important raids with its assault company,
notably in June, 1917 (Foret de Paroy), and November (Arracourt region).
In general, however, it remained exclusively on the defensive. It is
made up of men whose physical value is often diminished; who have,
consequently, waged only position warfare, and that upon a defensive
front.


                                 1918.


LORRAINE.

1. The division remained in the Parroy sector in Lorraine throughout
1918, and, with the exception of a very few raids executed by the
divisional Stosstrupp, did nothing.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Losses and reinforcements have been few. The strength of the companies
appears to be about 80 men, of an average age of 35–40 years. The 1st
Bavarian Landwehr is rated as a fourth-class division.




                         1st Cavalry Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │1 Cav. (1 C. Dist.).   │3 Cuirassier.
                        │                       │1 Drag.
                        │2 Cav. (1 C. Dist.).   │12 Uhlan.
                        │                       │9 Horse Jag.
                        │43 Cav. (1 C. Dist.).  │8 Uhlan (3 and 5 Sqns.
                        │                       │  detached).
                        │                       │10 Horse Jag. (2 and 3
                        │                       │  Sqns. detached).
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │35 Horse Art. Abt.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│(?) Pion. Detchs.
                        │347 Searchlight Section.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│65 Vet. Hospital.
                        │142 Vet. Hospital.
                        │70 Ambulance Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Odd units.             │152 Cyclist Co.
                        │153 Cyclist Co.
                        │159 Cyclist Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │3 Hus. Rgt. (1, 3, 4, and 6 Sqn.).
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

1. Throughout 1918 the separate elements of this division were used in
police duty in the Ukraine, in Lithuania, and along the Danube.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

As the division did not operate as a division in 1918, no estimate can
be given of its fighting value.




                          1st Naval Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Nav.   │         │1 Nav.   │         │1 Nav.   │
              │2 Nav.   │         │2 Nav.   │         │2 Nav.   │
              │         │         │         │         │         │
              │ The 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6th Marine Fus. Rgts. and the 4th
              │ Marine Inf. Rgt. alternated between the 1st and 2d Naval
              │                         Division.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Ldw. Sqn. (10 C. │                   │
              │  Dist.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 and 2 Ldw. F. A. │Nav. Brig.:        │1 Nav. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Detch. (10 C.    │                   │
              │  Dist.).          │                   │
              │                   │ 1 Nav. F. A. Rgt. │2 Nav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Nav. F. A. Rgt. │3 Nav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Torpedo-Matrosen  │Torpedo-Matrosen
              │                   │  Art. Rgt.        │  Art. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │1 Nav. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │2 Nav. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │165 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │124 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Nav.   │         │1 Mar.   │1 Mat.
              │         │         │         │2 Mat.
              │         │         │         │6 Mat.
                                  │         │
                                  │         │
                                  │         │
 ─────────────┬───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 6 Cuirassier│
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │258 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.│Mar. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │Torpedo-Matrosen   │1 Mat. A. Rgt.
              │  Art. Rgt.        │
              │                   │Marine Corps 1st
              │                   │  Ft. A. M. Col.
              │                   │2 Light A. Col. of
              │                   │  the Mar. F. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Nav. Pion. Btn.: │1 Mar. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Nav. Pion. Co.  │ 1 Mar. Pion. Co.
              │ 2 Nav. Pion. Co.  │ 4 Mar. Pion. Co.
              │ 337 Pion. Co.     │ 1 Entrenching Co.
              │ 165 Nav. T. M. Co.│ 2 Entrenching Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.       │291 Mar. Signal
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 291 Mar. Tel.
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │ 291 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │1 Mar. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.
              │1 Nav. Field       │1 Mar. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │Vet. Hospital
              │                   │  (Ostend).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │1 Sect. Flanders
              │                   │  Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │2 Sec. Flanders
              │                   │  Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │41 Cyclist Co.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                               1914–1917.


BELGIUM.

1. At the beginning of the war the Field Army contained only one naval
division. This division entered Belgium on September 4, 1914, detrained
at Brussels, and on September 6 took up its position to the left of the
corps which was besieging Antwerp. After the taking of the city on
October 10 the division marched along the coast, arrived at a point
between Ostend and Bruges on October 23, and on November 2 relieved the
4th Ersatz Division on the front of Nieuport-St. Georges.

2. On November 24, 1914, the Naval Corps was formed by adding a 2d Naval
Division to the 1st.

3. After this time the Naval Corps occupied the sea front and the sector
of the coast in occupied Flanders. The staffs of the 1st and 2d Naval
Divisions were permanently in command of this sector—the sea front (from
Raversyde to the frontier of Zeeland as far as Maldegem was assigned to
the 1st Naval Division; the front on land from the North Sea to
Schoorbakke, 4 kilometers southeast Nieuport, to the 2d Naval Division).
The six regiments of Marine Fusileers alternated between the two
sectors, and consequently changed from one division to the other.

4. In April, 1917, the three naval infantry regiments were withdrawn
from the 1st and 2d Naval Divisions to organize a new Division, the 3d
Naval Division. These regiments had already formed a provisional
division, from the end of September, 1916, to January, 1917, when they
were engaged on the Somme. After fighting east of Ypres (August to
November, 1917), the 3d Naval Division came into line at Nieuport
(Lombartzyde) to the right of the 2d Naval Division in December.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The Marine or Sailor Fusileers, recruited at the beginning of the war
from among the seamen or the population of the ports, had only a
mediocre combat value at the time.

Since 1917, in consequence of reinforcements taken from the land army,
and also in consequence of reducing the age of the effectives, the
regiments of Naval Fusileers seem to be of better quality.

From a recruiting standpoint, they may be compared with the active
divisions of the German Army.


                                 1918.

1. The division was out of line in 1918 until May 1. From that date
until November 4 it held the extreme right of the German line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. Until the last month of the war
its front was quiet.




                           2d Guard Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │3 Gd.    │1 Gren.  │3 Gd.    │1 Gren.  │3 Gd.    │1 Gren.
              │         │3 Gren.  │         │3 Gren.  │         │3 Gren.
              │4 Gd.    │2 Gren.  │4 Gd.    │2 Gren.  │4 Gd.    │2 Gren.
              │         │4 Gren.  │         │4 Gren.  │         │4 Gren.
              │5 Gd.    │5 Gren.  │         │         │         │
              │         │5 Ft.    │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Gd. Brig.:       │Cav. Rgt.,
              │                   │                   │  Schlotheim.
              │                   │ Body Guard Hus.   │2 and 5 Sqns. 2 Gd.
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Uhlan Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Gd. Uhlan Rgt.  │1 Sqn. 6 Drag. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │Ers. Sqn. 2 Uhlan
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │Ers. Sqn. 1 Horse
              │                   │                   │  Jag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │2 Gd. Brig.:       │2 Gd. Brig.:       │2 Gd. Brig.:
              │ 2 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │ 2 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │ 2 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │ 4 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │ 4 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │ 4 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Gd. Eng. Btn.:   │1 Gd. Eng. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. Gd.     │ 2 Co. Gd. Pion.
              │                   │  Pion. Btn.       │  Btn.
              │                   │ 2 Gd. Pont. Engs. │ 1 Co. 28 Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Btn.
              │                   │ 2 Gd. Tel. Detch. │ 281 Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 2 Gd. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 2 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 2 Gd. T. M. Co.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │3 Gd.    │1 Gren.  │3 Gd.    │1 Gren.
              │         │2 Gren.  │         │2 Gren.
              │         │4 Gren.  │         │4 Gren.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 6 Drag. Rgt.│1 Sqn. Body Gd.
              │                   │  Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │2 Gd. Art. Command:│2 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 2 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │3 Abt. 3 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │(Staff, 10, 11, and
              │                   │  12 Btries.).
              │                   │535 Ft. A. Btry.
              │                   │965 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1385 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1386  Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│102 Eng. Btn.:     │102 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Co. Gd. Pion.   │ 2 Co. Gd. Pions.
              │  Btn.             │
              │ 3 Co. Gd. Pion.   │ 3 Co. Gd. Pions.
              │  Btn.             │
              │ 2 Gd. T. M. Co.   │ 211 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 278, 281, and 298 │2 Gd. Signals
              │  Searchlight      │  Command:
              │  Sections.        │
              │ 2 Gd. Tel. Detch. │ 2 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 73 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │2 Ambulance Co.    │2 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │2 Field Hospital.  │2 Field Hospital.
              │3 Field Hospital.  │3 Field Hospital.
              │2 Gd. Vet.         │2 Gd. Vet.
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │2 M. G. S. S.      │
              │  Detch.           │
              │1 Abtl. 43 Res. F. │
              │  A. Rgt.          │
              │3 Abtl. 43 Res. F. │
              │  A. Rgt.          │
              │1 Abtl. 16 Ft. A.  │
              │  Rgt.             │
              │2 Abtl. 11 Res. Ft.│
              │  A. Rgt. with     │
              │  transport.       │
              │10 Btry. 13 Res.   │
              │  Ft. A. Rgt.      │
              │190 Ft. Batry.     │
              │9 Btry. 12 Res. Ft.│
              │  A. Rgt. with     │
              │  transport.       │
              │1 Btry. 57 Ldw. Ft.│
              │  A. Rgt.          │
              │3 Co. 87 Labor Btn.│
              │1 Co. 8 Ammunition │
              │  Train.           │
              │1133 Wireless      │
              │  Detch. (from 27  │
              │  Div.).           │
              │289 Pigeon Loft.   │
              │3 Balloon Section. │
              │327 Ammunition     │
              │  Train.           │
              │191 M. T. Col.     │
              │216 M. T. Col.     │
              │853 M. T. Col.     │
              │865 M. T. Col.     │
              │188 Depot Supply   │
              │  Train.           │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. Entrained August 9 to 11 (notebooks). Detrained at Beutgenbach (12
kilos east of Malmedy). Entered Belgium August 14. Crossed the Meuse at
Huy August 18. Crossed the Sambre at Auvelais (Aug. 22) on the right of
the 1st Guard Division. Fought at Falisolle and Aisemont the 23d; at
Mettet the 24th. Fought on the 29th at Haution and Vallee-aux-Bleds; on
the 30th at St. Pierre (west of Vervins), on the left of the 1st Guard
Division.

2. From there via Lugny, Boncourt, La Malmaison, Ville-aux-Bois, Sarcy,
Epernay, Avize, Vertus; fought after September 6 at Ecury-le-Repos and
Normee.

3. Retreated on the 9th at Vertus; 10th at Tauxieres; 11th at Thuizy.
Was before Reims until September 30.

4. In Artois in October (Bucquoy, Monchy-aux-Bois, Adinfer), near the
1st Guard Division. Split up in November like the latter; sent one of
its brigades, the 4th, in the region of Ypres (Gheluvelt), and remained
there until the end of December.


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. In January the division was again assembled. At rest at Douai from
the end of January till the middle of February. On the Monchy-aux-Bois-
Puisieux front till the end of March. Entrained March 30 at Cambrai for
Schelestadt (Alsace), where it was placed at rest.

2. In April transferred to Galicia (Neu-Samdek, Apr. 26–30).

3. Beginning on May 2 it took part in Mackensen’s offensive—Battle of
Gorlitz, May 2–3; at Jaroslav, May 16; battle of Krasnostav, July 17;
crossed the Bug August 24. At Zegrje, on the Narew, September 14.

4. On September 16 it returned to Novo-Georgievsk and entrained for the
western front. Detrained at Nivelles September 20.


FRANCE-LORETTE.

5. The division was at rest for one month in Belgium.

6. On October 25 entrained for Orchies and reached Henin-Lietard by
stages and fought at Lorette on November 5 for 6 days. It suffered
casualties again there.

7. The division went into line in the region between Noyon and Roye.


                                 1916.


FRANCE-SOMME.

1. The 2d Guard Division remained in the sector of the region Noyon-Roye
until August, 1916.

2. On August 15 it was sent to the Somme region (Chilly), where it
suffered heavy losses both to the north and to the south of Peronne.

3. From October 1 to the end of December, 1916, it fought for a second
time south of Peronne.


                                 1917.

1. At the end of January the division was sent to rest near Guise. To
the east of Clery-sur-Somme, end of February.

2. Then it held the Siegfried line, near Roisel and St. Quentin, for
five or six days (beginning of March).

3. Entrained for Vervins and sent back to rest (Mar. 16 to Apr. 12).


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

4. About April 12 the division was sent to Sissonne. Went into line
between Hurtebise and Craonne (Apr. 20 to 22), supporting or relieving
the units of the 5th Guard Division. It remained for three weeks in the
region of Craonne and Amifontaine. It suffered new losses and still
heavier ones on Californie Plateau.

5. On May 11 the division went to the Argonne by road (La Harazee, May
17) and was reorganized, receiving replacements from the 613th, 614th,
and 615th Regiments, which were dissolved.


RUSSIA.

6. Withdrawn from the line at the beginning of July and entrained for
the eastern front (from July 4 to 10), via Charleville, Givet, Namur,
Liege, Herbestal, Hanover, Berlin, Posen, Skalmiercyze, Ozidof.

7. Took part in the attack on the Sereth (July 19); relieved August 1
and sent to rest.


RIGA.

8. On August 9 entrained at Horlodylow and took part in the attack on
Uxkull (Sept. 1). On the 4th it entered Riga.


FRANCE.

9. From September 7 to 9 the division entrained for France, via Zanke,
Mitaul Vilna, Kovno, Posen, Berlin, Hanover, Dusseldorf, Aix-la-
Chapelle, Liege, Namur, Givet, Charleville.


LA MALMAISON.

10. Beginning September 21 it was sent to Laon. About the 28th it went
into line in the Malmaison sector. On October 23 the French attack
commenced and caused them very heavy losses (1,800 prisoners, of whom 50
officers, and many wounded). Relieved on the 25th and its regiments,
much reduced in strength, were sent to the Region of Vervins.

11. In the middle of November it held the sector of St. Mihiel, Forests
of Apremont. The regiment received replacements from the interior and
from the Russian front taken from the 226th Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 2d Guard Division had the reputation of being a good division. It
suffered heavy losses in the Aisne sector in May, 1917. However, even
after this attack the morale of the men on the whole seemed quite high.
At the Malmaison attack, October 23, the troops of the division, after
three days, were completely defeated.

During the last battles the division showed only moderate fighting
value.


                                 1918.

1. The 2d Guard Division was relieved by the 201st Division January 11
and went to rest at Metz.

2. Here the division underwent a 10 weeks’ course of training. March 18
it entrained at Metz and traveled via Thionville to St. Amand, where it
detrained on the evening of March 19. It went then via Marchiennes (Mar.
20–21), Montigny (Mar. 21–22), to Lambres, where it arrived the evening
of March 22. After 5 days’ rest here the division moved up to the line
at Vitry-en-Artois (Mar. 27) to reinforce the front for the attack north
of the Scarpe on the 28th. Except for one battalion of the 1st Guard
Grenadier Regiment, the division took part in the fighting, as the
attack was unsuccessful.


MOREUIL.

3. The following day it marched via Arleux-Morchies-Beaumetz-
Haplincourt-Le Fansloy-Les Boeufs-Maricourt, crossing the Somme at
Suzanne-Proyart-Framerville-Caix-Mézières. It went into reserve east of
Mailly-Raineval, where it remained until April 5, when it came into line
north of Rouvrel. It was relieved by the 6th Reserve Division May 2.


AISNE.

4. The division reinforced the Aisne battle front about May 26 to the
west of Vailly. It was relieved, June 17, by the 40th Division.


MARNE.

5. After a rest in the Marle region the division reinforced the front
near Chatillon-sur-Marne July 15. It was withdrawn on the 22d.


SOMME.

6. August 27 the division reinforced the front south of the Somme near
Dompierre. It was relieved, September 3, by the Alpine Corps, after
suffering heavy losses, and losing 1,450 prisoners.


LE CATELET.

7. During the night of September 11–12 it reinforced the front near
Ronssoy (west of Le Catelet). It was withdrawn October 9.


YPRES.

8. After resting a fortnight the division relieved the 52d Reserve
Division at Machelen, October 24. It was relieved by the 6th Cavalry
Division November 4, and did not return to line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 2d Guard Division is rated as a first-class assault division. It
participated in a great deal of heavy fighting during 1918 and always
acquitted itself very well. It was mentioned in the official communiqués
on several occasions. Between the end of August and October 9 it had
lost 2,800 in prisoners alone. Indeed, its losses must have been very
heavy, since there is positive evidence at hand to show that it received
4,000 replacements between August 10 and October 10.




                       2d Guard Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │26 Res.  │15 Res.  │26 Res.  │15 Res.  │26 Res.  │15 Res.
              │         │55 Res.  │         │55 Res.  │         │55 Res.
              │38 Res.  │77 Res.  │38 Res.  │77 Res.  │38 Res.  │77 Res.
              │         │91 Res.  │         │91 Res.  │         │91 Res.
              │ 10 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 10 Res. Jag. Btn. │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │                   │
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │20 Res. F. A. Rgt. │                   │20 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. 2d     │4 Field Co. 2d     │4 and 6 Field Cos.
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No.   │  Pion. Btn. No.   │  2 Pion. Btn. No.
              │  10.              │  10.              │  10.
              │                   │                   │2 Gd. Res. Pontoon
              │                   │                   │  Engs.
              │                   │                   │2 Gd. Res. Tel.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │38 Res.  │15 Res.  │38 Res.  │15 Res.
              │         │77 Res.  │         │77 Res.
              │         │91 Res.  │         │91 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2d Sqn. 2 Res.     │4 Cav. Sqn.
              │  Uhlan Regt.      │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │8 Gd. Art. Command:│116 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 20 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 20 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 23 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (4 and 6
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 714 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 911 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1237 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 and 6 Field Cos. │302 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No.   │
              │  10.              │
              │6 Gd. T. M. Co.    │ 6 Co. 10 Pions.
              │                   │
              │260 Searchlight    │ 6 Gd. T. M. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │402 Tel. Detch.    │ 212 Searchlight
              │  (Gd.).           │  section.
              │                   │402 Gd. Signals
              │                   │  Commands:
              │                   │ 402 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 21 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │268 Ambulance Co.  │268 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │389, 390, 17, and  │45 Res. Field
              │  45 Res. Field    │  Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │17 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │204 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │702 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (15th Reserve: Eighth District—Westphalia. 77th and 91st Reserve: Tenth
                            District—Hanover.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. At the beginning of the war the 2d Reserve Guard Division was grouped
with the 19th Reserve Division in the 10th Reserve Corps. This corps
formed a part of the Second German Army (Von Bülow).

The division entrained at Zulpich August 10, entered Belgium the 14th,
passed the Meuse near Liege the 17th, surrounded Namur on the north,
crossed the Sambre to the west of Charleroi on the 22d, fought at
Marbaix the 23d, and the 29th and 30th at Ribemont and St. Quentin.


MARNE-CHAMPAGNE.

2. The 2d Reserve Guard Division was engaged in the battle of the Marne
between Sezanne and Montmirail (Sept. 6–7). It retreated through Epernay
and fought on the Rheims front. It held its position on this front
(Courcy sector) up to the month of February, 1915.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. Toward the middle of February, 1915, the two brigades of the 2d
Reserve Guard Division were separated. The 26th Brigade went into the
line between Thiescourt and the Oise and the 38th Brigade went to the
forest of the Argonne.

2. Regrouped in Alsace in the vicinity of Schlestadt toward the end of
April, the 2d Reserve Guard Division was transported about May 20 to the
district of La Bassee. It was engaged in the Cuinchy-Givenchy sector
(June-July).

3. About the 1st of August the division was sent to rest east of
Cambrai.

4. In September it occupied the sector of Vingles-Hulluch to the south
of the La Bassee Canal. September 25–26 it took part in the third battle
of the Artois and suffered great losses. Portions of the 2d Reserve
Guard Division participated in the attack near Loos October 8.

5. The division remained in the district of La Bassee up to April, 1916.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. The 2d Reserve Guard Division was relieved about April 7 of the
Cuinchy-Canal sector of La Bassee. After a rest in Belgium in the
vicinity of Tournai, the division was placed in the Gommecourt sector
(Somme), end of May.

2. The Franco-British offensive found it in this sector July 1. It was
severely engaged from July to November, 1916, sometimes in the vicinity
of Pozieres, Thiepval, Bazentin-le-Petit (from July to September),
sometimes farther north, and suffered serious losses (51 per cent of its
personnel).

3. The 2d Reserve Guard Division was maintained in the Gommecourt-
Hebuterne sector during the entire winter of 1916–17. At the end of 1916
it ceded the 55th Reserve Infantry to the 220th Division (organization).


                                 1917.


HINDENBURG LINE.

1. The middle of March, 1917, the 2d Reserve Guard Division participated
in the retreat of the German Army; it went back through Bucquoy,
Lagnicourt, Beaumetz-les-Cambrai toward the Hindenburg line. It
established itself on this line between Queant and Boursies until the
end of May.


FLANDERS.

2. At the beginning of June the division remained at rest several days
in the vicinity of Cambrai, and was then transported to the Thielt,
(Pitthem-Eeghem) district (end of June). At the beginning of July it
approached the front toward Staden.

3. On July 31, certain elements of the division, being surprised and
later reassembled on the western border of the Houthulst forest, counter
attacked in the direction of Bixschoote and suffered rather heavy
losses.

4. The 2d Reserve Guard Division remained in this sector eight days. It
was relieved August 8–9 and sent to rest in the district of Gand
(Lakeren-Ostnieuwekerke) till the beginning of September.

5. About the 10th of September it was sent into the line on the front
west of Passchendaele (southeast of St. Julien). It was withdrawn from
this position toward the end of the month in order to go in again,
almost immediately, to the southeast of Armentieres.

6. It remained there until the end of November, after which it
reappeared on the front west and north of Passchendaele in December.

7. It was relieved February 1, 1918, and went into the district of
Roulers.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 2d Reserve Guard Division was always considered as being an
excellent division because it had always fought well, though it showed
only mediocre fighting qualities to the north of Ypres in 1917.

The 31st of July it counterattacked without energy and without success
in the direction of Bixschoote. During the approach, a great number of
men remained in the rear.

Following this, its attitude was passive.


                                 1918.


FLANDERS.

1. The division remained in the Passchendaele sector until withdrawn
about January 9.

2. It came back into line, relieving the 199th Division, during the
night of January 23–24, north of Passchendaele. It was relieved by the
239th Division February 1.

3. February 7 it relieved the 239th Division; relieved by 41st Division
March 3. It then was trained for a fortnight.


CAMBRAI.

4. March 21 the division reinforced the Cambrai front near St. Leger,
fighting, with heavy losses, until the 26th.


ARRAS.

5. It came back into line west of Neuville-Vitasse about April 3,
relieving the 236th Division. April 29 the division was relieved by the
extension of the fronts of the neighboring divisions.

6. It went to the Douai area and rested there until coming into line in
the Gavrelle sector during the night of June 7–8; it relieved the 187th
Division. It was relieved by the 187th Division June 20 and went to be
reconstituted in the Tournai area, receiving a draft from the 427th
Infantry Regiment and another of over 500 men from Germany.

7. The division relieved the 5th Bavarian Reserve Division, near
Bucquoy, August 7. During the heavy fighting that followed it lost 2,400
in prisoners alone. It was withdrawn August 25.

8. September 2 it reinforced the front near the Arras-Cambrai road,
whence it was withdrawn about the middle of the month.


LA BASSÉE.

9. It then relieved the 9th Reserve Division near Neuve-Chapelle
September 26.


FLANDERS.

10. October 5 prisoners belonging to the division were identified near
Ledeghem. It remained there, being identified by prisoners November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The general commanding the 2d Guard Reserve Division was decorated in
February and again in May. The last decoration was Pour le Mérite, and
was accompanied by promotion. August 15 Gen. Petersdorff reprimanded the
division because, as he said, “within 14 days, 1 noncommissioned officer
and 10 other ranks have been missing from the division * * *.” It is
considered as a second-class division.




                              2d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │3.       │4 Gren.  │3.       │4 Gren.  │3.       │4 Gren.
              │         │44.      │         │44.      │         │33 Fus.
              │4.       │33 Fus.  │4.       │33 Fus.  │         │44.
              │         │45.      │         │45.      │         │3 Landst.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │10 Horse Jag. Rgt. │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │2 Brig.:           │2 Brig.:           │2 Brig.:
              │ 1 F. A. Rgt.      │ 1 F. A. Rgt.      │ 1 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 37 F. A. Rgt.     │ 37 F. A. Rgt.     │ 37 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 1:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 1:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 1 Pion. │ 2 Co. 1 Pion. Btn.
              │                   │  Btn.             │
              │                   │ 2 Pontoon, Engrs. │ 2 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 2 Tel. Detch.     │ 2 Pontoon, Engrs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 2 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │3.       │4 Gren.  │3.       │4 Gren.
              │         │33 Fus.  │         │33 Fus.
              │         │44.      │         │44.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │10 Horse Jag. Rgt. │10 Horse Jag. Rgt.
              │  (2d Sqn.).       │  (2 Sqn.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │2 Art. Command:    │2 Art. Command:
              │ 1 F. A. Rgt.      │ 1 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 4 Abt. 6 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 872 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1,364 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1,392 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Pion. Btn. No. 1:│1 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Co. 1 Pion.     │ 2 Co. 1 Pion.
              │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 1 Pion.     │ 4 Co. 1 Pion.
              │ 2 T. M. Co.       │ 4 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 2 Searchlight     │ 2 Signals Command.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 2 Tel. Detch.     │ 2 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 159 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │5 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │11 Field Hospital. │11 Field Hospital.
              │12 Field Hospital. │12 Field Hospital.
              │195 Vet. Hospital. │195 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │535 M. T. Col.     │535 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │150 Bav. Anti-     │
              │  Aircraft Section.│
              │Cyclist Detch. 2   │
              │  Landst. Btn.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (First District—Oriental Prussia.)


                                 1914.

The first and second divisions formed the 1st Army Corps.


RUSSIA.

1. At the beginning of the war the 2d Division was sent to the Russian
front. Up to the month of November it participated in the operations in
Oriental Prussia (Tannenberg, Aug. 27–29).

2. In November, 1914, the 2d Division, minus one brigade, which
continued to hold its old sector, was withdrawn and included in the
group which attacked in the direction of Lodz and operated between the
Vistula and the Warta; continuing its activities, it attempted to cross
the Bzura-Rawka opposite Warsaw in the district of Lowicz.


                                 1915.

1. At the beginning of February, 1915, it reappeared in Oriental Prussia
and participated in the offensive which ejected the Russians from this
Province. It was engaged in its entirety in the district of Lyck and
marched upon Augustowo and Grodno.

2. The Russian counter attack launched in the vicinity of Prasnysz
toward the end of March drew the 2d Division to this sector.

3. In July during the development of the Hindenburg offensive, it
emerged from the Ostrolenka-Pultusk line and proceeded in a northerly
direction.

4. Upon the stabilization of the front the 2d Division held a sector
between Illukst and Lake Drisviaty (Dwinsk District).


                                 1916.

1. At the end of July, 1916, portions of the 2d Division were assigned
to duty in Galicia to oppose the Russian advance.


                                 1917.

1. The reconstituted 2d Division was engaged in the Mitau sector up to
the end of January, 1917; all its units were identified in the vicinity
of Kalnzen.

2. On February 8 it entrained at Mitau for the western front.
(Itinerary: Chavli, Kovno, Insterburg, Konigsberg, Stettin, Hamburg,
Munster, Aix-la-Chapelle, Liège, Louvain, Bruxelles, Audenarde.)


BELGIUM.

3. Detrained February 13 and remained at rest up to the end of March. It
received reinforcements of various classes of men (wounded,
convalescents, class 1917 reservists).

4. The division occupied the Wytschaete sector from the 25th of March to
the beginning of June. (On April 15 and May 10 and 15 it received the
first reinforcements from the class of 1918, the last having had only
three months’ instruction; in all, 4,460 men between January 1 and June
1.) On June 7 it left 2,825 men in the hands of British troops.

5. On June 10 the 2d Division retired from the Belgian front. It was
placed at rest in the district of Audenarde in June and then entrained
for the eastern front (end of June).


RUSSIA.

6. It arrived in Russia at the beginning of July and was put at rest in
the district of Vilna. On July 14 it was identified in the Illukst
District.


FRANCE.

7. It returned to France on the 25th of November. It entrained on this
date at Kovno and was transported over the following itinerary:
Insterburg, Thorn, Posen, Frankfort-sur-Oder, Berlin, Paderborn,
Crefeld, Aix-la-Chapelle, Liège, Namur, Vouziers (Nov. 30).

8. On December 27 it relieved the 1st Bavarian Division in the Souain-
Somme-Py sector.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Except during the period March-June, 1917, when the 2d Division was
fighting in Belgium, it continuously occupied the Russian front from the
beginning of the war till December, 1917.


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 2d Division remained in line in the Souaine-Somme-Py region until
relieved by the 87th Division about April 2. It went back to the Army
depot at Semide, where it stayed about a week drilling and maneuvering.
April 10 it entrained at Machault, and went via Rethel, Liart, Marle,
and detrained at La Ferté-Chevresis, encamping in the vicinity. It
traveled by St. Simon (Apr. 11), Ham, Solente (5 km. east of Roye), and
Laboissiére, where it stayed until April 30.


MONTDIDIER.

2. May 1 the division relieved the 51st Reserve Division at Monchel,
south of Montdidier; relieved August 31.


ST. QUENTIN.

3. The division was identified in line near Essigny-le-Grand, south of
St. Quentin, September 5; it was relieved about the 15th by the
extension of the fronts of the neighboring divisions.

4. During the night of September 20–21 it went back into line north of
St. Quentin, in the Bellenglise sector. It was withdrawn about the 10th.

5. The division rested for a fortnight in the Avesnes area, then came
into line October 24, relieving the 19th Reserve Division east of
Ribemont (southeast of St. Quentin). It was withdrawn from line early in
November and did not return.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 2d is rated as a third-class division. It was used in a great deal
of heavy fighting and suffered severe losses (July 23 it lost 54
officers and 1,800 men in prisoners alone west of the Avre; the 9th and
10th of August it lost 443 prisoners; in its engagements between August
8 and October 1 it lost over 1,500 prisoners). Nevertheless, it was
never used as an attacking division, but confined itself to holding the
sectors allotted it; on account of its weakened condition and lowered
morale (there are several cases of insubordination on record), it did
not acquit itself any too well.




                         2d Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │53 Mixed │124 Ldw. │53 Mixed │124 Ldw. │53 Mixed │124 Ldw.
              │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │
              │         │125 Ldw. │         │125  Ldw.│         │125 Ldw.
              │9 Bav.   │6 Bav.   │9 Bav.   │6 Bav.   │   (.)   │120 Ldw.
              │  Mixed  │  Ldw.   │  Mixed  │  Ldw.   │         │
              │Ldw.     │7 Bav.   │Ldw.     │7 Bav.   │         │122 Ldw.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │
              │         │         │         │         │ 6 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Ldw. Sqn. (13 C. │3 Ldw. Sqn. (13 C. │3 Ldw. Sqn. (13 C.
              │  Dist.).          │  Dist.).          │  Dist.).
              │                   │                   │3 Landst. Sqn. (13
              │                   │                   │  C. Dist.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ldw. Btry.       │1 Ldw. Btry.       │2 Ldw. Rgt.
              │  Landst. Btn. (13 │  Landst. Btn. (13 │
              │  C. Dist.).       │  C. Dist.).       │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │6 Co. 13 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │3 Co. 18 Pion.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │302 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │54 Ldw.  │120 Ldw. │54 Ldw.  │120 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │122 Ldw. │         │122 Ldw.
              │         │125 Ldw. │         │125 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Ldw. Sqn. (13 C. │4 Sqn. 20 Uhlan
              │  Dist.).          │  Rgt.
              │4 Sqn. 20 Uhlan    │
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │142 Art. Command:  │2 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 2 Ldw. Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(402) Eng. Btn.:   │402 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 13     │ 1 Ldw. Co. 13 C.
              │  Pion.            │  Dist. Pions.
              │ 5 Ldw. Co. 13     │ 5 Ldw. Co. 13 C.
              │  Pion.            │  Dist. Pions.
              │ 302 T. M. Co.     │ 302 T. M. Co.
              │ 299 Searchlight   │ 224 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 502 Tel. Detach.  │502 Signals
              │                   │  Command.
              │                   │ 502 Tel. Detach.
              │                   │ 176 Wireless
              │                   │  Detach.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │572 Ambulance Co.  │572 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Ldw. Field Hosp.   │254 Field Hospital.
              │  Vet. Hospital.   │
              │                   │25 Ldw. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │502 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │722 M. T. Col.     │772 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (Thirteenth District—Wurttemberg.)


                                 1914.


ARGONNE.

1. The 2d Landsturm Division (Franke Division) forms a part of the
Argonne group and has continuously occupied sectors of this district
since September, 1914. At the beginning of the campaign it comprised a
Wurttemberg and a Bavarian brigade. Engaged at Etain August 24, 1914, it
crossed the Meuse at Stenay on the 31st.

2. Beginning with September it occupied the line in the woods of Cheppy
and Malancourt.


                                 1915.


ARGONNE.

1. Vauquois-bois de Malancourt sector.

2. At the end of September, 1915, portions of the division (one
battalion of the 6th and one of the 7th Bavarian Landsturm) were
assigned to service in the district of Massiges; they rejoined the
Vauquois sector at the end of October.


                                 1916.


ARGONNE.

1. Vauquois-bois d’Avocourt and Malancourt sector.

2. At the beginning of 1916 the 2d Landsturm Division was reconstituted
with exclusively Wurttemberg elements, including the 120th Landsturm,
withdrawn from the Bavarian Ersatz Division, and the 122d Landsturm,
proceeding from the 1st Bavarian Landsturm Division. The 9th Bavarian
brigade went over to the 1st Bavarian Landsturm Division.


                                 1917.


ARGONNE.

1. In the Cheppy-bois d’Avocourt wood sector.

2. At the end of August, 1917, the 2d Landsturm Division changed places
with the 2d Bavarian Division and took the Nord Four sector of Paris-
Bolante-Courte-Chausse.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Sector division. Did not leave Argonne from the beginning of the war. On
several occasions it furnished young men to active and reserve
Wurttemberg regiments, replacing them by older Landsturm men.


                                 1918.


ARGONNE.

The division remained in line in the Apremont sector, engaging in but
little activity until the American attack of September 26. From that
time on until it was withdrawn, October 25, it fought a great deal.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Most of the young men of the division were taken from it to be sent to
other organizations early in the year. October 12 the corps commander
telegraphed the King of Wurttemberg (the 2d Landwehr Division comes from
Wurttemberg): “The 2d Landwehr Division * * * has particularly
distinguished itself by its bravery and intrepidity during the last
combats in the Argonne and has thus contributed toward the failure of
the enemy’s attempt to break through.” It was badly used on the opening
day of the American attack, but it fought hard. It loaned companies to
various other divisions, including the 1st and 5th Guard Divisions, and
for days at a time these Landwehr troops were making the greatest
resistance in the Aire Valley. While the division lost only 795
prisoners during the offensive, its total losses undoubtedly are above
5,000, there being evidence to show that many companies did not have
more than 25 men, there being only three companies per battalion, and—in
at least one case—only two battalions in the regiment. It is rated as a
fourth-class division.




                         2d Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │3 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │3 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │12 Bav.
              │         │20 Bav.  │         │20 Bav.  │         │15 Bav.
              │4 Bav.   │12 Bav.  │4 Bav.   │12 Bav.  │         │20 Bav.
              │         │15 Bav.  │         │15 Bav.  │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Bav. Light Cav.  │                   │3 Sqns. 4 Bav.
              │  Rgt.             │                   │  Light Cav. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │2 Bav. Brig.:      │2 Bav. Brig.:      │2 Bav. Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 4 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 4 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 2 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 9 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 9 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 9 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Field Co. 1 Bav. │2 Field Co. 1 Bav. │2 and 4 Field Cos.
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn.       │  Pion. Btn.       │
              │                   │2 Bav. Pont. Engs. │1 Bav. Pion. Btn.
              │                   │2 Bav. Tel. Detch. │2 Res. Co. 19
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │                   │2 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │2 Bav. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │2 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │4 Bav.   │12 Bav.  │4 Bav.   │12 Bav.
              │         │15 Bav.  │         │15 Bav.
              │         │20 Bav.  │         │20 Bav.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 and 3 Sqns. 8    │3 Sqns. 8 Bav.
              │  Bav. Light Cav.  │  Light Cav. Rgt.
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │2 Bav. Art.        │2 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 9 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 9 Nav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 3 Bav. Res.
              │                   │  Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 151 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 153 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 160 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 and 4 Bav. Pion. │7 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Cos.             │
              │2 Bav. T. M. Co.   │ 2 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │2 Bav. Tel. Detch. │ 4 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │2 Bav. Signals
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 2 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 107 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │2 Bav. Ambulance   │2 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │Field Hospital.    │6 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │8 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │682 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (First Bavarian District—Southwest of Bavaria, Bavarian Swabia.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. At the beginning of August the 2d Bavarian Division which, with the
1st Bavarian Division, formed the 1st Bavarian Corps, was a part of the
army of the Crown Prince of Bavaria (6th Army). The 3d Brigade, covering
troops, detrained at Reding near Saarburg, the 3d of August. On the 9th
the division was at its full strength. It proceeded to the frontier,
reached Badonviller, and retired as far as Gosselming (west of Saarburg)
the 17th of August, gave battle there on the 20th, and recrossed the
frontier. It advanced as far as Xaffévillers (Sept. 7), whence it
retired to Morhange (Sept. 10). On September 15 the division entrained
at Metz. It detrained near Namur, gained Peronne by stages, and was
engaged at Foucaucourt the 24th.


SOMME.

2. Together with the 1st Bavarian Corps it was attached to the 2d Army
(Von Bülow), operating on the Somme in the district of Peronne. It took
part in the fiercely contested battles which took place there but a
short time after the stabilization of the front and suffered serious
losses. At the beginning of the campaign, October 30, the 12th Infantry
had 50 officers and 1,910 men who were unable to take part in action
(lists of losses).

3. The division was maintained in this district up to the month of
October, 1915, first to the south of the Somme, later, at the beginning
of November, 1914, between Dompierre and Maricourt.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. In April, 1915, the division was reduced to three regiments through
the cession of the 3d Infantry to the 11th Bavarian Division. Between
the 10th and 15th of October, 1915, the 2d Bavarian Division was placed
on the Artois front in the Neuville-Souchez sector.

2. About the 20th of December it was in the line at Bailleul-Sire-
Berthoult between the western part of the Lille road and the Arras road.

3. It remained there until the beginning of May, 1916.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. At this date it was relieved and transported to Verdun. It
participated in the violent battles which took place there in May and
June in the vicinity of Douaumont and suffered serious losses (50 per
cent of its personnel). It was reconstituted in June in the district of
Merke-Romagne-sur-les-Cotes (reinforcement of from 50 to 100 men per
company), and went back to the line near Thiaumont. It suffered serious
losses in the attack of June 23 (the companies of the 12th Bavarian
Regiment were reduced to about 40 men).


LORRAINE.

2. The 2d Bavarian Division was withdrawn from this zone of combat about
the 15th of July and was sent to the Apremont-St. Mihiel sector, where
it was reconstituted. It received numerous reinforcements (convalescents
and class 16 men). During this period, which extends up to October 15,
it did not take part in any serious operation.


SOMME.

3. At the end of October it was transported to the Somme (Sailly-
Saillisel sector), where it was again put to a severe test.

4. After staying a month in the Somme district it reoccupied the lines
in the St. Mihiel sector at the beginning of December.


                                 1917.


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

1. The 2d Bavarian Division was withdrawn from the St. Mihiel sector
between the 2d and 5th of May, 1917, and entrained at Mars-la-Tour on
the 6th, whence it was transported via Conflans to Montcornet, where,
during the night of the 8th, it gained the sector situated to the east
of Hurtebise.

2. From the 9th on the 2d Bavarian Division engaged some of its elements
on the salient northeast of Californie Plateau (May 9 and 10).

3. The division occupied this sector up to the end of May and
participated in serious engagements notably those of the 13th and 22d of
May to the northwest of the plateau. It was put to a very severe test.
(The 9th Company of the 20th Battalion was reduced to 45 men.)


ARGONNE.

4. The 2d Bavarian Division was relieved at the beginning of June and
sent to rest for 15 days at Camp Sissonne; later it was transported to
the Argonne, where it occupied the Grande Courte-Chausse sector. During
this rest it received two reinforcements—700 to 800 men June 28 and 300
men in July.

5. At the end of August it changed sectors and went into the line toward
Bois d’Avocourt (Bois de Cheppy).


MEUSE.

6. The division was withdrawn from this sector at the end of October and
remained in repose in the vicinity of Stenay up to the middle of
November, whence it was directed to the sector west of the Bois-le-
Chaume. The 12th Bavarian Regiment, which had been sent in reserve to
the southeast of Altkirch about the 10th of November to ward off an
expected French attack in Alsace, rejoined the division December 6.

7. The 2d Bavarian Division remained in this sector (southeast of
Beaumont) up to January, 1918, and then went to rest in the district of
Longwy.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 2d Bavarian Division participated on the 9th and 10th of May, 1917,
in violent but unsuccessful counterattacks on the salient northeast of
the Californie Plateau. It appears that the Bavarians were always placed
in the most dangerous positions and that they were sacrificed by the
Prussians.

In spite of this condition the 2d Bavarian Division still showed itself
as a good division (July, 1917).


                                 1918.


MEUSE.

1. The division remained in line north of the Bois des Fosses until
relieved by the 19th Reserve Division, January 14. It went then to the
Longwy region, where it was put through a stiff course of training in
open warfare.


AMIENS.

2. March 23 it entrained at Audun-le-Roman, and traveled via Longwy-
Sedan-Charleville-Hirson-Anor-Avesnes-Le Cateau-Bertry-Caudry to
Cambrai, where it detrained March 24–25. At first the division marched
in the direction of Bapaumes, but was diverted in a southerly direction
on the way and passed through Le Transloy-Sailly-Saillisel-Péronne-
Villers-Carbonnel-Estrees-Foucaucourt and billeted at Beaucourt-en-
Santerre on the night of March 30–31. April 2 it attacked at Morisel,
and two days later to the southwest of Morisel. It fought then until the
15th, when it side-slipped to the north, relieving the 54th Division,
its place being taken by the 15th Division. It was relieved about May 4
by the 21st Division.

3. It moved to the area southeast of Ghent, and there was reconstituted
and trained. June 2, it relieved the 14th Bavarian Division in the
Morisel sector. It was relieved the middle of the month by the extension
of fronts of the neighboring divisions.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. It rested in rear of the front in Champagne for about a month and
then entered line in the Navarin sector (north of Souain), being
identified by prisoners, July 15. It was withdrawn on the 20th.


VESLE.

5. August 4 the division relieved the 22d Division at Jonchery (on the
Vesle, east of Fismes). It remained in line, taking part in the general
retirement, until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 2d Bavarian is one of the very best German shock divisions. It was
called upon to do a great deal of heavy fighting, and always acquitted
itself well. It suffered severe losses in consequence, but these were
made good as long as the German High Command had replacements at its
disposal.




                     2d Bavarian Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │9 Bav. Ldw.  │2 Bav. Ldw.  │9 Bav. Ldw.  │2 Bav. Ldw.
              │             │5 Bav. Ldw.  │             │5 Bav. Ldw.
              │             │10 Bav. Ldw. │             │10 Bav. Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │5th Sqn. 4th Bav. Light    │3 Sqn. 1 Bav. Res. Cav.
              │  Cav.                     │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │2 Bav. Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 2 Bav. Ldw. F. A. Rgt.    │
              │ 811 and 905 F. A. Btries. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(25 Bav.) Eng. Btn.:       │25 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 2 Bav. Ldw. Pion. Co.     │ 2 Bav. Ldw. Pion. Co.
              │ 3 Bav. Ldw. Pion. Co.     │ 3 Bav. Ldw. Pion. Co.
              │ 302 Bav. T. M. Co.        │ 12 Bav. Searchlight
              │                           │  Section.
              │ 502 Tel. Detch.           │502 Signals Command:
              │                           │ 502 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │24 Bav. Ambulance Co.      │24 Bav. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │17 Bav. Field Hospital.    │63 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │63 Bav. Field Hospital.    │17 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │32 Vet. Hospital.          │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                 │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Attached.    │156 Labor Btn.             │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                               (Bavaria.)


                                 1917.

The 2d Bavarian Landwehr Division was formed in Lorraine at the end of
December, 1916, and the beginning of January, 1917. Two of its
regiments, the 5th Bavarian Landwehr and the 10th Bavarian Landwehr,
were assigned respectively to the 1st Bavarian Landwehr Division and the
33d Reserve Division, at that time on the Lorraine front. The 2d
Bavarian Landwehr was ceded by the 6th Bavarian Landwehr Division, which
held a Vosges sector.


RUSSIA.

1. As soon as it was constituted the 2d Bavarian Landwehr Division was
transported to the Eastern front via Frankfort and Leipzig.


COURLAND.

2. Directed to Courlande and attached to the 8th Army it entered the
line in the vicinity of Friedrichstadt (middle of January, 1917) and
remained in this district up till February, 1918. In September it
participated in the operations against Riga. In December a number of men
were detached in order to reinforce the 10th Bavarian Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

It remained on the Russian front from the time of its formation
(January, 1917). It held the calm sector of Courlande in 1917; it
occupied Livonia in 1918 (May). Men under 35 years of age were withdrawn
from the 5th Bavarian Landwehr in December, 1917 (letter). It is rated
as a 4th class division.




                          2d Cavalry Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │22 Cav. (11 C. D.).    │5 Drag. Rgt.
                        │                       │14 Hus. Rgt.
                        │25 Cav. (18 C. Dist.). │23 Gd. Drag. Rgt. (1
                        │                       │  Sqn. Detch.).
                        │7 Bav. Cav.            │24 Gd. Drag. Rgt. (3
                        │  (Siebenburgische).   │  Sqn. detached).
                        │                       │4 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.
                        │                       │  (3 Sqn. detached).
                        │                       │5 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.
                        │                       │  (3 Sqn. detached).
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │15 Horse Art. Abt.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│2 Cav. Pion. Detch.
                        │7 Cav. Pion. Detch.
                        │200 Bav. T. M. Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│21 Ambulance Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Odd units.             │2 M. G. Btry.
                        │3 M. G. Btry.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │4 Jag. Btn.
                        │1 Cyclist Co. 3 Jag. Btn.
                        │2 Cyclist Co. 3 Jag. Btn.
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

1. The division was in the Stochod sector until February 28, when it
advanced through Kiev and Kharhov to Rostov, where it was on August 4.
At this date the division occupied the area between Kharkov and Rostov.
The troops were frequently attacked by armed bands or by mobs. In this
way they suffered some heavy losses. The German cruiser _Goeben_, which
had been supporting them, was damaged by fire and had to put into
Constantinople.

Nothing was known of the division’s movements after August, 1918.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was considered as 4th class.




                           2d Naval Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │3 Nav.        │              │3 Nav.        │
              │4 Nav.        │              │4 Nav.        │
              │              │              │              │
              │ The 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6th Marine Fus. Rgts. and the 4
              │ Marine Inf. Rgt. alternated between the 1st and 2d Naval
              │                         Divisions.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │Marine E. A. Abt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │3 Nav. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │27 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │3 Nav.        │              │3 Mar.        │3 Mat.
              │4 Nav.        │              │              │4 Mat.
              │              │              │              │5 Mat.
                                            │              │
                                            │              │
                                            │              │
 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │4 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Mar. F. A. Rgt.            │3 Mar. Art. Rgt.
              │2 Mar. F. A. Rgt.            │
              │3 Mar. F. A. Rgt.            │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Nav. Pion. Btn.:           │2 Mar. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 3 Nav. Pion. Co.            │ 2 Mar. Pion. Co.
              │ 4 Nav. Pion. Co.            │ 3 Mar. Pion. Co.
              │ 377 Pion. Co.               │ 3 Entrenching Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │ 4 Entrenching Co.
              │                             │292 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 292 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.                │2 Mar. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │Field Hospital.              │3 Mar. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │4 Mar. Field Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │Coast Defense Btn.           │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1915.


BELGIUM.

1. The 2d Naval Division, formed November 24, 1914, was a part of the
Naval Corps at this time.

Since its formation the 6th Naval Fusileer Regiments of the Corps
alternate in Flanders between the coast sector (2d Naval Division) and
the sea front (1st Naval Division).


                                 1916.

2. In September, 1916, the 3d Naval Infantry Regiment was transferred to
the Naval Division, which later became the 3d Naval Division, engaged on
the Somme.


                                 1917.


FLANDERS.

Sector of the coast and sea front. The staff of the 2d Naval Division
remained in charge of the coast sector.


                                 1918.

1. In early March the division was relieved in its sector southeast of
Nieuport and took over the coast sector from the 3d Naval Division.
Elements of the division reinforced the German attacking forces north of
Bixschoote on April 17.

2. After October 15, the division retreated toward Ostend and Maldeghem.
It was last identified at Wachtebeke on November 2. On the day of the
armistice it was considered to be in reserve of the 4th Army.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                         3d Guard Division.[2]


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Gd.    │5 Ft.    │5 Gd.    │5 Ft.    │6 Gd.    │Gd. Fus.
              │         │5 Gren.  │         │5 Gren.  │         │Lehr Rgt.
              │6 Gd.    │Gd. Fus. │6 Gd.    │Gd. Fus. │         │9 Gren.
              │         │Lehr Rgt.│         │Lehr Rgt.│         │
              │  (Instruction.)   │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Gd. Res. Uhlan Rgt.│                   │Gd. Res. Uhlan Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (?Sqns.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Gd. F. A. Rgt.   │3 Brig.:           │3 Brig.:
              │6 Gd. F. A. Rgt.   │ 5 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │ 5 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │(Formed of the     │ 6 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │ 6 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Juterbog         │                   │
              │  Instruction Rgt.)│                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(?) Pion. Co.      │(?) Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │3 Gd. Pont. Engs.  │3 Gd. T. M. Co.
              │                   │3 Gd. Tel. Detch.  │3 Gd. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │3 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │75 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │6 Gd.    │Gd. Fus. │6 Gd.    │Lehr Rgt.
              │         │Lehr Rgt.│         │Fus. Rgt.
              │         │9 Gren.  │         │9 Gren.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3d Sqn. Gd. Res.   │1 Sqn. 2 Gd. Drag.
              │  Uhlan Rgt.       │  Rgt.
              │1st Sqn. 2 Gd.     │
              │  Drag. Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(*) Art. Command:  │5 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 5 Gd. F. A. Rgt.  │1 Abt. 2 Gd. Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │(Staff, 1 and 3
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │
              │                   │936 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1347 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(104) Pion. Btn.   │104 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 28 Pions.   │ 1 Co. 28 Pions.
              │ 274 Pion. Co.     │ 274 Pion. Co.
              │ 3 Gd. T. M. Co.   │ 198 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 280 Searchlight   │3 Gd. Signals
              │  Section.         │  Command:
              │ 3 Gd. Tel. Detch. │ 3 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │ 55 Tel. Detch.    │ 90 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │7 Ambulance Co.    │265 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │265 Ambulance Co.  │393 Field Hospital.
              │393 Ambulance Co.  │35 Field Hospital.
              │Field Hospital.    │3 Gd. Vet.
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │532 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │75 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Section.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 2:

  Organized in August, 1914; elements taken from 1st and 2d Guard
  Divisions.


                                HISTORY.


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. In August, 1914, the 3d Guard Division was first directed to the
Western Front. It fought below Namur.


RUSSIA.

2. The 27th of August the division was transported to Silesia via
Oriental Prussia. It took part in the invasion of southern Poland.

3. The group of armies of which it formed a part was turned back and was
obliged to retire to Lodz.

4. During the winter of 1914–15 it took part in the severe engagements
on the Bzura.


                                 1915.

1. At the beginning of 1915 the 3d Guard Division was dismembered; the
5th Brigade was sent to Oriental Prussia; the 6th Brigade, to the south
of the Carpathians, was engaged in the Uzsok defile distinct.

2. In March, 1915, the 6th Brigade alone formed the 3d Guard Division,
with the addition of the 9th Grenadier Regiment to its own two
regiments. Thus formed, the 3d Guard Division took part in the campaign
of the summer of 1915. (Carpathians Oriental Galicia. Linsingen’s army.)

3. The division took up its position before Tarnopol and passed the
winter of 1915–16 there. (Bothmer’s army.)


                                 1916.


FRANCE.

1. In April, 1916, the 3d Guard Division was transported to the Western
Front. It occupied a sector in Champagne and took part in no serious
engagements.

2. It was sent to rest at Valenciennes the 1st of June.


SOMME.

3. The 1st of July (beginning of the Franco-British offensive) the 3d
Guard Division went into the line on the Somme. It was put to a severe
test there, particularly in the Thiepval district (57.5 per cent loss).

4. After the Somme it was sent to the Dixmude front.


GALICIA.

5. It was transported to Galicia (beginning of September) by the
following itinerary: Liège, Cologne, Leipzig, Dresden, Cracow, Przemysl.

6. At Halicz the 3d Guard Division took part in the German
counteroffensive, and again suffered great losses.


FRANCE.

7. It was sent back to the Western Front on the 24th of November by the
following itinerary: Lemberg, Jaroslaw, Gorlitz, Dresden, Chemnitz,
Nurnberg, Heilbronn, Strasbourg, Mulhouse, Rheinweiler, and having
arrived there the 20th of November, was sent to rest for a month.


                                 1917.


LORRAINE.

1. Beginning with January and up to April 6, 1917, the division occupied
the sector of the forest of Parroy.

2. The 8th of April it entrained at Metz, and arrived at Cambrai via
Montmedy, Sedan, and Charleville.


ARTOIS.

3. Engaged in action before Arras in order to repulse the English
offensive from April 15 on, it participated in severe battles (May).

4. On the 18th of May the division was relieved and sent into the
Cambrai district. After a short period of repose it occupied the
Pronville-Inchy-en-Artois sector (June 1–22).

5. It was sent in reserve to the Bruges sector (June 22).

6. It was transported to Thourout the 9th of July and remained there at
rest until July 29.


YPRES.

7. On the 31st of July, the date of the great British attack, the 3d
Guard Division suffered very heavy losses (1,000 prisoners) in relieving
the 23d Reserve Division in the Pilken sector.


ALSACE.

8. It was relieved the 5th and 6th of August and transported to Alsace,
where it was placed at rest. At the beginning of September it occupied
the Altkirch sector.


FLANDERS.

9. About the 7th of October the division was again sent to Flanders to
the northeast of Zonnebecke.

10. The 3d Guard Division left the Ypres front (Zonnebecke) at the
beginning of November, 1917.


CAMBRAI.

11. After remaining in the vicinity of Ghent it went into action before
Cambrai near the Bourlon wood (Nov. 22).

12. It was relieved the 10th of December and went to rest in the
Vendegies District (south of Valenciennes—division maneuvers).


                                 1918.


CAMBRAI.

1. The division returned to the line in the sector, southwest of Cambrai
on January 10, relieving the 21st Reserve Division. It remained in line
until the 119th Division relieved it on February 12.

2. The division retired to Hem-Lenglet (north of Cambrai) where it
rested and underwent instruction.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

3. The division entered the line on March 19, between Inchy-en-Artois
and Pronville. Engaged in the advance between the 21st and 24th. It
suffered heavy losses on the 22d in the fighting north of Beaumetz,
passing to the second line on the 24th. The division came back and
participated in the fighting about Bucquoy and Hebuterne, March 26-April
3.

4. Returning from the Somme front about April 4, the division was at
rest until April 18.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

5. The division was engaged on the Lys, northeast of Estaires, after
April 18, then north of Kemmel from April 30 to May 5. Heavy losses
featured the fighting.

6. After resting at Halluin for seven days the division was moved by
rail to Lorraine by the route Namur, Treves, Saarbruck, Sarreguemines.


LORRAINE.

7. On May 18 the division relieved the 202d Division in the Chateau
Salins sector. While in this quiet sector the division received
reinforcements. When it left the line on June 24, the division was
comparatively fresh and an available reinforcement for a battle front.


CHAMPAGNE.

8. On leaving Lorraine the division moved to Rozay-sur-Lene, July 1, and
later southward to Hannogne.

9. In the offensive of July 15, the division fought east of Rheims in
the region of des Monts. Between the 15th and 31st heavy losses were
suffered. It is known to have received a draft of 300 men in July.

10. While at rest behind the Champagne front further drafts of men from
Russia and Rumania were received.

11. The division held the line in Champagne north of St. Hilaire-le-
Grand from August 15 to September 18.

12. Upon relief the division was first sent to Laon, but was hastily
entrained and hurried to Machault, where it entered the line
immediately.


BATTLE OF ARGONNE.

13. From September 27 to October 5 the division was engaged between
Somme-Py and Manre; then it fought near Orfeuil where 900 prisoners were
lost. Acting as a rear guard, the division covered the retreat from
Machault to Voziers. Extremely heavy losses were reported in this
period.

14. Withdrawn on the 8th, the division was moved by truck to Romagne.
After two days in reserve it entered the line on the 12th, now opposing
the first American Army. In this sector it fought vigorously, making
perhaps the stiffest resistance encountered in the offensive.

15. The division went out on October 17 and rested until the 26th.

16. Reengaged northeast of Attigny (Rilly-aux-Dies) on the 26th, the
division continued in line until the armistice. The last identification
was southeast of Mezieres on November 7. Five hundred prisoners were
lost by the division during their last period in line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 3d Guard Division was rated as one of the best German divisions. It
was completely exhausted in the offensive of March and April and
suffered from a low morale in July and August. The Argonne Battle losses
were very severe for the division. The regiments were reduced to 200 and
300 effectives.




                              3d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5.       │2 Gren.  │5.       │2 Gren.  │6.       │34 Fus.
              │         │9 Gren.  │         │9 Gren.  │         │42.
              │6.       │34 Fus.  │6.       │34 Fus.  │         │4 Ldw.
              │         │42.      │         │42.      │   (1, 2, and 4
              │         │         │         │         │      Btns.).
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Horse Gren. Rgt. │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │3 Brig.:           │3 Brig.:           │3 Brig.:
              │ 2 F. A. Rgt.      │ 2 F. A. Rgt.      │ 2 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 38 F. A. Rgt.     │ 38 F. A. Rgt.     │ 38 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 2:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 2:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 2 Pions.│ 1 Co. 2 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 3 Pont. Engs.     │ 3 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 3 Tel. Detch.     │ 3 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 3 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │6.       │426.     │6.       │381.
              │         │428.     │         │(?)
              │         │4 Ldw.   │         │428.
              │   (1, 2, and 4    │         │
              │      Btns.).      │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Horse Gren. Rgt. │3 Sqn. 3 Horse
              │  (3d Sqn.).       │  Gren. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │3 Art. Command:    │(?).
              │ 38 F. A. Rgt.     │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Pion. Btn. No. 2:│108 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 2 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 6 Ldw.
              │                   │  Pions.
              │ 3 Tel. Detch.     │ 2 Ldw. Co. 4 C.
              │                   │  Dist. Pion.
              │ 3 Co. 32 Pions.   │ 110 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 3 T. M. Co.       │3 Signals Command:
              │ 283 and 301       │ 3 Tel. Detch.
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Sections.        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │7 Ambulance Co.    │7 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │18 Field Hospital. │23 Field Hospital.
              │24 Field Hospital. │24 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │189 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │6 Truck train.     │
              │7 Truck train.     │
              │436 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                      (Second District—Pomerania).


                                 1914.

1. The 3d and 4th Division together composed the 2d Army Corps
(Stettin).

2. At the beginning of the war it gave up one of its five regiments, the
54th Infantry, for the formation of the 36th Reserve Division, which
operated against Russia.


BELGIUM.

3. In August, 1914, the 3d Division formed a part of the 1st Army (Von
Kluck). It invaded Belgium the 13th and 14th of August, passing through
Visé (Aug. 14), Hasselt (Aug. 17), Aerschot (Aug. 19), Laeken (Aug. 21)
and entered France on the 24th.


MARNE.

4. It was at Cambrai on the 26th and on the Somme the 28th. It took part
in the Battle of the Marne at Vareddes on the 7th of September (district
northeast of Meaux).

5. Was situated to the north of Soissons after the retreat. The 2d of
October it was in the district south of Roye; on the 4th it fought near
Beauvraignes.

6. At the beginning of November it was transported to Flanders
(Wytschaete-Messines District) where it remained till the end of the
month.


RUSSIA.

7. It then entrained for Russia (end of November). On its arrival it was
divided. The 5th Brigade was attached to the 8th Army in Oriental
Prussia, the 6th Brigade to the 10th Army to the east of Lodz.


                                 1915.

1. During the first months of 1915 the two brigades remained separated
and changed position with their respective armies. The 5th Brigade went
into the government of Souvalki near the frontier of Oriental Prussia;
the 6th into Poland near Prasnysz and the Narew.

2. In May, at the time of the formation of new divisions, the 5th
Brigade was broken up. The 2d Grenadiers, then in Courland, went over to
the Homeyer Brigade which then became the 109th Division; the 9th
Grenadiers went as the Third Regiment to the 3d Guard Division which
abandoned one of its brigades (the 5th Guard) for the formation of a 4th
Guard Division.

3. The 3d Division, reduced to the 6th Brigade, completed itself by the
addition of the 4th Landwehr Regiment (1st, 2d, and 4th Battalions). The
progress of the Russian offensive conducted it into the Vidzy District,
where it firmly established itself.


                                 1916.

1. Its composition varied still more in the course of the year 1916 and
it lost the two active regiments which it still had. The 42d Infantry
left it in September to go to the Kovel District and from there to
Macedonia; in December the 34th Fusiliers left it definitely in order to
go to Courland. In exchange it received two regiments formed in the
autumn, the 426th and the 428th Infantry.


                                 1917.

1. There was no change of composition or position during 1917.


                                 1918.

The division remained in the east throughout the year. Its movements
were obscure.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated fourth class.




                         3d Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │18 Ldw.  │6 Ldw.   │18 Ldw.  │6 Ldw.   │18 Ldw.  │6 Ldw.
              │         │7 Ldw.   │         │7 Ldw.   │         │7 Ldw.
              │19 Ldw.  │37 Ldw.  │         │19 Ldw.  │37 Ldw.  │19 Ldw.
              │         │46 Ldw.  │         │46 Ldw.  │         │46 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Ldw. Cav. Rgt. (3│1 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.   │1 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │3 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.  │3 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.  │3 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (Ers. Abils. of  │                   │
              │  20, 41, and 56,  │                   │
              │  F. A. Rgts.)     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │1 Ldw. Survey Sect.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │2 Ldw. Survey Sect.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │1 Ers. Co. 5 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │303 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │17 Mixed Ers. Brig.│                   │
              │  (17, 18, 19, 20, │                   │
              │  and 77 Brig. Ers.│                   │
              │  Btns.).          │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │17 Ldw.  │6 Ldw.   │17 Ldw.  │6 Ldw.
              │         │4 Ldw.   │         │7 Ldw.
              │37 Ldw.  │46 Ldw.  │         │46 Ldw.
              │         │327 Ldw. │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │        (?)        │3 Sqn. 4 Drag. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │3 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 3 Ldw. F. A. Rgt. │
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │ 913 Batry.        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(403) Pion. Btn.:  │418 Pion. Btn:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 5      │ 1 Ers. Co. 5
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 4 Co. 17 Pions.   │ 139 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 344 Pion. Co.     │503 Signal Command:
              │ 303 T. M. Co.     │ 503 Tel. Detch.
              │ 246 Searchlight   │
              │  Section.         │
              │ 503 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │230 Ambulance Co.  │230 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │21 Ldw. Field      │322 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │22 Ldw. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │503 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │537 M. T. Col      │773 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │2 Neuss Landst.    │
              │  Inf. Btn. (8     │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │C. Dist. Btn. No.  │
              │  22.).            │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                        (Fifth District—Posen.)


                                 1914.


RUSSIA.

At the beginning of the war the 3d Landwehr Division formed a part of
the 2d Landwehr Corps (old 6th Landwehr Corps) and always occupied the
eastern front.


POLAND.

1. Up to the German offensive of the summer of 1915 the 3d Landwehr
Division, along with the 2d Landwehr Corps, participated in the Polish
campaign. At the end of October, 1914, it was identified before Warsaw
(Rawa-Vistula); in the middle of November it was in retreat to the south
and east of Czenstochow; in December it was to the west of Kielce.


                                 1915.


POLAND.

1. In January, 1915, the 2d Landwehr Corps was still in the Kielce
District.

2. Toward the middle of February a brigade (19th Landwehr Brigade) was
detached to the northeast of Warsaw (Plock-Mlawa). Reassembled to the
west of Kielce in April, the 3d Landwehr Division remained between the
Vistula and the Pilica until July.


BARANOVITCHI.

3. The division took part in the offensive against the Russians (July-
August); it was before Ivangorod July 20 and arrived in the vicinity of
Baranovitchi toward the end of August.

4. In October it was in the line near Goroditche. In November it took
the Liakhovitchi sector (south of Baranovitchi).


                                 1916.

1. The 3d Landwehr Division remained to the southeast of Baranovitchi
(Liakhovitchi) for more than two years (November, 1915-January, 1918).
The 37th Landwehr became independent in July, 1916, and received various
successive additions. About the same date the 3d Landwehr Division
furnished a part of the elements necessary to the formation of the 420th
Infantry. In return the 327th Landwehr was assigned to it, and it kept
this regiment until June, 1917, ceding it at that time to the 4th
Landwehr Division.


                                 1917.

1. Liakhovitchi sector. In November the 3d Landwehr Division sent an
important reinforcement to the 9th Division (particularly to the 7th
Grenadiers); two months later a smaller reinforcement was sent to the
43d Reserve Division, which was preparing to leave the eastern front.


                                 1918.

The division remained in the eastern theatre throughout the year.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division remained on the Russian front from the beginning of the
war. Fighting value mediocre. It was rated as fourth class.




                         3d Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Bav.   │22 Bav.  │5 Bav.   │22 Bav.  │6 Bav.   │17 Bav.
              │         │23 Bav.  │         │23 Bav.  │         │23 Bav.
              │6 Bav.   │17 Bav.  │6 Bav.   │17 Bav.  │         │18 Bav.
              │         │18 Bav.  │         │18 Bav.  │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Bav. Light Cav.  │                   │3 Bav. Light Cav.
              │  Rgt.             │                   │  Rgt. (3 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │3 Bav. Brig.:      │3 Bav. Brig.:      │3 Bav. Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 5 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 5 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 5 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │ 12 Bav. F. A. Rgt.│ 12 Bav. F. A. Rgt.│ 12 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 3 Field Cos. │1 and 3 Field Cos. │1 and 3 Field Cos.
   Liaisons.  │  2 Bav. Pion. Btn.│  2 Bav. Pion. Btn.│  2 Bav. Pion. Btn.
              │                   │3 Bav. Pont. Engs. │13 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Co.
              │                   │3 Bav. Tel. Detch. │3 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │3 Bav. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │3 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │Inf. Pion. Co. of
              │                   │                   │  the 3 Bav. Div.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │6 Bav.   │17 Bav.  │6 Bav.   │17 Bav.
              │         │18 Bav.  │         │18 Bav.
              │         │23 Bav.  │         │23 Bav.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4th Sqn. 3 Bav.    │4 Sqn. 3 Bav. Light
              │  Light Cav. Rgt.  │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │3 Bav. Art.        │3 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 12 Bav. F. A.     │ 12 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Rgt.?            │
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 2 Bav. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 149 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 150 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 162 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│5 and 7 Bav. Pion. │2 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Cos.             │
              │3 Bav. T. M. Co.   │ 5 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │2 Bav. Searchlight │ 7 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │3 Bav. Tel. Detch. │ 3 Bav. Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │3 Bav. Signals
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 3 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 77 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │4 Bav. Ambulance   │4 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │9 Bav. Field       │9 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │16 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │683 Bav. M. T. Col.│683 Bav. M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

        (Second Bavarian District—Bavaria, Bavarian Palatinate.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. At the time of the declaration of war the 3d Bavarian Division and
the 4th Bavarian Division constituted the 2d Bavarian Army Corps. At the
beginning of August, 1914, the 2d Bavarian Army Corps formed a part of
the 6th Army (Crown Prince of Bavaria). It detrained at Faulquemont
(Lorraine) on August 8, and the 3d Bavarian Division was to the north of
Château-Salins on the 10th. It took part in the Battle of Morhange on
the 20th, passed the frontier, pillaged Gerbeviller on its way, and
advanced as far as the left bank of the Mortagne. Forced to turn back,
it moved near Metz the 15th of September and entrained the 19th.


SOMME-FLANDERS.

2. Similar to the 1st Bavarian Army Corps, the 2d Bavarian Army Corps
was attached to the 2d Army and fought in the Peronne District (end of
September); then it was transported to Flanders, where it rejoined the
6th Army.

3. From November, 1914, to October, 1915, the 2d Bavarian Army Corps
occupied the front from the Ypres-Comines Canal as far as Douve. During
this period it generally remained on the defensive.


                                 1915.

1. In April, 1915, the 3d Bavarian Division ceded the 22d Infantry to
the 11th Bavarian Division, formed at this time.

In June, 1915, the 3d Bavarian Division was sent as a reinforcement for
a short time to the Arras sector.


ARTOIS.

2. In the month of October the 2d Bavarian Army Corps (3d and 4th
Bavarian Divisions) was transported to the Auchy-Loos sector and kept
there until August, 1916.


                                 1916.

1. In the Loos sector the 2d Bavarian Army Corps showed itself very
active. It undertook mine works and executed them with great rapidity.
At the end of April it attempted a gas attack; this latter had no
success, however.


SOMME.

2. The 3d Bavarian Division left the Loos sector with its Army Corps
about August 25 and went into the Somme District. It occupied the
Martinpuich-Bazentin-le-Petit sector up to the 15th of September and
fought with characteristic stubbornness. Its total losses during this
period reached 4,976 men (55 per cent).

3. The Division retired from the Somme September 27 and was sent to the
Douve sector (from this river to the Armentières-Lille railroad). It
remained there till the end of March, 1917.


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. The 3d Bavarian Division was relieved from Armentieres March 20,
1917. It was transported to the Arras District, situated on the Scarpe
front, on April 11. It suffered considerable loss in the two unfortunate
counterattacks of Monchy-le-Preux and in the French counterattack of
April 23.

2. The division was withdrawn from the front April 25 and sent to rest
in the Roubaix zone until the beginning of June.


FLANDERS.

3. On June 5 the 3d Bavarian Division began to relieve the 40th Division
in the Messines sector. The British attack took place on the 7th during
this relief. The division lost the village and the summit of Messines.
It suffered considerable loss and left 1,531 prisoners in the hands of
the enemy. (The 17th Battalion was reduced to 800 men; the 23d suffered
about equal losses; the 18th lost fewer men.)


LORRAINE.

4. The 3d Bavarian Division was withdrawn from the Messines sector June
8, 1917, and taken to the Conflans area. After a short period of repose,
during which it was partially reconstituted, it was put into the line in
the sector of the Bezange forest (south of Château-Salins) July 18.

5. The 3d Bavarian Division received a reinforcement of 4,500
men—convalescents, exclusively—between June 8 and the end of August. (At
the end of August the personnel averaged only 120 men who drew rations
(80 combatants) per company in the 17th Battalion.) The losses sustained
the 7th of June had not been made good by the 28th of August.

6. The division was sent into Lorraine for rest and reconstitution,
remaining on the defensive, and pursuing the instruction of its
detachments in the use of light minenwerfers and assault tactics.


AISNE.

7. It left Lorraine in the middle of October. On the 28th it occupied
the Aisne front to the north of Braye-en-Laonnois (Trucy sector). The
17th Battalion was the only one to engage in the October battles which
preceded the German retreat to the north of the Ailette.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 3d Bavarian Division is one of the best German units.

It always fought well, showing great energy in the offensive and
preserving a great tenacity in the defensive.

Nevertheless, the fighting value of this division appears to have
diminished during the course of the year 1917.


                                 1918.

1. About January 1 the division was relieved and went into training in
the region Fournes-Chimay, where it remained for four weeks.


ST. GOBAIN.

2. The division relieved the 47th Reserve Division near Septvaux about
February 1, and occupied the line until March 28.

3. Retired from the front on the 28th; the division was sent toward
Chauny-La Fere, where it constituted the reserve division of the 8th
Reserve Corps.


NOYON.

4. In April the division alternated between short periods in line and
brief rests. North of Plemont it relieved the 7th Reserve Division about
April 2, was relieved by the 1st Bavarian Division a few days later, and
returned to line about April 11, relieving the 1st Bavarian Division.
About this time the division received a draft of 900 men of the 1919
class.

5. The division was withdrawn from the Lassigny front about May 25.


BATTLE OF THE OISE.

6. The division participated in the Oise fighting of June, although it
did not take a direct part in the opening attack. It supported the
effort of the 3d Bavarian Reserve Division, lending some battalions,
from which prisoners were taken. About the middle of June the division
passed to the second line, rested two weeks, and returned to the
Montdidier-Noyon front about June 30.


LASSIGNY.

7. The division remained in line throughout July and encountered the
Allied attack of middle August. About August 21 it was withdrawn.

8. Between August 21 and October 7 the division was not satisfactorily
identified. Elements were reported near Terguier in September, near
Ypres, and in the region of St. Etienne-Arnes.


WOEVRE.

9. The division entered the Woevre line on October 7, near Manheulles,
where it remained until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was used during 1918 as a sector-holding division. It took
no prominent part in the offensives of the year.




                          3d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Res.   │2 Res.   │5 Res.   │2 Res.   │5 Res.   │2 Res.
              │         │9 Res.   │         │9 Res.   │         │9 Res.
              │6 Res.   │34 Res.  │6 Res.   │34 Res.  │6 Res.   │20
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Landst.
              │         │49 Res.  │         │49 Res.  │         │49 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Res. Dragoon Rgt.│5 Res. Dragoon Rgt.│
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │3 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │3 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │3 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │2d Pion. Btn. No.  │2d Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  2:               │  2:
              │                   │ Field Co. 2 Pions.│ 2 Res. Co. 2
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │ 3 Res. Pont. Engs.│ 203 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 3 Res. Tel. Detch.│ 3 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 3 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Res.   │2 Res.   │5 Res.   │2.
              │         │49 Res.  │         │34 Fus.
              │         │34 Fus.  │         │49 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1 Sqn. 22 Drag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │73 Art. Command:   │73 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 3 Res. F. A. Rgt. │ 3 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 4 Abt. 14 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 865 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1177 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1195 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│303 Pion. Btn. (?):│303 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Res. Co. 2      │ 2 Res. Co. 2
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Co. 34 Res.     │ 203 T. M. Co.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 203 M. T. Co.     │ 196 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 403 Tel. Detch.   │403 Signals
              │                   │  Command:
              │ 3 Res. Pont. Engs.│ 403 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 33 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │502 Ambulance Co.  │502 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │14 Field Hospital. │14 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │15 Field Hospital. │15 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │16 Field Hospital. │163 Vet. Hospital.
              │163 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │704 M. T. Col.     │704 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │154 Cyclist Co.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                        (2d District—Pomerania.)


                                 1914.


EAST PRUSSIA-RUSSIA.

1. At the beginning of the war the 3d Reserve Division, recruited in the
2d District (Pomerania), formed a part of the 8th German Army
(Hindenburg). It fought with this army in eastern Prussia; it was
engaged in the battle of Tannenberg (Aug. 26–28), in the battles of
Biallo, Lyck, Suwalki, and Augustowo (September-October).


                                 1915.

1. In February, 1915, the 3d Reserve Division participated in the battle
of the Mazurian Lakes, and in May in the battles on the Polish frontier.

2. During the great offensive of the summer of 1915 the division was
engaged in the operations on the Bobr, which resulted in the taking of
Ossovietz. In August it fought in the vicinity of Kovno. It participated
in the siege of this city (Aug. 13–18) at the battle of Niemen (Aug. 19-
Sept. 8). When the front was stabilized it took position to the north of
Smorgoni (southeast of Vilna).


                                 1916.

1. The 3d Reserve Division occupied this sector (north of Smorgoni) up
to March, 1917. At this time it was placed in reserve in the Vilna
sector.


BELGIUM.

2. At the beginning of May, 1917, it was sent to the western front. It
entrained May 13 at Soly (east of Vilna), and was transported via Vilna,
Wirballen, Gumbinnen, Berlin, Hanover, Aix-la-Chapelle, Liege, Louvain,
and Brussels up to Bruges, where it detrained May 18. It was sent to
rest in this district until June 4.

3. On this date the division was transported to the district north of
St. Quentin and went into the line on the 8th in the Vendhuille-
Bellicourt sector (west of Catelet), where it habituated itself to the
western front.


                                 1917.


YPRES.

4. The division was relieved the end of July. After having been in
reserve for several days it engaged in the battle of Ypres on the
Frezenberg front on August 4; here it was severely tried by artillery
fire.

5. It was withdrawn from the front August 18 and sent to rest, first at
Tournai and later in the Moorslede District.

6. On September 23 it was again sent into the line in the battle of
Flanders to the south of Zonnebeke (Polygone wood), and again suffered
serious losses on the 26th.


ALSACE.

7. The 3d Reserve Division was relieved September 28 and transported to
Alsace (Mulhouse District), where it remained in repose up to the middle
of October.

8. About the 10th or 15th of October it occupied the sector north of the
canal from the Rhone to the Rhine, and remained there till the end of
October.

9. At this time it was withdrawn from the front. It entrained for Metz
November 10. In December it was in the vicinity of Sissone.


AISNE.

10. About December 13 it entered the line in the Craonne sector
(Juvincourt area). At the beginning of January it took over the
neighboring sector (Bouconville).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Very mediocre morale. The 49th Reserve Regiment was very severely tested
by losses and desertions to such a point that it had to be returned to
the rear after August 18, 1917. September 26 the 8th Company of the same
regiment refused to take part in the attack. The relatively high
proportion of men of the 2d Landsturm levy may be responsible for these
facts, since they formed part of the regiments of the Second District.

According to prisoners captured in February, 1918, the 3d Reserve
Division seemed to be of mediocre quality: “6,000 men lost in Flanders,
poorly replaced by men 50 per cent of whom were old, many being above
40, and by 30 per cent Poles.”

Nevertheless, despite the mediocrity of its personnel, it must be noted
that the 49th Reserve was subjected to a special training for attack
troops in November and December.


                                 1918.


LAON.

1. The division held the line in the Craonne sector until about April
20, when it was relieved.


OISE.

2. It reappeared on May 1 near Hainvillers (southeast of Montdidier),
where it remained until about June 20. The division was in the thick of
the June fighting on the Oise and lost heavily.

3. About June 20 the division went to rest in the region of Guise.


MARNE.

4. The division participated in the fighting between the Marne and
Soissons when the Allies delivered their attack on the Marne salient. It
relieved the 115th Division at Longpont on July 18 and withstood the
attack until July 31. The 49th Reserve Regiment was almost annihilated
in the course of the fighting near Mery. The other regiments were
reduced to 70–80 rifles per company.

5. Retired from the front on July 31, the division rested at La Capelle
until September 1.


CAMBRAI.

6. The division came into line east of Chevisy on September 2. Its
composition had been altered by the disbandment of the 2d Reserve
Regiment and the addition of the 2d Grenadier Regiment from the 109th
Division. The British attack on the Somme of September 12 engulfed the
division, which lost 1,300 prisoners.


BELGIUM.

7. It was withdrawn about September 27 and transferred to Belgium, where
it entered the line near Dixmude on September 29. It held the line in
this sector until October 16, when it passed into the second line for a
week’s rest. Returning to line on the 23d, it remained in line until the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division is rated as a third-class division. Its morale was on the
whole bad. The Polish elements deserted freely. In July pillaging of
supply trains was apparently prevalent in the divisional area. Elements
of the division refused to fight in the Oise battle in June, and the
German command appeared to have confidence in its fighting value.




                           3d Naval Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry     │4 Nav.       │1 Mar.       │Mar.         │1 Mar.
              │             │2 Mar.       │Inf. Brig.   │2 Mar.
              │             │3 Mar.       │             │3 Mar.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry      │                           │3 Sqn. 7 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery    │9 F. A. Rgt.               │2 Matr. F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │925 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1234 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1292 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Co. Mar. Pion. Btn.      │115 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons   │                           │
              │3 Co. Mar. Pion. Btn.      │ 1 Res. Co. 24 Pions.
              │337 Pion. Co.              │293 Signal Command:
              │165 T. M. Co.              │ 293 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 66 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                           │610 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary │                           │
              │                           │2 Mar. Field Hospital.
              │                           │390 Field Hospital.
              │                           │569 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports   │                           │679 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Attached     │Coast Defense Btn.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1917.

1. The 3d Naval Division was organized in April, 1917. Its Regiments
(1st, 2d, and 3d Naval Infantry) were detached from the Naval Corps,
before the constitution of the division, to take part in the attacks
upon Steenstraat on April 22, 1915, and on the Somme from September,
1916, to April, 1917. Since its formation the 3d Naval Division has
scarcely left the coast.


FLANDERS.

2. In August, 1917, the 3d Naval Division occupied the sector of
Lombartzyde.

3. In October it was in action on the Ypres front at Poelcappelle.

4. In December it again took over the sector of Lombartzyde.


                              RECRUITING.

The 3d Naval Division is recruited from the entire German Empire, the
naval troops being imperial troops.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Before the war the troops of the 3d Naval Division were landing and
occupying troops for the German colonies. They are good units whose
recruiting has been kept up to a high standard.


                                 1918.


ALBERT.

1. The division was relieved north of St. Georges about the 1st of March
and moved to Valenciennes, where it arrived about the 13th. From March
18 to 23 it moved up to the front by stages via Haussy-Cattenieres-
Lesdain. On the 23d it followed up the advance, passing through Fins and
Manancourt on the 24th–25th and coming into action at Contalmaison on
the 25th. It captured Albert on the 26th. The division held a sector
west of Albert until mid-April, and on April 24 returned to its former
sector west of Anthuille. It was relieved about the end of May by the
24th Division.

2. On June 20 the division returned to relieve the 24th Division in the
Aveluy sector. In mid-July the company strength was low. No drafts had
been received recently and sickness was prevalent. This, together with
the August spell in line, had considerably reduced the morale of the
division. It was relieved on August 19 by the 83d Division.


SCARPE-SOMME.

3. The division rested at Flers for five days, when it came into line
west of Grevillers on the night of August 23–24 to reinforce the line.
It was withdrawn in a few days (Aug. 26) and rested at Cambrai. Five
hundred prisoners were taken from the division in this period.

4. The division rested at Thourout during the first half of September.
On the 27th it was engaged west of Marcoing and fought in that area
until the end of the month. The total prisoners captured from the
division was 700.

5. After two weeks’ rest in the Cambrai area, the division returned to
line at Molain on October 17. It fought in the Molain-Catillon area
until October 23, when it was relieved by the 19th Reserve Division. On
November 1 it was again in line, northwest of the Hattencourt Farm. The
last identification was at Any, on November 7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its use in the Somme March
offensive and as an intervention division in the Scarpe-Somme battle
suggest that the division was a second class division.




                          4th Guard Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │              │5 Ft.         │5 Gd.         │5 Ft.
              │              │5 Gren.       │              │5 Gren.
              │              │93 Res.       │              │93 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │3d Sqn. Gd. Res. Ulan Regt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │(z) 2d Gd. Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │6 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │(z) Co. 3 Gd. Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │261 Pion. Co.
              │                             │4 Gd. T. M. Co.
              │                             │4 Gd. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │4 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │           1918[3]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │5 Gd.         │5 Ft.         │5 Gd.         │5 Ft.
              │              │5 Gren.       │              │5 Gren.
              │              │93 Res.       │              │93 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2d Sqn. Gd. Res. Drag. Rgt.  │2d Sqn. Gd. Res. Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │4 Gd. Art. Command:          │4 Gd. Art. Command:
              │ 6 Gd. F. A. Rgt.            │ 6 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 3 Abt. 1 Gd. Ft. A. Rgt. (5,
              │                             │  6, and 10 Btries.).
              │                             │ 1208 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1285 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1359 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│106 Pion. Btn.:              │106 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 261 Pion. Co.               │ 261 Pion. Co.
              │ 269 Pion. Co.               │ 269 Pion. Co.
              │ 4 Gd. T. M. Co.             │ 4 Gd. T. M. Co.
              │ 315 Searchlight Section.    │4 Gd. Signals Command:
              │ 4 Gd. Tel. Detch.           │ 4 Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 61 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │267 Ambulance Co.            │267 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │392 Field Hospital.          │392 Field Hospital.
              │397 Field Hospital.          │397 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │4 Gd. Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │13 Gd. Truck Train.          │533 M. T. Col.
              │533 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │32 M. G. S. S. Detch.        │44 Observation Group.
              │70 Anti-Aircraft Section.    │72 Sound Ranging Section.
              │                             │244 Reconnaissance Flight.
              │                             │20 Balloon Sqn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 3:

  According to a document of Aug. 21, 1918.


                                HISTORY.


                                 1915.

The 4th Guard Division was formed on the Russian front in March, 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. From March 14 to July 12 the 4th Guard Division was in line near
Przasnysz. It belonged to Gallwitz’s army, which was operating north of
the Vistula.

2. From July 13 to September 28 the division took part in many fights,
notably on the Narew, and took part in the pursuit as far as the region
of the marshes of Lithuania.

3. Withdrawn from the front and reached Kovno on foot, where it
entrained for the Western Front on October 10 via Koenigsberg, Luebeck,
Hamburg, Aix-la-Chapelle, Namur. Detrained at Douai and sent to rest.


FRANCE.

4. From November 14 to 26 it occupied a sector near Arras, then went to
rest near Cambrai.

5. From December 15, 1915, to January 4, 1916, it built entrenchments in
the region of Wytschaete-Messines.


                                 1916.

1. During January and February, 1916, the 4th Guard Division continued
its entrenching work in the sector Wytschaete-Messines and held the
sector at the same time.

2. Until the end of April, 1917, the 4th Guard Division, together with
the 1st Reserve Guard Division, formed the reserve corps of the guard.
Both these divisions were put through a course of training with a view
to active operations.

3. From May 9 to July 23 the division remained in line northeast of
Neuville-St. Vaast.


SOMME.

4. Engaged in the battle of the Somme July 25 (Estres sector), suffered
heavy losses and was withdrawn August 19. Engaged again after a few days
of rest and fought some severe local battles until September 10
(Thiepval sector).

5. After seven days of rest behind the Flanders front it held a quiet
sector north of Ypres from September 17 to October 25.

6. From November 6 to 25 it was again sent to the Somme, where it was
subjected to several heavy local attacks (Warlencourt sector).


                                 1917.

1. Remained in the Warlencourt sector until March 17, 1917. It was
relieved immediately after it had retired to the Hindenburg line.


LENS.

2. After three weeks’ rest in the region of Tournai it was sent by
stages to the south of Lens, where it went back in the lines. It
suffered considerable losses there. Withdrawn from the front July 11.

3. At rest in the region of Pont-a-Vendin and Meurchin. On August 15 the
division was hurried up to the north of Lens. It attacked to regain the
lost ground but in vain. Its losses were extremely heavy.

4. The division stayed in line until September 15.


FLANDERS.

5. At rest for a week behind the front. Entrained September 23 and 24 at
Carvin for Flanders.

6. It was at first in the reserve of the army, but went into line
September 27 east of Zonnebeke. After one of its regiments had attacked
and was stopped by the British artillery fire (Oct. 22), the division
obtained replacements and on October 4 renewed its attempt to retake the
heights lost on September 26. Warned by a British attack, they became
demoralized and fled in disorder toward Becelaere. The losses of the 4th
Guard Division were so heavy that it had to be relieved on October 5 to
7.

7. Entrained for Guise and arrived there October 10. Went into line on
the 14th in the sector of Itancourt, southeast of St. Quentin, and was
still holding it in December. Its forces were much reduced by the
attacks in Flanders and were reinforced by neighboring units (13th
Landwehr Division).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Formerly an excellent combat unit, having that traditional esprit de
corps which animated the regiments of the Prussian Guards. At the
present time (November, 1917) it has lost a good part of its fighting
value. It seems to have been much weakened by the battle of Ypres
(October, 1917).


                                 1918.


GUISE.

1. The division rested during January near d’Origny Ste. Benoite (west
of Guise).


SOMME.

2. On February 4 the division came into line northwest of Bellenglise.
It was relieved about the middle of February.

3. Upon relief, it marched via Bohain to St. Souplet, near Le Cateau.
Here the division underwent a course of training in this area until
March 18, when it marched via Bohain-Brancourt-Montbrehain-Ramicourt
back to its old sector at Bellenglise, arriving in line March 20.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

4. The division attacked in the first line and advanced by Hesbecourt
March 21–26. Passing into support for eight days it was reengaged April
3–8 near Bouzencourt and le Hamel, suffering very heavy losses. Between
the 8th and the 24th the division rested. It was in line again near
Marcelcave from the 22d to the end of April, participating in the attack
at Villers-Bretoneaux on the 24th. Heavy losses were again sustained.

5. Again the division went to rest at St. Souplet, near le Cateau. The
2d Battalion of the 427th Regiment, dissolved, arrived as a
reinforcement for the division on May 27. The division was moved by rail
to Flavy le Martel on night of June 1. It marched by nights to Canny sur
Matz (by Golancourt, Guiscard, and Candor) and entered the line on the
night of June 8–9.


BATTLE OF THE OISE.

6. The division attacked on the 9th between Roye sur Matz and Canny sur
Matz. It penetrated by Marquelise to Antheuil. The French counterattack
threw it back north of Antheuil on the 11th. The division stayed in line
until the 19th.


LORRAINE.

7. After resting at Bohain until June 29 the division was moved to
Lorraine by Valenciennes-Brussels-Namur-Saarburg. Here it was rested and
reconstituted.

8. The division returned by rail to Athies sur Laon on July 22. From
there it marched to Mousey sur Aisne by stages and then in trucks to
Mareuil en Dole on July 25.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE, VESLE, AISNE.

9. The division was engaged July 27 southeast of Fere en Tardenois. It
fell back toward Fismes on August 1–2, from where it was shifted into
the Courlandon-Breuil sector, which it held from August 14 to the
beginning of September. On the 5th it moved to the south of Glennes,
remaining there until the 30th, when it fell back across the canal. The
division was relieved on October 2, but turned back to line on the 5th
to cover the retreat near Benu au Bac. On the 7th it went to rest for a
week.


ARDENNES.

10. Reengaged west of Chateau Porcien from October 14 to November 5. The
93d Regiment was mentioned in the German communique of November 2 as
fighting especially well. In the retreat the division passed through
Renneville and Rubigny, where it was last identified on November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was always regarded as a first-class fighting division,
although the losses on the Somme in March and the setback on the Oise in
June lowered its value. Constant fighting impaired the morale and kept
the effectives low, but the division was always to be included in the
first-class divisions.




                             4th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │7.       │14.      │7.       │14.      │7.       │14.
              │         │149.     │         │149.     │         │149.
              │8.       │49.      │8.       │49.      │8.       │49.
              │         │140.     │         │140.     │         │140.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │12 Drag. Rgt. (v.  │12 Drag. Regt.     │
              │  Arnim).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │4 Brig.:           │4 Brig.:           │4 Brig.:
              │ 17 F. A. Rgt.     │ 17 F. A. Rgt.     │ 17 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 53 F. A. Rgt.     │ 53 F. A. Rgt.     │ 53 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 2:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 2:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 1 Pion. │ 2 Co. 2 Pions.
              │                   │  Btn. No. 2.      │
              │                   │ 4 Pont. Engs.     │ 4 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 4 Tel. Detch.     │ 4 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 4 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │8.       │14.      │8.       │14.
              │         │49.      │         │49.
              │         │140.     │         │140.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3d Sqn. Horse Gren.│2 Sqn. 3 Horse
              │  Rgt.             │  Gren. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │4 Art. Command:    │4 Art. Command:
              │ 53 F. A. Rgt.     │ 53 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 48 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 939 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 945 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1319 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│114 Pion. Btn.:    │114 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Co. 2 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 2 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 5 Co. 2 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 2 Pions.
              │ 2 Co. 114 Pions.  │ 4 T. M. Co.
              │ 4 T. M. Co.       │ 55 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 7 Searchlight     │ 4 Signals Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 4 Tel. Detch.     │ 4 Tel. Detch.
              │ 4 Pont. Engs.     │ 72 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │6 Ambulance Co.    │6 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │17 Field Hospital. │17 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │19 Field Hospital.
              │                   │131 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │8 Truck Train.     │537 M. T. Col.
              │9 Truck Train.     │
              │537 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │Construction Co.   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                      (Second District—Pomerania.)


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. At the beginning of the campaign the 4th Division fought on the
Western Front until November, 1914. It detrained at Rheydt on August 9
and 10, and entered Belgium on the 14th and France on the 25th. Fought
at Sailly-Saillisel on the 28th; reached Grand-Morin September 5 and
fought at Acy en Multien on the 6th. After retreating to the north of
Soissons it remained south of Roye from the end of September to the end
of October, and was near Ypres in November.


RUSSIA.

2. Sent to Russia and took part in the second offensive on Warsaw.


                                 1915.

1. In January it took part in the battles of Bolimow. In February it
went to the Carpathians (Army of the South under Linsingen). Took part
in the offensive on Lemburg.

2. About September 27, 1915, it was relieved in the region south of
Baranovitchi and entrained at Kobryn for the Western Front.


FRANCE.

3. It arrived in the vicinity of Sedan at the beginning of October.
After a few days’ rest it marched to the north of Tahure.

4. On October 30 the division took part in the attack of Butte De Tahure
and suffered severe losses.

5. At the beginning of November it left Champagne for the region of
Reims where its units went into the trenches on November 8. Until the
beginning of April, 1916, it held the sector northwest of Prunay.


                                 1916.

1. At the beginning of April the division was sent to rest in the
vicinity of Rethel. During this period (Nov. 15 to Apr. 16) its losses
were light.


VERDUN.

2. At the beginning of May the division was sent to the region of
Verdun. On May 4 it took part on the attack on Hill 304, where it
suffered heavy losses.

3. Relieved May 15 and sent to rest in the region of Mouzon-Carignan,
from where it went to the region of Damvillers.

4. At the beginning of July it was sent to hold the sector of Thiaumont
at the moment when the French recommenced their offensive in that
region. Its losses were very heavy.

5. On August 3 it left Thiaumont for the region of Cumieres, on the left
bank of the Meuse (Aug. 5).

6. At the end of September it held the sector Malancourt-Avocourt.

7. Relieved at the end of October and trained at Dun. After a short rest
it went into line in December northeast of Vaux.


                                 1917.

1. The division remained in the Vaux sector until April 17.

2. It relieved the 10th Reserve Division in the region of Satigneul
(night of Apr. 15–16) a few hours before the beginning of our attack. It
remained in this sector until May 5 and was subjected to French attacks
of April 16 and May 4.

3. Beginning May 5, it was relieved and went into camp in the region of
Caurel.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. On May 7 and the following days it went into the sector of Grille
Mont Haut and held this until June 19.

5. The division was put in reserve on this date in the region Epove-
Warmeriville.

6. Went into line in the sector Moronvilliers (July 19 and days
following) until the end of October.


BELGIUM.

7. At the end of October it entrained at Juniville and went to Belgium,
where it held the sector Poelcapelle until November 24.

8. It went into line again east of Armentieres on November 30 and was
still in that sector on January 11, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

In spite of heavy losses suffered several times, it would seem that they
wished to keep up the Pomeranian character of the 4th Division, although
it received in September, 1915, some men of the 1915 class from Hesse-
Nassau, and later on a number of Brandenburgers and Silesians, as the
third and sixth districts often furnished their ratio to the districts
temporarily out of men. A great majority of men, however, came from
Pomerania, and as the resources of this Province in men are limited it
was necessary, to keep up the provincial composition of this division,
to draw from the Landwehr depots and the battalions of Pomeranian
Landsturm. Since it was impossible to maintain the quality of the
division, it seems that they were anxious to maintain its nationality.


                                 VALUE.

The 4th Division was always a very good division and gave proof of very
fine military qualities in all the battles in which it took part,
especially in the sector of Sapigneul during the offensives of April 16
and May 4, 1917. It would seem that the nature of the replacements they
received, especially the most recent ones, has considerably altered the
value of this division.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved from the front of Armentieres on January
23, and went to rest and instruction in the Oisene area (southwest of
Deyuze). After four weeks the division entrained at Roubaix on March 16
and detrained at Douai on the following day. Hence it marched by stages
to Neuville St. Remy, a suburb of Cambrai. The division was concentrated
south of Inchy on the night of March 20–21.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. Engaged on March 21, the division advanced by Doignies and Herrnies.
It passed to rest on the 24th and was reengaged from March 26 to April 6
at Miraumont, Hebuterne, and Colincamps. The division suffered very
heavy losses in the engagement.

3. Relieved from the Hebuterne front on April 6, the division rested two
weeks in the Bapaune-Cambrai area. The division moved north to the Lys
front via Douai-Lille.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

4. The division was in line west of Merville from April 23 to May 14.

5. While at rest north of Tournai, the division was reconstituted and
prepared for another heavy engagement.

6. The division entrained for Loos on June 30 and moved on to Sailly sur
la Lys on July 18.


THE LYS WITHDRAWAL.

7. The division came into line near Merris on July 27. It lost 500
prisoners south of Meteren on August 18. On the 30th the division fell
back on Bailleul and later to Bac St. Maur and Fleurbaix. It was
relieved at Fleurbaix on October 11.

8. The division rested from the 11th to the 21st near Denain.

9. Again the division was engaged to the east and northeast of Solesmes
and near Le Quesnoy, retreating to Beaurain, Ghissignies, and Ruesnes.
It passed in the second line on November 1, but came back to the line
south of Le Quesnoy about November 5. It retreated by Locquignol toward
Maubeuge, where it was last identified on November 9.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 4th Division was a very good division. In 1918 its morale was
mediocre, due to the young recruits.




                          4th Ersatz Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │9 Ers.   │9, 10,   │9 Ers.   │9, 10,   │9 Mixed  │359.
              │         │  11, and│         │  11, and│  Ers.   │
              │         │  12,    │         │  12,    │         │
              │         │  Brig.  │         │  Brig.  │         │
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │  Btns.  │         │  Btns.  │         │
              │         │         │         │         │         │360.
              │         │         │         │         │13 Mixed │361.
              │         │         │         │         │  Ers.   │
              │         │         │         │         │         │362.
              │13 Ers.  │13, 14,  │13 Ers.  │13, 14,  │         │
              │         │  15, and│         │  15, and│         │
              │         │  16,    │         │  16,    │         │
              │         │  Brig.  │         │  Brig.  │         │
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │  Btns.  │         │  Btns.  │         │
              │33 Ers.  │33, 34,  │33 Ers.  │33, 34,  │         │
              │         │  35, 36,│         │  35, and│         │
              │         │  and 81,│         │  81,    │         │
              │         │  Brig.  │         │  Brig.  │         │
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │  Btns.  │         │  Btns.  │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Ers. Detchs. of the│Ers. Detchs. of the│4 Ers. Cav. Sqn.
              │  9, 13, and 33    │  9, 13, and 33    │
              │  Ers. Brigs.      │  Ers. Brigs.      │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ers. Abt. of the │1 Ers. Abts. of the│90 F. A. Rgt.
              │  18 and 39 F. A.  │  18 and 39 F. A.  │
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │
              │1 Ers. Abts. of the│1 Ers. Abts. of the│91 F. A. Rgt.
              │  40 and 75 F. A.  │  40 and 75 F. A.  │
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │
              │1 Ers. Abts. of the│1 Ers. Abts. of the│
              │  45 and 60 F. A.  │  45 and 60 F. A.  │
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ers. Co., 3      │1 Ers. Co., 3      │303 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │
              │1 Ers. Co., 4      │1 Ers. Co., 4      │304 Pion. Co.
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │
              │1 Ers. Co., 9      │1 Ers. Co., 9      │305 Pion. Co.
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │
              │                   │                   │161 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │1 Res. Co., 25     │103 Antiaircraft
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Section
              │                   │                   │2 Res. Co., 25
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │13 Ers.  │360.     │13 Ers.  │214 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │361.     │         │360.
              │         │362.     │         │362.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Ers. Cav. Detch.   │3 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.
              │  (3d C. Dist.).   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │139 Art. Command:  │139 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 90 F. A. Rgt.     │ 90 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │ 119 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │ 1052 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1059 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1323 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│504 Pion. Btn.:    │504 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 304 Pion. Co.     │ 304 Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 305 Pion. Co.     │ 305 Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 161 T. M. Co.     │ 161 T. M. Co.
              │ 251 Searchlight   │ 59 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 554 Tel. Detch.   │554 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 554 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 123 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │64 Ambulance Co.   │64 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │135 Field Hospital.│135 Field Hospital.
              │136 Field Hospital.│136 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │136 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │762 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

     (360th and 361st: Fourth District—Prussian Saxony. 362d: Ninth
                     District—Schleswig—Holstein.)


                                 1914.

The 4th Ersatz Division was organized in August, 1914, by grouping
together brigade Ersatz Battalions coming from the Third, Fourth, and
Ninth districts (Brandenburg Prussian-Saxony, Mecklenburg, Schleswig-
Holstein, and Hansa towns).


LORRAINE.

1. Detrained August 18 at Teterchen (Lorraine) and at the battle of the
20th the division was in the rear of the 2d Bavarian Corps. It fought on
the 22d along the Marne-Rhine Canal between Einville and Dombasle,
retreated on the 23d, suffered heavy losses on the 25th at Mazerulles,
and engaged only a few units of its 9th Brigade in the attack on Nancy
in September.

2. On September 15 the division went to rest west of Delme. On the 23d
it entrained at Rening (Sarralbee-Benestroff line), passed through Metz,
Luxemburg, Arlon, Marche, Liége, Louvain and detrained September 25,
1915, at Brussels.


BELGIUM.

3. From there it went to Bruges (Oct. 14), then Ostend (Oct. 16). On the
17th by the road along the coast it marched from Ostend to Nieuport
(Oct. 30). It then went into the line in front of the Belgians on the
right bank of the Yser (November).


                                 1915.


DIXMUDE.

1. Remained in the sector north of Dixmude during the whole of 1915.

2. At the end of July, 1915, the brigade Ersatz Battalions of the
division were grouped into regiments. The 4th Ersatz Division was made
up of the 359th, 360th, 361st and 362d Infantry. With the 37th Landwehr
Brigade and the 2d Reserve Ersatz Brigade (Basedow Division) it
constituted the Werder Corps (December).


                                 1916.

1. The division was kept in the region of Dixmude until April, 1916.

2. After April a part of the division was sent east of Ypres between the
Ypres-Roulers Railway and the Comines Canal. Some of the units of the
division remained in line near Dixmude.


SOMME.

3. About September 27 the division left Belgium for the Somme, where it
was engaged during the first two weeks of October near Le Sars.

4. On October 15 it returned to Belgium and went back to the sector east
of Ypres in November.

5. Sent to rest about November 30 and sent back to the Somme south of
Bapaume, about the middle of December.


                                 1917.

1. Remained south of Bapaume (Le Transloy-Gueudecourt) until the end of
February, 1917.

2. About the middle of March it relieved the 14th Bavarian Division in
the same sector at the beginning of the retirement of the German troops,
withdrew to the east of Bertincourt, via Neuville-Bourjonval, Metz en
Courtuere, and fought on the Trescault-Havricourt line (April).


ARTOIS.

3. Relieved about April 26 or 28 and sent north of the Scarpe about May
10. Engaged near Roeux until about May 18 and suffered heavy losses
(more than 800 prisoners).

4. At the end of May it was sent to the Eastern Front. The 361st
Infantry entrained May 26 at Vitry en Artois, via Paderborn-Halle-
Leipzig-Dresden-Breslau-Lemburg.


GALICIA.

5. Until July the division remained in reserve in Galicia with the
Bothmer army.

6. In July it held the sector south of Brzezany. Took part in the
offensive against the Russians, and in September was near Radautz, where
it remained until December. Due to some of its forces being transferred
to other organizations more than to its losses, the companies of the
362d Infantry from August to October, had fallen from 120 men to 70
(examinations of Russians).


FRANCE.

7. Relieved December 4 and entrained the 16th for the Western Front, via
Lemberg-Cracow-Breslau-Berlin-Hanover-Aix la Chapelle-Brussels-Courtrai-
Tournai. Detrained the 26th.


                              RECRUITING.

360th Infantry: Brandenburg and Prussia Saxony. 361st and 362d Infantry:
Prussia Saxony, Hanover, Schleswig-Holstein and Hansa towns.


                                 VALUE.

A fairly good division.


                                 1918.


LA BASSEE.

1. The first entry into line of the division was on January 18 in the
sector south of the La Bassee Canal, relieving the 6th Bavarian
Division.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

2. On the 5th of April the division crossed north of the canal and
attacked in the Gorre-Givenchy-Festubert region. Seven hundred prisoners
were lost on April 9, besides heavy casualties. The division was
relieved on April 20–21.


WOEVRE.

3. The division was moved to the region south of Metz for a rest. About
May 18 it took up a sector south of Les Esparges, which it held until
about June 13.

4. After resting near Conflans until June 25, it entrained in the Woevre
and moved by Sedan-Charleville to the region east of Laon, arriving on
June 28. It proceeded to the line by the road through Fismes.


AISNES-MARNE.

5. The division was engaged at Bussiares, Torcy, and Hautevisnes between
June 30 and July 18. It met the attack of July 18 and was thrown back
toward Oulchy le Chateau. On the 24th it was relieved.

6. The division rested at Perthes for a week and then moved to Novy. It
entrained at Amagne on August 12 and traveled to Ostrecourt, where it
remained for two weeks. On August 28 it occupied the Dricourt-Queant
line astride the Arras-Cambria road.


SECOND BATTLE OF PICARDY.

7. Engaged on the 29th, the division came in for some heavy fighting. It
was thrown back on Dury (Sept. 2) and after losing 1,650 prisoners was
relieved on September 5.

8. The division rested until the middle of September. The 214th Reserve
Regiment coming from the dissolved 46th Reserve Division, replaced the
361st Regiment.

9. The division was engaged near the La Bassee Canal from September 16
to October 1. It rested until the 16th, when it was reengaged southwest
of Lille. In the retreat it fell back by Wavrin, Seclin, Cysoing, Ere,
Mons and Blaugies. The last identification was at Boussu on November 9.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a third-class division. At no time in 1918 did
it distinguish itself, especially not in the Lys battle. Before the July
18 attack, the infantry effectives of the division numbered about 3,200.
In October the battalions were reduced to three companies.




                         4th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │22 Ldw.  │11 Ldw.  │22 Ldw.  │11 Ldw.  │22 Ldw.  │11 Ldw.
              │         │51 Ldw.  │         │51 Ldw.  │         │51 Ldw.
              │23 Ldw.  │22 Ldw.  │23 Ldw.  │22 Ldw.  │23 Ldw.  │22 Ldw.
              │         │23 Ldw.  │         │23 Ldw.  │         │23 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Ers. Cav. Rgt. of  │Ers. Cav. Rgt. of  │Ers. Cav. Rgt. of
              │  the 4 Ldw. Div.  │  the 4 Ldw. Div.  │  the 4 Ldw. Div.
              │  (4 Sqns.).       │                   │
              │2 Ldw. Cav. Rgt. (3│                   │
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │4 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.  │4 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.  │4 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (Ers. Abtls. 6,  │                   │
              │  42, and 56 F. A. │                   │
              │  Rgt.).           │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ers. Co. 6 Pions.│1 Ers. Co. 6 Pions.│1 Ers. Co. 6 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │2 Ers. Co. 6 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │304 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │21 Mixed Ers. Brig.│                   │
              │  (21, 22, 23, 24, │                   │
              │  and 78, Brig.    │                   │
              │  Ers. Btns.) Dis. │                   │
              │  in Sept.         │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │      1918[4]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │22 Ldw.  │11 Ldw.  │22 Ldw.  │   (?)
              │         │23 Ldw.  │         │23 Ldw.
              │         │51 Ldw.  │         │51 Ldw.
              │         │404.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 4 Drag. Rgt.│
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │4 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (Staff, 2 Abt.
              │                   │  Staff and 5 and 6
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │ 4 Ldw. F. A. Rgt. │
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(404) Pion. Btn.:  │2 Ers. Co. 6 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 6      │504 Signals
              │  Pions.           │  Command:
              │ 2 Ers. Co. 6      │ 504 Tel. Detch.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 304 T. M. Co.     │
              │ 25 Light Fortress │
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Section.         │
              │ 323 and 332       │
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Sections.        │
              │ Tel. Detch.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │236 Ambulance Co.  │236 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │19 Ldw. Field      │19 Ldw. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │20 Ldw. Field      │504 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │785 T. M. Co.      │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │7th Munster Landst.│
              │  Inf. Btn. (7 C.  │
              │  Dist. Batn. No.  │
              │  69) arrived from │
              │  3 Ldw. Div.      │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 4:

  The elements below are those grouped in the 4th Landwehr Division
  Postal Zone. Other elements belonging to the 4th Landwehr Division but
  operating in other sectors (Nov. 13) are listed as attached to the
  divisions they are operating under.


                                HISTORY.

                       (Sixth District—Silesia.)


                                 1914.

At the beginning of the war the 4th Landwehr Division, with the 3d
Landwehr Division, formed the 2d Landwehr Corps (former 7th Landwehr
Corps), which was engaged on the Eastern Front.


POLAND.

1. The 4th Landwehr Division at the beginning of September, 1914, took
part in the battle of Tarnowka with the 3d Landwehr Division, then in
the operations before Warsaw and the retreat following the enveloping
movement of the Russians at Lodz. In December it was located between the
Vistula and Pilica (at Czenstochow, Dec. 1; near Kielce, Dec. 28).


                                 1915.

1. Until July, 1915, the division remained on the Polish front (left
bank of the Vistula) between Radom and Gravowiec.


BARANOVITCHI.

2. Took part in the offensive against the Russians, which carried it
through the region of Baranovitchi in July to August.


                                 1916.

1. Held the front northeast of Baranovitchi from September, 1915, until
the beginning of 1918. In 1916 it contributed drafts to the 420th
Infantry.


                                 1917.

1. Sector of Baranovitchi. The division had many of its forces
transferred to the Western Front: In November, 1917, for the 52d
Division; in February, 1918, for the 5th Reserve Division, but during
1917 it was reinforced by the 404th Infantry, coming from the 18th
Landwehr Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Mediocre.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. At the beginning of April, 1918, the 4th Landwehr Division marched
into Russia. On the 14th of April, the 11th Landwehr Regiment was near
Minsk; and at the beginning of May it was east of Kiev, along with the
404th Regiment.

2. On June 15 the 23d and 51st Landwehr Regiments were identified near
Ochra.

3. A man of the 51st Landwehr Regiment wrote on October 23: “The latest
news is that the 4th Landwehr Division is going into France.” The
division was still in Russia on October 28 and was never identified on
the Western Front.




                         4th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │7 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │7 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │7 Bav.   │5 Bav.
              │         │9 Bav.   │         │9 Bav.   │         │5 Bav.
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Res.
              │5 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │         │9 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │         │
              │         │8 Bav.   │         │8 Bav.   │         │
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Bav. Light Cav.  │                   │5 Bav. Light Cav.
              │                   │                   │  (3 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │4 Bav. Brig.:      │4 Bav. Brig.:      │4 Bav. Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 2 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 2 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 2 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 11 Bav. F. A. Rgt.│ 11 Bav. F. A. Rgt.│ 11 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2d Field Co.       │2d Field Co.       │2d and 5th Field
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Cos.
              │2 Bav. Pion. Btn.  │2 Bav. Pion. Btn.  │2 Bav. Pion. Btn.
              │                   │4 Bav. Pont. Engs. │4 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │4 Bav. Tel. Detch. │4 Bav. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │4 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │35 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │7 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │7 Bav.   │4 Bav.
              │         │5 Bav.   │         │5 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │
              │         │9 Bav.   │         │9 Bav.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Bav. Light Cav.  │5 Sqn. 3 Bav. Light
              │  (5th Sqn.).      │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │4 Bav. Art.        │4 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │2 Bav. F. A. Rgt.  │ 2 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │11 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 2 Abt. 4 Bav. F.
              │  (?).             │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 122 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 134  Bav. Light
              │                   │  Am. Col.
              │                   │ 135  Bav. Light
              │                   │  Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│6 Bav. Pion. Co.   │8 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │9 Bav. Pion. Co.   │ 6 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │4 Bav. T. M. Co.   │ 9 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │4 Bav. Tel. Detch. │ 14 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 4 Bav. Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │4 Bav. Signal
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 4 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 108 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │5 Bav. Ambulance   │5 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │11 Bav. Field      │11 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │12 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │684 Bav. M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

        (Second Bavarian District—Bavaria and Lower Franconia.)


                                 1914.

1. At mobilization the 4th Bavarian Division, with the 3d Bavarian
Division, formed the 2d Bavarian Army Corps. It transferred its 8th
Brigade (Metz Garrison) to the 33d Reserve Division and replaced it by
the 5th Bavarian Reserve Brigade, organized in the Palatinate. The other
brigade, the 7th, detrained, commencing August 3, between Morhange and
Remilly. The reserve brigade detrained August 10 at St. Avold. Assembled
the 18th in the rear of the Metz-Strasbourg Railroad and with the 2d
Bavarian Army Corps constituted the 6th Army (Crown Prince Ruprecht of
Bavaria).


LORRAINE.

2. On August 20 it fought west of Morhange. Then it captured the fort of
Manonviller (with the 22d Bavarian of the 3d Bavarian Division) and
advanced to Mortagne, south of Luniville. September 11 it was withdrawn
to the rear.


SOMME.

3. September 18 the division entrained at Metz for Namur, from where it
went to the north of Peronne (Sept. 25). It then became part of the 2d
Army and fought from September 26 to the middle of October in the region
north of the Somme (Fricout, Mametz, Montauban).


FLANDERS.

4. During the third and fourth weeks of October (beginning the 23d) it
went to Flanders (6th Army) south of Ypres. It held the sector of
Wytschaete from November 14 to October 15 and was on the defensive.
November 9 the 5th Infantry was reduced to less than 800 men
(notebooks).


                                 1915.

In March, 1915, the 8th Reserve Infantry was transferred from this
division to the 10th Bavarian Division.


ARTOIS.

1. September 26, 1915, some of its units fought on the Loos-Hulluch
front at the time of the British attack. In the counter attack, during
which these troops retook ditch No. 8, they suffered severe losses.

In November the whole division was in the region of Loos south of
Hulluch, where it stayed until August 16. In this sector it carried on
mine warfare. About the end of April, 1916, it lost 1,100 men while
attempting a gas attack.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. Toward the end of August, 1916, the division was sent to the Somme.

2. It was engaged between Martinpuich and Longueval, where it fought
violent battles for the Bois Haut (Aug. 25–28 to Sept. 15). Its total
losses were 5,361 men, or 60 per cent of its effectives.


FLANDERS.

3. Again sent to Flanders and held the sector northeast of Armentieres
(east of the Bois de Ploegsteert) from October 16 to June 17.


                                 1917.

1. In June, 1917, while still in line in front of Bois de Ploegsteert,
it was in part subjected to the British attack against Messines ridge,
and suffered especially from the artillery preparations. It lost 200
prisoners.

2. Relieved from the Belgian front about June 16 and sent to rest in the
region of Audenarde until July 7.

3. Beginning July 9, it was engaged southeast of Armentieres (between
the Lys and Wez-Macquart) July and August.

4. Withdrawn from the Armentieres sector in the middle of September and
went into line northeast of Ypres, between Zonnebeke and Passchendaele,
from September 26 to October 27. Suffered heavy losses (30 per cent of
its forces).


LORRAINE.

5. October 11 entrained at Pitthem and went to Conflans the 13th from
where it went into line in the region of Thiaucourt (Limey sector). It
was there still in February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Lower Franconia and Bavarian Palatinate.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 4th Bavarian Division went through some very severe offensive and
defensive fights and came through them with honors.

The prisoners examined gave proof of vigor and tenacity if not of
intelligence. As soon as it is filled up again this division shall again
take its place on the most effective fronts (December, 1917).

It is to be noted that February, 1918, it is not yet completely filled
up and does not seem to be in shape for an offensive.


                                 1918.

1. The division remained in the quiet Thiaucourt sector until late March
when it was relieved by the 40th Division. On April 14 it entrained at
Nancieulles and traveled via Audun le Romain-Longuyon-Sedan-Charleville-
Hirson-Avesnes-Denain-Orchies to Rouchin. It marched to Armentieres,
arriving on April 16, and proceeded to reserve near Bailleul on the
following day.


KEMMEL.

2. On the 23d of April the division came into line northeast of
Dranoutre, suffered heavy losses about here, and was relieved about May
1.

3. The division rested until June 11 in the north of France. During this
time it was reviewed by the King of Bavaria and Prince Franz. The
division commander was decorated.


FLANDERS.

4. It returned to line near Merris about June 11. It continued in line,
suffering heavy losses until July 10.

5. The division rested out of line until August 17.

6. It was reengaged on August 17 east of Bucquoy, coming from Lille via
Cambrai Velu Beugny. It was withdrawn from the battle north of Bapaume
on August 25, after losing 1,600 prisoners.

7. The division rested near Tourcoing until late in September.

8. On September 29 the division was identified in line in Champagne,
north of Maure. Its composition had been changed by the disbandment of
the 5th Bavarian Reserve Regiment and the substitution of the 4th
Bavarian Regiment from the dissolved 14th Bavarian Division. The
division continued on this front, with short periods in the second line,
until November 4. It was identified north of Marvaux (October 4), near
Monthois (October 11), between Namdy and Falaise (October 19). The
division was considered in reserve 3d Army between November 4 and the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was of the first quality. It saw heavy fighting and showed
itself very aggressive in attack and tenacious in defense. The extensive
replacements which have been necessary did not improve the morale, but
due to the high quality and spirit of the organization, it was always to
be considered as a first-class division.




                   4th Cavalry Division (Dismounted).


                              COMPOSITION.

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
                        │39 Cav.                │38 Ldw. Inf. Rgt.
                        │                       │40 Ldw. Inf. Rgt.
                        │                       │9 Res. Schutzen Uhlan
                        │                       │  Rgt.
                        │                       │89 Schutzen Rgt.
                        │                       │87 Schutzen Rgt.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│2 Ldw. Pion. Co., 14 C. Dist. Pions.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│99 Ambulance Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │Landst. Inf. Btns.
                        │VII-54 Munster.
                        │XIV-14 Bruchsae.
                        │IV-15 Jorgan.
                        │XVI-7 2d Saarlouis.
                        │XIV-51st Offenburg.
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

1. The 4th Cavalry Division entrained in the Riga region on the 1st of
April, 1918, for the Western Front. It detrained at Molsheim in Alsace
on April 7, and went into line near the Ban de Sapt (Vosges). The
division had recently been reorganized. During April a report was
received stating that Lieut Gen. von Krame, commander of the 39th
Cavalry Brigade, had been decorated. The division continued to hold the
Alsace sector until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                          5th Guard Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │2 Gd.        │3 Ft.        │2 Gd.        │3 Ft.
              │             │3 Gren.      │             │3 Gren.
              │             │20.          │             │20.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 2 Gd. Uhlan Rgt.    │1 Sqn. 2 Gd. Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Gd. Art. Command:        │5 Gd. Art. Command:
              │ 4 Gd. F. A. Rgt.          │ 4 Gd. F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 1 Abt. 1 Gd. Res. Ft. A.
              │                           │  Rgt.
              │                           │ 1180 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1181 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1203 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│100 Pion. Btn.:            │100 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 4 Gd. Pions.              │ 4 Gd. Pion. Co.
              │ 1 Gd. Res. Pion. Co.      │ 1 Gd. Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 9 Gd. T. M. Co.           │ 9 Gd. T. M. Co.
              │ (?) 28 Searchlight        │ 195 Searchlight Section.
              │  Section.                 │
              │ 5 Gd. Tel. Detch.         │5 Gd. Signal Command:
              │                           │ 5  Gd. Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 149 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │3 Ambulance Co.            │3 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │8 Field Hospital.          │8 Field Hospital.
              │9 Field Hospital.          │9 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │5 Gd. Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                 │680 M. T. Col.
              │680 Divisional M. T. Col.  │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │Field Recruit Depot No.    │
              │  815.                     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Attached.    │3 Abt. 43 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │
              │2 Abt. 3 Bav. Ft. A. Rgt.  │
              │2 Abt. 11 Res. Ft. A. Rgt. │
              │2 Abt. 21 Ft. A. Rgt.      │
              │3 Btry. 57 Ldw. Ft. A. Rgt.│
              │5 Btry. 57 Ldw. Ft. A. Rgt.│
              │6 Btry. 57 Ldw. Ft. A. Rgt.│
              │10 Btry. 13 Res. Ft. A.    │
              │  Rgt.                     │
              │11 Btry. 13 Res. Ft. A.    │
              │  Rgt.                     │
              │6 Btry. 17 Bav. Ft. A. Rgt.│
              │464 Ft. A. Btry.           │
              │4 Co. 8 T. M. Btn.         │
              │3 Co. 8 T. M. Btn.         │
              │1 Co. 5 Road. Const. Btn.  │
              │  No. 72.                  │
              │3 Co. 166 Labor Btn.       │
              │43 Res. Pion. Co.          │
              │199 Signal Btn.            │
              │307 Signal Btn.            │
              │2 Field Signal Co.         │
              │60 Balloon Section.        │
              │114 Supply Train.          │
              │21 Munition Train.         │
              │181 Munition Train.        │
              │190 Munition Train.        │
              │374 Munition Train.        │
              │517 Munition Train.        │
              │560 Supply Train.          │
              │50 Supply Train.           │
              │1 Field Bakery.            │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1917.

Organized in February, 1917, from regiments transferred from already
existing units (3d Foot Guards, transferred from the 1st Guard Division;
3d Grenadier Guards, transferred from the 2d Guard Division; 20th
Infantry, from the 212th Division, previously belonging to the 6th).


CRAONNE.

1. It appeared for the first time in line about March 20 between Craonne
and Hurtebise, where it suffered heavy losses, April 16 to 18.

2. Relieved May 4 and went to a calm sector in the region of
Preqmontreq.

3. About June 5–6 it was sent to rest in the region north and northwest
of Laon. June 20 it was located in the region of Sissonne, where it
remained until July 7.


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

4. On the night of July 7–8 it arrived in this sector. It executed a
violent attack on July 19 and again suffered heavy losses. Relieved July
27.

5. Reinforced by drafts from depots in Brandenburg and rested in the
region of Mauregny en Haye and Barenton sur Cerre, and then went through
a methodical and intensive training at the camp at Chivy les Etouvelles.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

6. About August 20 it relieved the 43d Reserve Division on the Chemin
des Dames between Panthéon and La Royere; suffered considerable losses
during the French offensive of October 23.

7. In the region of Vervins at the beginning of November, with its
battalions greatly reduced.

8. Went into line near Hargicourt at the end of November.


                              RECRUITING.

The 20th Infantry (3d Brandenburg) was a regiment from the Province of
Brandenburg.

The 3d Foot Guards and the 3d Grenadier Guards were drawn not only from
Brandenburg, but generally from the Kingdom of Prussia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 5th Guard Division must be considered one of the best divisions of
the German Army. Its regiments are extremely good.

The Division had been brought to the Aisne to retake the Californie
Plateau, and it showed wonderful energy in this work (July 19, 1917).
October 23, 1917, at the Chemin des Dames, in spite of its great losses
and of the fact that the 1918 class formed about 20 per cent of its
effectives, the division showed great resistance, and left only a
comparatively small number of prisoners in our hands (about 300).


                                 1918.

1. The division arrived at Fourmies on January 10 for training and
maneuvers. About February 14 it marched to Avesnes, where it rested
until March 5. It then marched to St. Quentin by night marches, passing
through Homblieres, Dallow, Happencourt, Tugny, and crossed the Crozat
Canal between Ham and St. Simon on March 23.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. On the night of the 23d it relieved the 45th Reserve Division in
front of Golancourt, where it met a lively resistance. From the 24th to
the 27th it was in army reserve resting in the region Golancourt le
Plesses Patte d’Oie. On the 28th it moved

by Flavy le Meldux, Ecuvilly, Catigny, Candor, and entered line west of
Lassigny on the 29th, relieving the 1st Bavarian Division. On the 30th
it attacked west of the Roye sur Matz railroad but was stopped by our
counterattacks. Until April 10 the division was in line at Beuvraignes
and at Roye sur Matz. On the 8th it received 400 men, mostly of the 1919
class, in reinforcements.

3. Withdrawn from line on April 4, the division moved by degrees to the
northeast of Laon on April 24, where it was reorganized, reinforced, and
rested near Rozay sur Serre. By night marches it moved to the Aisne
front and entered line on May 26, between Corbeny and the Californie
Plateau.


BATTLE OF AISNE.

4. It fought in the offensive from May 27 to 30, advancing by
Guyencourt, Fismes, Crugny, Cierges, and Vincelles. Between May 31 and
June 7 it was in reserve at Coulonges, Sergy, Beuvardes, Grisolles, and
Sommelous. The division was reengaged northwest of Chateau Thierry on
June 7 against the American 2d Division.


CHATEAU THIERRY.

5. In the three weeks the division was in the Torcy-Hautevesnes sector
it lost most heavily. Several companies of the 20th Regiment were
annihilated on June 8–9; the others were reduced to 30–40 rifles. The
division lost about one-half its effectives in this period.

6. It was withdrawn about June 30 and reconstituted in reserve of the
Torcy sector near Coincy from July 1 to 17.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

7. The division came back on the 18th and engaged in rear-guard fighting
near Monthiers and Grisolles. It was engaged on defensive works near
Blanzy les Fismes from July 29 to August 8.

8. It rested in the region of Bruyeres from August 2–8, when it was
transported to Belgium by Marle-Hirson to rest. On the 31st it was
alerted and entrained, the regiments following with a day’s interval by
Mauberg-St. Quentin, detraining at Laon and Crepy en Laonnois. From that
point it moved by foot to Vauxaillon front.


AISNE-AILETTE.

9. On September 3 the division relieved the 238th Division east of
Louilly. In the succeeding days it suffered very heavily. It was
relieved on September 16.

10. The division left the Laon area on September 16 and detrained that
night at St. Juvin, where it rested until September 24. The heavy losses
of the division were made good while there.


ARGONNE.

11. It entered the line opposite the American 1st Army on September 27
in the region of Montblainville. After heavy losses, which caused a
partial disintegration of the division, it withdrew on October 8. The 3d
Guard Grenadier Regiment was practically destroyed in this fighting.


WOEVRE.

12. It was transported to the Woevre and on October 19 was engaged east
of Verdun at Chatillon sous les Cotes. Here it remained until the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a first-class division, but after its rough
handling in the Hautevesnes-Torcy sector it lost much of its value as an
attack division.

Both on the Aisne in September and in the Argonne the division’s losses
were extremely heavy. Battalions were reduced to three companies in
October. By the 20th of October the remnants of the companies were
combined to make one.




                             5th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │9.       │8 Body   │9.       │8 Body   │10.      │8 Body
              │         │  Gren.  │         │  Gren.  │         │  Gren.
              │         │48.      │         │48.      │         │12 Gren.
              │10.      │12 Gren. │10.      │12 Gren. │         │52.
              │         │52.      │         │52.      │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Hus. Rgt. (3     │        (?)        │3 Hus. Rgt. (3
              │  Sqns.)           │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Brig.:           │5 Brig.:           │5 Brig.:
              │ 18 F. A. Rgt.     │ 18 F. A. Rgt.     │ 18 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 54 F. A. Rgt.     │ 54 F. A. Rgt.     │ 54 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 3:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 3:
   Liasions.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 3 Pions.│ 1 Co. 3 Pions.
              │                   │ 5 Pont. Engs.     │ 5 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │ 5 Tel. Detch.     │ 5 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 5 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │Field M. G. Co. of
              │                   │                   │  the 10 Brig.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │10.      │8 Body   │10.      │8 Body
              │         │  Gren.  │         │  Gren.
              │         │12 Gren. │         │12 Gren.
              │         │52.      │         │52.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Hus. Rgt. (?).   │3 Sqn. 3 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Art. Command:    │142 Art. Command:
              │ 18 F. A. Rgt.     │ 18 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 67 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │  (Staff and 1, 2,
              │                   │  and 3 Btries).
              │                   │ 848 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 879 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 792 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│116 Pion. Btn.     │116 Pion. Btn.:
   Liasions.  │  (formerly 1 Pion.│
              │  Btn. No. 3):     │
              │ 1 Co. 3 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 3 Pions.
              │ 2 Co. 3 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 3 Pions.
              │ 5 T. M. Co.       │ 14 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 319 Searchlight   │ 5 T. M. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 5 Tel. Detch.     │ 35 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 99 Searchlight    │5 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │                   │ 5 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 29 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │9 Ambulance Co.    │9 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │27 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │26 Field Hospital.
              │                   │5 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │11 Supply Train.   │538 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │M. T. Col.         │
              │                   │
              │M. G. S. S. Detch. │
              │  No. 5.           │
              │68 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Sect.            │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (Third District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. The 5th Division with the 6th Division formed the 3d Army Corps. At
the beginning of the campaign it was part of the 1st Army (Von Kluck).
It detrained near Aix la Chapelle August 9 and 10, entered Belgium the
14th, and passed through Louvain the 19th. Took part in the battle of
Charleroi and the battle of the Marne (at Sancy and Cerneux, Sept. 6),
then in the battles between the Aisne and the Marne in September, and
was finally stabilized between the Aisne and the Oise, in the region
Vailly and Soissons.


                                 1915.

1. Battle of Soissons (Jan. 13).

2. About June 10 the 5th Division was no longer a part of the 1st Army.
July 1 it was sent to Douai, and about July 14 held the sector before
Arras.

3. September 25, 1915, took part in the attacks in Champagne.


BELGIUM.

4. Went to Belgium in December. About December 25 was at rest in the
region Hirson-Avesnes.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. At the beginning of February, 1916, it was in the region of
Spincourt.

2. At the end of February at Verdun. It fought near Herbebois February
23. It attacked Douaumont February 26 and suffered severe losses. It was
again engaged from March 8 to 15 and from April 22 to the end of the
May.


SOMME.

3. July at the Somme (Longueval, Bois Delville). Suffered heavy losses.

4. Middle of August in Champagne (Auberive) until October 12.


VERDUN.

5. December, 1916, it went again to Verdun (region of Vaux, Dec. 7).
Units of the 5th Division were engaged as reinforcements during the
French attack of December 15. The division was withdrawn from the Verdun
front about December 25 and sent to the region of Mulhouse.


                                 1917.


ALSACE.

1. Stayed in Upper Alsace (region of Mulhouse and Ferrette) until April
20, 1917. It held temporarily a calm sector in the Vosges region, but
during this period it is used particularly for entrenching works on the
French front and the Swiss frontier.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. It was alarmed. It entrained in the region of Mulhouse and was sent
through Montmedy and Sedan to Champagne, where it went into line on
April 23 in the Mont-Haut sector, where it suffered very heavy losses.

3. Left Champagne front at the beginning of May.

4. Toward the end of June it was in the Woevre in the region between
Conflans and Briey.

5. At the beginning of July it was again in the Champagne (Téton
sector).


RUSSIA.

6. Sent to the Eastern Front in July and relieved at the beginning of
September by the 6th Reserve Division in the region of Zbrucz.


ITALY.

7. About October sent from Galicia to Italy.


FRANCE.

8. Sent from Italy to France at the beginning of January, 1918, and at
rest behind the front in Champagne. January 20, 1918, it went into line
near Butte du Mesnil.


                              RECRUITING.

Essentially from Brandenburg (Regiments of the Mark, as the communiques
sometimes call it), and its provincial character has been carefully
maintained.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Although not as good as at the beginning of the war, the morale of the
5th Division seemed good and its fighting value worthy of consideration
(July 17).


                                 1918.

1. After its return from Italy the division rested and trained at
Chenois, near Charleville, from January 1 to March 1, when it moved to
Anderlues-Resbaix (west of Charleroi) from March 1 to 14. On that date
it moved to the front by night marches by Maubeuge, Landrecies,
Wassigny, and Etaves.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It took its place in line between Lesdins and Remancourt (north of
St. Quentin) on the night of March 20–21. The next day it was engaged in
support of the 25th Division, advancing via Morcourt and Fayet. It took
part in the attack on Holnon Wood and reached Attilly that night. It
continued to advance on the 22d via Beauvois-Lanchy-Uguy-Quivieres-
Croix-Moleguaux to a point east of Falvy. On the 24th it forced the
crossing of the Somme at Falvy and Pargny and reached Morchain that
night. It was at Omilcourt on the 25th and captured Chaulnes on the
26th; from there it advanced to Fouquescourt and Rouvroy on the 27th,
crossed the Avre, and when the line stabilized near Aubvillers the
division withdrew, March 28. Its losses in the fighting were extremely
heavy. In crossing the Somme it especially distinguished itself.

3. The division rested until April 3, when it was reengaged between
Sauvillers and Grivesnes from April 3–12. It again lost heavily,
especially the 52d Regiment, during the attack of April 4 near the Bois
de Arrachies.

4. It rested and trained from April 13 to May 23 at Iron et Vadencourt,
near Guise. It is known to have received 1,000 men from Beverloo on
April 14. From May 23 to 26 it marched toward the Aisne front by night,
through Parpeville, Monceau le Neuf, Aisis sur Serre, Couvron,
Laniscourt, Foucancourt.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

5. On the night of June 26 it entered line southeast of Lizy. In the
offensive the division advanced by Chavignon, Malmaison, Uregny, region
of Pommiers, Mercin, Pernant, east of Ambleny. It was partially relieved
on June 7 and the last elements withdrawn by June 13.

6. The division rested between Guise and Le Nouvion (Mannappes Lechelle)
from the middle of June to July 18. During this period the Spanish
sickness ravished the troops. Reinforcements reconstituted the division
during this period. On July 19 the division was transported to Anezy le
Chateau by way of Wassigny, Guise, Mesbricourt. By marches it moved by
steps to south of Soissons.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

7. On July 21 the division was engaged near Buzancy. It fell back to the
Vesle by Acy on August 1–2. It remained in the sector south of Vailly
(Ciry-Salsogne, Sermoise) until September 5, when it retired to the line
Vailly-Celle sur Aisne. After losing more than 1,000 prisoners it was
relieved on September 18.


ARDENNES.

8. The division was reengaged in the region of Jonchery on September 28.
It retired north of the Aisne (Sept. 30) toward Berry au Bac. Again
retreated October 10 by Prouvais, La Malmaison, to Nizy le Comte. It was
in line there until October 17, when it retired to the second line for a
week. It was reengaged in the same region from October 25 to November 5,
when it retreated by Rozoy and Brunehamel with extremely heavy losses.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Before the summer of 1918 the 5th Division was an excellent assault
division, frequently mentioned in German communiques. But after August,
1918, it became a sector-holding division. It was almost constantly in
line after July 21 with consequent lowering of morale and discipline. In
November it had but two battalions per regiment and three companies per
battalion.




                         5th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │9 Res.   │8 Res.   │9 Res.   │8 Res.   │10 Res.  │8 Res.
              │         │48 Res.  │         │48 Res.  │         │12 Res.
              │10 Res.  │12 Res.  │10 Res.  │12 Res.  │         │48 Res.
              │         │52 Res.  │         │52 Res.  │         │
              │ 3 Res. Jag. Btn.  │ 3 Res. Jag. Btn.  │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Res. Dragoon Rgt.│                   │2 Res. Drag. Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │5 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │5 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. and 2  │4 Field Co. and 2  │4 Field Co. and 2
   Liaisons.  │  Res. Co. of the 2│  Res. Co. of the 2│  Res. Co. of the 2
              │  Pion. Btn. No. 3.│  Pion. Btn. No. 3.│  Pion. Btn. No. 3.
              │                   │5 Res. Pont. Engs. │205 T. M. Co.
              │                   │5 Res. Tel. Detch. │5 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │5 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │10 Res.  │8 Res.   │9 Res.   │8 Res.
              │         │12 Res.  │         │12 Res.
              │         │48 Res.  │         │48 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Res. Drag. Rgt.  │5 Sqn. 4 Drag. Rgt.
              │  (?) (1 Sqn.).    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │90 Art. Command:   │90 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 5 Res. F. A. Rgt. │ 5 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 4 Abt. 17 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1086 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1176 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1202 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(305) Pion. Btn.:  │505 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 3 Pions.    │ 4 Co. 3 Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 3      │ 2 Res. Co. 3
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 205 T. M. Co.     │ 205 T. M. Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.       │ 69 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │405 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 405 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 44 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │503 Ambulance Co.  │503 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │64 Res. Field      │64 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │65 Res. Field      │65 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │135 Res. Vet.
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │705 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (Third District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1914.

The 5th Reserve Division is organically a part of the 3d Reserve Corps,
with the 6th Reserve Division.


BELGIUM.

1. At the beginning of the war the division belonged to the 1st Army
(Von Kluck). Detrained at Crefeld from August 10 to 12; entered Belgium
the 18th. The 3d Reserve Corps was sent to France. The division was at
Malines on August 22, at Vilvorde the 26th, and fought against the
Belgians on that day. The 3d Reserve Corps then turned toward Antwerp,
which it besieged. After the city was taken the corps advanced toward
the sea through Ghent, Bruges, October 13 to 16. The 19th the 5th
Reserve Division attacked in the direction of Nieuport. At the beginning
of November it fought in the vicinity of Bixschoote, in the forest of
Houthulst; then until the end of November it held the Dixmude-Langmarck
front.


RUSSIA.

2. About December 2 the division entrained for the eastern front. On
arriving in Russia it became part of Mackensen’s army (9th Army). It was
sent to the Bzura.


                                 1915.

1. In February, 1915, the division was attached to the 10th Army and
took part in the battle of Prasnysz.

2. In May one of its brigades remained before Kovno with the 10th Army
(Gen. von Eichhorn). The other brigade joined the 3d Reserve Corps of
the 9th Army (Gen. von Fabeck) and fought on the Bzura. The 52d Reserve
Infantry was transferred to the 107th Division.

3. In July the division was reorganized. It was attached to the 9th Army
before Warsaw and fought between the Bzura and the Pilica.

4. In November, after crossing the Vistula and the Bug it arrived before
Baranovitchi. It remained in this region until March, 1917.


                                 1916.

1. On January 1, 1916, it held the eastern sector of Novo-Grudok, north
of Baranovitchi.

2. At the beginning of April the division was placed in reserve behind
this sector.

3. During the first two weeks of July it was engaged between Gorodivche
and Baranovitchi to oppose the Russian offensive started on this part of
the front. On July 8 it suffered heavy losses. (The 8th Reserve had
1,200 men out of action.)


                                 1917.


FRANCE.

1. It was relieved in this area about the middle of April and sent to
the Western Front.

2. Entrained between the 17th and 18th of April at Molczacz
(Baranovitchi sector) and went to France, via Brest-Litovsk-Warsaw-
Oppeln-Breslau-Goerlitz-Dresden-Leipzig-Sondershausen-Frankfort on Main-
Sarrebrucken-Metz. It detrained at Mars la Tour.


WOEVRE.

3. It was then sent to St. Maurice sous les Cotes, where it rested for a
few days and then went to the Cotes de Meuse, east of the Combres
Heights. It went into the sector before Combres (Calonne trench) on May
15 or 16, and there became accustomed to the Western Front.


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

4. Relieved May 27, it was sent behind the Aisne front; spent about
three weeks in the Sissonne region, and about June 19 went into line on
Californie Plateau near Chaevreux. On June 24, July 3 and 22, the
division executed some violent attacks on Californie Plateau, and some
of its units lost half their men.

5. Partially relieved about July 23, the units of the division were sent
to rest successively at St. Erme, Ramecourt, and La Selve. Before August
10 it was back on Californie Plateau (region of Craonne south of
Corbeny).

6. The division took part on the same position in the general retreat of
November 1 which brought the German lines back to the north of the
Ailette following the French attack of La Malmaison. The division
remained on these new lines (south and west of Corbeny) until January
22, 1918.

7. Relieved on this date and put through a course of training in the
region of Chimay. On February 18 it marched to the sector of Juvincourt.


                              RECRUITING.

Brandenburg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division is considered by the Germans as a very good division. Its
original elements came from the best corps, the Brandenburg corps, but
it contains a large proportion of Poles. The division needs rest and
replacements. When reconstituted it will probably again be a good unit.
(Dec. 29, 1917.)


                                 1918.


LAON.

1. On February 21 the division relieved the 113th Division at
Juvincourt, which sector it held until March 26.


PICARDY.

2. It was withdrawn to reinforce the battle front at Chauny, where it
appeared on April 2. About April 11, it retired to second line, from
which it returned to the battle front on April 25, relieving the 242d
Division at Couchy le Pots. The division continued to hold this sector
until early June.


NOYON.

3. Between June 1 and 10 it was moved from the Couchy le Pots sector to
reinforce the Montdidier-Noyon battle front, where it was identified on
June 12 near Courcelles. It was withdrawn on June 17.

4. During July the division rested in rear of the Amiens front.


SOMME.

5. It came into line on August 8 at Trace le Mont. In the opening week
of the offensive it lost many prisoners and retired from the line about
August 20 to rest near St. Gobain. On the 29th it returned to line near
Arblencourt-Champs. It withdrew early in September but returned to
support the 80th Reserve Division in a counterattack executed in the
region Sancy-Vauxillon September 16–18.

6. Following this the division was rested near Laon. On October 7 it was
entrained and moved to the region of Tupigny-Mennevret.

7. It was engaged on October 9 to the east of Bohain before the extreme
right of the 4th British Army. It was relieved in this sector on October
23 by the 200th Division. At this time the division was very low in
effectives; two regiments had three battalions of three companies and
one regiment had but two battalions. The average company strength was
about 50 men.

8. Retired to rest for 15 days, the division returned to line on
November 5, near Wiege Faty. It was last identified at Trelon on
November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a second-class division. In the earlier years
it was a very good division, but through losses and lack of
reinforcements during 1918 considerably reduced its value.




                          5th Ersatz Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1916             │            1917
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │37 Mixed Ldw. │73 Ldw.       │37 Ldw.       │3 Res. Ers.
              │              │74 Ldw.       │              │73 Ldw.
              │2 Res. Ers.   │4 Res. Ers.   │              │74 Ldw.
              │              │3 Res. Ers.   │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Cuirassier Rgt. (Ers.      │8 Cuirassier Rgt. (Ers.
              │  Sqn.).                     │  Sqn.).
              │                             │88 Cav. Rgt. (3 Sqn.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │102 F. A. Abtl. (1 Ers. Abt. │102 F. A. Regt.
              │  26 F. A. Rgt).             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│161 T. M. Co.                │Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │ (?) 2 Landst. Co. 9 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │                             │ 405 T. M. Co.
              │                             │ 303 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │ 555 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │269 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │(?) (11 Ldw.) Field Hospital.
              │                             │505 Vet. Hospital.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │763 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │2 Insterburg Landst. Inf.
              │                             │  Btn. (1 C. Dist. Btn. No.
              │                             │  6).
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1918             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │37 Ldw.       │73 Ldw.       │37 Ldw.       │73 Ldw.
              │              │74 Ldw.       │              │74 Ldw.
              │              │8 Landst.     │              │(?)
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │1 Sqn. 16 Drag. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │250 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │2 Landst. Co. 9 C. Dist
   Liaisons.  │                             │  Pions.
              │                             │111 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │
              │                             │555 Signal Command.
              │                             │555 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │269 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │500 Field Hospital.
              │                             │11 Ldw. Field Hospital.
              │                             │505 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │763 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (73d Landwehr and 74th Landwehr: Tenth District—Hanover. 8th Landsturm;
                     Eighth District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1916.

The 5th Ersatz Division was organized in the fall of 1915 with the name
of Basedow Division. It comprised the 37th Landwehr Brigade (73d and
74th Landwehr); until then attached to the 26th Reserve Corps, and the
2d Reserve Ersatz Brigade (3d Ersatz Reserve and 4th Reserve Brigade),
situated in the Dixmude sector. With the 4th Ersatz Division, the
Basedow Division, which became the 5th Ersatz Division in 1916,
constituted at the end of 1915 the Werde Corps.


BELGIUM.

1. From January to October, 1916 the division remained in Belgium
(region of Yser, then southeast of Ypres). However, the 4th Ersatz
Reserve was transferred to the 206th Division at the beginning of
September.


SOMME.

2. Withdrawn from the Ypres front at the beginning of October, the
division was sent to the Somme and engaged north of Courcelette from
October 19 to 30.

3. In November it was sent to rest behind the Champagne front.


RUSSIA.

4. At the beginning of December it was sent to Russia (the 73d Landwehr
entrained December 11 northeast of Reims, via Dusseldorf-Hamburg-
Koenigsburg-Tilsit-Poneviej. Detrained at Elovka the 16th).


                                 1917.


COURLAND.

Sent into line in the Illukst sector (region of Dvinsk) at the beginning
of January 1917 and remained in this country during the whole year
(Illukst, Lake Stenten, Kchtchava). Its losses were very small—17 killed
and 20 wounded in the 3d Ersatz Reserve from the end of December, 1916,
to the end of August, 1917. Because the sector was so quiet the division
had only small forces during the last months of 1917. The 73d Landwehr
at the end of November had only 60 to 65 men per company (examination of
Russians).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division remained for a long time in the quiet sectors of the
Russian front and seems to have had only moderate fighting value.


                                 1918.


COURLAND.

1. The 5th Ersatz Division was still in the vicinity of Dvinsk in
February. In March it exchanged the 3d Ersatz Regiment for the 8th
Landsturm Regiment of the 87th Division, the latter being on the point
of leaving for France.


LIVONIA.

2. The division advanced into Livonia (in March) and remained in the
Pskov-Ostrov region as late as June 27th. The 74th Landwehr Regiment was
identified here on August 6, but the rest of the division was identified
near Mitau during July.

3. Toward the end of October, it was reported that the division, having
been refitted, had come to the Western Front via Trier and Rethel;
however, the division was never actually identified on the Western
Front.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as 4th class.




                         5th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │14 Ldw.  │36 Ldw.  │14 Ldw.  │36 Ldw.  │14 Ldw.  │36 Ldw.
              │         │66 Ldw.  │         │66 Ldw.  │         │66 Ldw.
              │         │17 Ldw.  │30 Ldw.  │25 Ldw.  │30 Ldw.  │25 Ldw.
              │30 Ldw.  │25 Ldw.  │         │65 Ldw.  │         │65 Ldw.
              │         │65 Ldw.  │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │4 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │                   │1 and 2 Landst. 4
              │                   │                   │  C. Dist.
              │                   │                   │  Batteries. F. A.
              │                   │                   │256 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (left in July).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ldw. 11 C. Dist. │                   │1 Ldw. 11 C. Dist.
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Co.        │                   │  Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │1 Ldw. 16 C. Dist.
              │                   │                   │  Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │305 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │93 Ldw. Inf. Regt. │
              │                   │  (June to Sept.)  │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │30 Ldw.  │25 Ldw.  │30 Ldw.  │25 Ldw.
              │         │36 Ldw.  │         │36 Ldw.
              │         │65 Ldw.  │         │65 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 16 Uhlan    │2 Sqn. 16 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │256 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 256 Ldw. F. A.    │1,415 Light Am.
              │  Rgt.             │  Col.
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(405) Pion. Btn.:  │405 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Ldw. 11 C. Dist.│ 1 Ldw. Co. 11 C.
              │  Pion. Co.        │  Dist. Pions.
              │ 1 Ldw. 16 C. Dist.│ 1 Ldw. Co. 16 C.
              │  Pion. Co.        │  Dist. Pions.
              │ 305 T. M. Co.     │ 305 T. M. Co.
              │ 321 Searchlight   │ 217 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ Tel. Detch.       │505 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 505 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 92 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │12 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │151 Field Hospital.│67 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │79 Field Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │775 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (25th Landwehr and 65th Landwehr: Eighth District—Rhine Province. 36th
              Landwehr: Fourth District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1914.

The 5th Landwehr Division is composed of two Landwehr brigades meant to
be the war garrison of Metz, where they detrained August 9 and 10, 1914:
14th Landwehr Brigade from the Fourth District (36th Landwehr and 66th
Landwehr); 30th Landwehr Brigade from the Eighth District (25th Landwehr
and 65th Landwehr). The 17th Landwehr was under the 14th Brigade.


WOEVRE.

1. During the first days of September the 14th Landwehr Brigade was
engaged at Fresnes and Marcheville (in Woevre), near the 33d Reserve
Division. It fought on the Cotes de Meuse, near Champlon and Les
Eparges, at the beginning of October and suffered heavy losses there.

2. In December the two brigades (14th Landwehr Brigade and 30th Landwehr
Brigade) were united in the Woevre (Warcq, Hennemont, Marcheville,
Champlon, Saulx). The division at that time was part of the Von Strantz
detachment.


                                 1915.

1. The division remained in the sector between Warcq and Saulx en Woevre
during the whole of 1915. In January the 17th Landwehr, from which many
men had deserted, was sent to Russia, where it assisted in the formation
of the 85th Landwehr Division.


                                 1916.


COTES DE MEUSE.

1. At the time of the Verdun offensive the division was present during
the attacks on the Cotes de Meuse, near Braquis, Ronvaux, Manhuelles, at
the end of February to March, 1916.

2. Toward the end of March the 14th Landwehr Brigade took the place of
the First Guard Ersatz Brigade (Guard Ersatz Division) in the Apremont
sector.

3. The 30th Landwehr Brigade was kept before the Cotes de Meuse (region
of Fresnes en Woevre) until July. It then rejoined the other brigade
east of St. Mihiel.


                                 1917.


FOREST OF APREMONT.

1. The division from this time on did not leave the Forest of Apremont
sector. In April, 1917, the 66th Landwehr was transferred to the 23d
Landwehr Division, newly organized, and soon sent to Russia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

A sector unit.


                                 1918.

1. On April 12 the division undertook a local operation in the Apremont
sector in an effort to divert troops and artillery from the Somme front.
About 800 men of the Storm Battalion were engaged. Forty-seven prisoners
were lost in the attack. Aside from this the sector continued very quiet
until September 12.


BATTLE OF ST. MIHIEL.

2. The division was engaged in the attack in the St. Mihiel salient. It
lost heavily in prisoners, among whom were the entire staff of the 3d
Battalion, 65th Landwehr Regiment, which was taken on September 12 in
the Bois de Thiaucourt. The division retreated with orders to take up
positions between the first and second positions of the Hindenburg line.
Here it had orders to hold the Mihiel Zone under all circumstances.

3. The division continued in line until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 5th Landwehr Division was rated as a fourth-class division. In 1918
it held the Apremont sector continuously, showing no initiative or
capacity for offensive operation, but due to the small losses and heavy
effectives it offered as much resistance to our attack in September as
did the other German divisions in the salient.




                         5th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │9 Bav.   │14 Bav.  │9 Bav.   │14 Bav.  │9 Bav.   │14 Bav.
              │         │21 Bav.  │         │21 Bav.  │         │21 Bav.
              │10 Bav.  │7 Bav.   │10 Bav.  │7 Bav.   │10 Bav.  │7 Bav.
              │         │19 Bav.  │         │19 Bav.  │         │19 Bav.
              │ 2 Bav. Res. Jag.  │ 2 Bav. Res. Jag.  │         │
              │       Btn.        │       Btn.        │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │7 Bav. Light Cav.  │7 Bav. Light Cav.  │7 Bav. Light Cav.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt. (2 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Bav. Brig.:      │5 Bav. Brig.:      │5 Bav. Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 6 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 6 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 6 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │ 10 Bav. F. A. Rgt.│ 10 Bav. F. A. Rgt.│ 10 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 4 Field Cos. │1 and 4 Field Cos. │1 and 4 Field Cos.
   Liaisons.  │  3 Bav. Pion. Btn.│  3 Bav. Pion. Btn.│  3 Bav. Pion. Btn.
              │                   │5 Bav. Pont. Engs. │5 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │5 Bav. Tel. Detch. │5 Bav. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │5 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │84 Labor Btn. Anti-
              │                   │                   │  Aircraft.
              │                   │                   │Section 1 Bav.
              │                   │                   │  Balloon Sqn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │10 Bav.  │7 Bav.   │10 Bav.  │7 Bav.
              │         │19 Bav.  │         │19 Bav.
              │         │21 Bav.  │         │21 Bav.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Bav. Light Cav.  │4 Sqns. 2 Bav.
              │  Rgt. (4 Sqns.).  │  Light Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Bav. Art.        │5 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 6 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 10 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 3 Abt. 1 Bav. F.
              │                   │  A. Rgt. (Staff,
              │                   │  and 9, 10, and 11
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │103 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │109 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │166 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(S) 5 Bav. Pion.   │3 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 10 Bav. Pion. Co. │ 10 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 13 Bav. Pion. Co. │ 13 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 5 Bav. T. M. Co.  │ 5 Bav. Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 5 Bav. Tel. Detch.│5 Bav. Signal
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 5 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 100 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │3 Bav. Ambulance   │6 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │6 Bav. Ambulance   │21 Bav. Field
              │  Co.              │  Hospital.
              │Field Hospital.    │25 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │114 M. T. Col.     │685 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                 (Upper and Middle Franconia—Bavaria.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. At the beginning of the war the division was a part of the 3d
Bavarian Army Corps, with the 6th Bavarian Division, and was part of the
6th Army (Crown Prince Ruprecht of Bavaria). Detrained between Boulay
and Courcelles from August 9 to 11, it fought August 20 on the right of
the 2d Bavarian Corps at Oron, Lusy, Fremery. Crossed the frontier on
the 22d and advanced to Sanon, fighting on the 25th at Serres and
Hoéville, and on September 2 at Einville Wood. During the days following
it formed the left of the troops attacking Nancy by way of Champenoux.


WOEVRE.

2. After its failure the division was assembled at Metz on September 13
and 14. The 19th it was at Mars-la-Tour. From there going through La
Haye it reached the Cotes de Meuse. The 7th Infantry took Nonsard the
20th and Heudicourt the 21st. Marching on the left of the 6th Bavarian
Division, which went up the hill, the 5th Bavarian Division, walking
along the summit, established itself in the forest of Apremont at the
beginning of September 25 and held it during the whole of 1915, and,
except for the months of October and November, 1915, during the summer
of 1916. Its losses were quite high during the first two months of the
campaign. On October 14 the 1st Company of the 14th Infantry had only 1
officer and 41 men (notebooks).


                                 1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. October 6, 1915, the division was sent to Champagne, via Audun le
Roman-Longuyon-Sedan, to relieve the 16th Reserve Division which had
been crushed by the French attack of September 25. It was engaged south
of Tahure (La Courtine) beginning October 13.


WOEVRE.

2. At the beginning of December it returned to its old sector east of
St. Mihiel.


                                 1916.


ARTOIS.

1. In July, 1916, the division was withdrawn from the St. Mihiel salient
and sent to Artois. It held the Lens-Vimy sector until the end of
August, 1916.


SOMME.

2. September 7 to 8 it was engaged in the Somme (Delville Wood-Ginchy).
It suffered heavy losses in the fights around Ginchy and during the
British attack of September 15 (Flers, Gueudecourt).


ARTOIS.

3. Relieved September 20, it went back into line after a few days of
rest in the sector Neuve-Chapelle, south of the Armentieres road.


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. The division remained on the front south of Armentieres during the
whole winter 1916 to 1917. In February it was reduced to three regiments
on the transfer of the 14th Infantry to the 16th Bavarian Division,
newly organized.

2. It left the lines at the end of April, but at the beginning of May
went to the sector north of Arras, where it fought heavily at Fresnoy on
May 7 and southeast of Gavrelle on June 28.


BELGIUM.

3. Withdrawn from the Oppy-Gavrelle front July 1 and sent to rest near
the Belgian-Dutch front. It went through a period of training at the
Brasschaet camp in July.


FLANDERS.

4. About August 6 it entrained and went to Gits, via Lokeren, Ghent,
Thielt, and Pitthen. From there it went to Roulers. On August 10 held
the sector south of St. Julien, east of Ypres, where it suffered heavy
losses in the fighting of August 15 and days following. Relieved August
24.

5. After a period of rest the division went back into line September 8
in the quiet sector of Deulemont (south of the Lys) and held it until
the end of February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Upper and Middle Franconia (3d Bavarian District).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Although not among the best Bavarian divisions, it was a good combat
unit. In 1917 it did well at Arras and on the Ypres front where it
suffered heavy losses (information from the British, February, 1918).


                                 1918.

1. About February 13 the division was relieved, moved to Tourcoing (Feb.
14), and trained in that area until March 17, when it marched to
Roubaix. It entrained and moved to Fressies (5 miles north of Cambrai),
rested until the 19th, and moved to the front.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was engaged east of Cambrai (Vaux-Vrancourt) on March 22. Retiring
to second line about April 4, it rested near Sapignies until about April
11, when it was identified southeast of Boyelles. It was relieved by the
111th Division on May 6.

3. The division trained in the Somain area until May 22, when it was
moved by trucks via Cantin and Palluel to Ecourt. A day later it marched
to Bullecourt and relieved the 221st Division on night of May 24–25.
Lieut. Gen. v. Endres, the division commander, was promoted to the
command of the 1st Bavarian Corps about this time. The division was
relieved in the Boyelles sector on July 15 by the 21st Reserve Division.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. After resting behind the Arras Front the division entered the line
near Lihons on August 10. After suffering heavy losses it withdrew from
the battle front south of Peronne on September 24 and retired to the Le
Cateau region.

5. It rested for a week and returned to the battle at Rumilly on the
night of September 30-October 1. About October 12, after heavy losses,
it was withdrawn and rested near Valenciennes.

6. On October 25 it was again put in line at Rameguies-Chin. It was last
identified at Mourcourt on November 9.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 5th Bavarian Division was a first-class division. In 1918, it was
almost constantly engaged in the most active sectors on the British
front.




                     5th Bavarian Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │9 Bav.   │6 Bav.   │9 Bav.   │6 Bav.   │9 Bav.   │10 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │7 Bav.   │         │7 Bav.   │         │7 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.  │         │3 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │13 Bav.  │         │13 Bav.  │         │12 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │         │         │39 Ldw.  │         │
              │ 1 Bav. Res. Jag.  │ 1 Bav. Res. Jag.  │ 1 Bav. Res. Jag.
              │       Btn.        │       Btn.        │       Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Bav. Res. Cav.   │5 Bav. Res. Cav.   │        (?)
              │  Rgt. (3 Sqns.).  │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │5 Bav. Res. F. A.  │5 Bav. Res. F. A.  │5 Bav. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt. (6 Btries.).│  Rgt.             │  Rgt. (9 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. and 1  │4 Field Co. and 1  │4 Field Co. and 1
   Liaisons.  │  Res. Co. 2 Bav.  │  Res. Co 2 Bav.   │  Res. Co. 2 Bav.
              │  Pion. Btn.       │  Pion. Btn.       │  Pion. Btn.
              │                   │5 Res. Pont. Engs. │205 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │5 Res. Tel. Detch. │5 Bav. Res. Cable
              │                   │                   │  Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │5 Bav. Res. Tel.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │7 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │7 Bav.   │         │10 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │12 Bav.  │         │12 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │        (?)        │2 Sqn. 3 Bav. Light
              │                   │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │17 Bav. Art.       │17 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 5 Bav. Res. F. A. │ 5 Bav. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt. (9 Btries.).│  Rgt.
              │                   │ 17 Bav. Ft. A.
              │                   │  Btn.
              │                   │ 102 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 104 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 119 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(18) Bav. Pion.    │18 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.             │
              │                   │
              │ 2 Bav. Res. Pion. │ 2 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 19 Bav. Res. Pion │ 19 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 205 Bav. T. M. Co.│ 205 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 405 Bav. Tel.     │ 8 Bav. Searchlight
              │  Detch.           │  Section.
              │                   │405 Bav. Signal
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 405 Tel Detch.
              │                   │ 103 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │16 Bav. Ambulance  │16 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │46 Bav. Field      │46 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │56 Bav. Field      │50 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │751 Bav. M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (Third Bavarian District—Upper Palatinate, Upper and Middle Franconia.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. The division constituted, with the 5th Bavarian Reserve Division, the
1st Bavarian Reserve Corps, and at the beginning of the war was part of
the army of Crown Prince Ruprecht of Bavaria (6th Army). It detrained
from August 11 to 13 between Sarreguemines and Sarralbe. It fought
August 20 on the left of the 21st Corps at Loudrefeing, was engaged the
26th at Maixe, September 2 at Deuxville, northwest of Luniville, and
remained a few days longer behind Luniville.

2. On September 13 it was in line on the Seille and the Paris-Avricourt
Railroad and remained there until the last days of the month.


ARTOIS.

3. September 28 and 29 the division entrained at Metz. Detrained the
30th and October 1 at Valenciennes. Engaged north of Arras (Roclincourt-
Carency) in October and November and took position in the sector.


                                 1915.

In January, 1915, the division was increased by the 39th Landwehr
Infantry (Westphalian), coming from Brussels and sent as punishment to
the Artois front. In March and April two of its regiments were
transferred, the 6th Reserve to the 10th Bavarian Division, and the 13th
to the 11th Bavarian Division.


ARTOIS.

1. May 9, 1915, the division suffered very heavy losses during the
French offensive of Carency-Souchez. (The 10th Reserve Infantry lost 35
officers and 1,711 men, the 1st Reserve Bavarian Battalion of Chasseurs
lost 13 officers and 750 men.)

2. In the middle of June the division was moved south of the Scarpe in
front of Arras (Blangy sector).


                                 1916.

In January, 1916, the 39th Landwehr Infantry went to Russia.

1. The division remained in Artois until August, 1916, and was increased
by a regiment from the 1st Bavarian Division (3d Reserve Infantry later
replaced by the 12th Reserve Infantry).


SOMME.

2. Relieved about August 7, the division was sent to the Somme and was
engaged near Maurepas from the middle of August to September. Heavy
losses. August 19 the 2d Battalion of the 10th Reserve Infantry was
reduced to 150 men (letter). September 1 the 3d Battalion of the 7th
Reserve Infantry borrowed 200 men from the 5th Bavarian Ersatz (letter).


AISNE.

3. In the middle of September the division was sent to the Aisne, where
it held a quiet sector east of Craonne until the end of November.


SOMME.

4. About December 9 the division returned to the Somme (south of
Saillisel.)


                                 1917.

1. The division was withdrawn from the Somme front at the end of
January, 1917, and sent to rest in the vicinity of Cambrai until April.


AISNE.

2. At the beginning of April it was sent east of Laon to the region of
St. Erme, and reinforced the front south of Juvincourt between the
Miette and the Aisne about April 12 in anticipation of the French
offensive. It was subjected to the attack of the 16th and suffered heavy
losses (2,000 prisoners).


ST. MIHIEL.

3. Withdrawn from the Aisne front about April 20, the division was
reconstituted north of Laon (?), and on May 1 held the St. Mihiel sector
(Chauvoncourt-Spada).

4. October 7 it left the region of St. Mihiel.


FLANDERS.

5. Sent to Flanders and sent into line October 12 near the Ypres-Roulers
Railroad (Zonnebeke). In November it was left of Artois, where it held,
after intervals of relief, a sector north of the Scarpe (from Gavrelle
to Acheville). It was still there at the end of February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

3d Bavarian Division (Upper Palatinate, Upper and Middle Franconia).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Good division, which has always fought well (October, 1917). April 16,
1917, it fought with great tenacity.


                                 1918.

1. Early in January the division was relieved in its sector north of the
Scarpe and went to rest north of Douai.


SCARPE.

2. It was reengaged southeast of Gavrelle on February 21, when it was in
line during the attack. It took no prominent part in the offensive and
was withdrawn about the 1st of April.


SOMME.

3. On April 7–8 it came in line south of Hebuterne, where it was engaged
until April 16. After eight days’ rest it came into line south of the
Ayette, relieving the 195th Division on April 24. It was not withdrawn
until July 24.


ALSACE.

4. The division moved to Muelhausen, via Belgium and Germany, a trip of
10 days. While at rest there it was frequently alerted in anticipation
of an expected Allied attack in that region. On September 4 it returned
through Germany and Belgium to Douai, where the British were attacking.

5. It left Douai on September 22, detraining at Dun sur Meuse on
September 23. From there the division marched to the front.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

6. On September 27 it was engaged at Daunevoux. It was engaged
throughout the entire Meuse-Argonne battle on the American front. At
Montfaucon it was forced back with heavy losses. The division affected
relief by regiments, which were sent to close support to be
reconstituted by drafts. Five hundred replacements were received early
in October. The initial company combat strength averaged 60 men. On
November 4 this had been reduced to 20. During the retreat of November
1–2 the division crossed the Meuse and took up a position on the east
bank.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 5th Bavarian Reserve Division was rated as a second-class division.
Apart from the Meuse-Argonne offensive, it did not see much heavy
fighting during the year. Its effectives had been almost completely used
up by the time of the armistice.




                         5th Cavalry Division.


                            COMPOSITION.[5]

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │9 Cav.                 │4 Drag.
                        │                       │10 Uhlan.
                        │11 Cav.                │1 Cuirassier.
                        │                       │8 Drag.
                        │12 Cav.                │4 Hus.
                        │                       │6 Hus.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │5 Horse Art. Abt. (5.7 cm.).
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│643 Ambulance Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Odd units.             │1 M. G. Btry. 5 Cav. Pion. Detch.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │52 Ldw. Inf. Rgt.
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────

Footnote 5:

  At the time of its dissolution, July, 1918.


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

There were repeated rumors of the division being on the Western Front in
1918, but no satisfactory identification was ever received.

According to a deserter of the 8th Dragoon Regiment, who left his
regiment in Jeumont, south of Binche, on May 20, the entire 5th Cavalry
Division entrained in Russia about March 6 and detrained at Zossen,
south of Berlin, where it was re-formed and trained. On the 26th of
April the division moved to St. Amand, from where it moved two weeks
later to the Jeumont and Marpent area.

Evidence points to the dissolution of the division on the Western Front
about July, 1918.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a fourth-class division.




                             6th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │11.      │20.      │11.      │20.      │12.      │20.
              │         │35 Fus.  │         │35 Fus.  │         │24.
              │12.      │24.      │12.      │24.      │         │64.
              │         │64.      │         │64.      │         │
              │    3 Jag. Btn.    │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Hus. Rgt. (3     │                   │3 Hus. Regt. (3
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │6 Brig.:           │6 Brig.:           │6 Brig.:
              │ 3 F. A. Rgt.      │ 3 F. A. Rgt.      │ 3 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 39 F. A. Rgt.     │ 39 F. A. Rgt.     │ 39 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 3:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 3:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 3 Pions.│ 2 Co. 3 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 6 Pont. Engs.     │ 6 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 6 Tel. Detch.     │ 6 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 6 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │M. G. Co. to the 12
              │                   │                   │  Brig.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │12.      │24.      │12.      │24.
              │         │64.      │         │64.
              │         │396.     │         │396.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Hus. Regt. (5    │5 Sqn. 3 Hus. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │6 Art. Command:    │64 Art. Command:
              │ 3 F. A. Rgt.      │ 3 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 3 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (Staff and 2
              │                   │  and 4 Btries).
              │                   │ 1087 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1168 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1205 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Pion. Btn. No. 3:│3 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │(now 116 Pion.     │ 3 Co. 3 Pions.
              │  Btn.):           │
              │ 3 Co. 3 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 3 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 3 Pions.    │ 6 T. M. Co.
              │ 6 T. M. Co.       │ 64 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 6 Tel. Detch.     │6 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 6 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 2 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │8 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │29 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │31 Field Hospital.
              │                   │233 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │539 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │242, 244, 245, and │
              │  246 Mountain M.  │
              │  G. Detch.,       │
              │  Naumburg Landst. │
              │  Inf. Btn. (IV C. │
              │  Dist. No. 11).   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (Third District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1914.

At mobilization the 6th Division formed, together with the 5th Division,
the 3d Army Corps (Berlin).


CHARLEROI-MARNE.

1. At the beginning of the war the 3d Army Corps belonged to the 1st
Army (Von Kluck). Entered Belgium August 4 and the 11th Brigade made
part of the unit which attacked Liège. Its reservists rejoined it there.
The 12th Brigade crossed the Belgian frontier August 15; then the
division, completely filled up, marched via Tongres, Louvain, and Hal.
It fought the 24th at Mons and Frameries. Going via Villers-Cotterets
(Sept. 1), La Ferté-Milon, it arrived at Petit-Morin September 4.
Engaged the 6th between Montceaux and Courgivaux on the left of the 5th
Division. Obliged to retreat, it established itself on the right bank of
the Aisne in the region of Soissons. It remained there until the end of
June, 1915.


AISNE.

2. From October 30 to November 30, 1914, the division, reinforced by
units of neighboring organizations, directed a successful offensive
against the French troops in the region Chavonne-Soupir and threw them
back on the left bank of the Aisne November 17 to 19, 1914.


                                 1915.

1. From the end of January to July, 1915, the Aisne front was held by
the division and remained quiet, the division suffering no losses. At
the end of March the 35th Fusilier Regiment was transferred to 56th
Division (new division).


ARTOIS.

2. Relieved from the region of Soissons toward the end of June and sent
to Artois. On July 14 it took the place of the Bavarians before Arras.
Withdrawn from the front toward the beginning of August and sent to rest
between Valenciennes and Cambrai.


SERBIA.

3. September 23 it entrained for the Eastern Front. With the 25th
Reserve Division it constituted, on the Serbo-Hungarian frontier, a new
3d Army Corps belonging to the Gallwitz Army. October 9 it crossed the
Danube and remained in Serbia until the capture of Kragujewatz. During
this October campaign the division suffered greatly.


FRANCE.

4. Returned to the Western Front at the beginning of December. Sent to
rest and reorganized in the region Hirson-Avesnes.


                                 1916.

1. At the end of January and the beginning of February, 1916, it was
sent to the front north of Verdun (Romagne-Mangiennes area).


VERDUN.

2. February 22 it was engaged with the 5th Division in the zone between
the western limits of Herbebois and the eastern slopes of the Cotes de
Meuse. The two divisions did not go beyond Fort Douaumont, captured by
the 24th Infantry. Their violent attacks on the village February 26 to
28 were repulsed. March 2 the regiments were withdrawn from the front
and filled up.

3. On March 8 new and unsuccessful attacks against the village of
Douaumont and the Hardaumont defenses.

4. About March 15 the 3d Army Corps was withdrawn from the front. The
6th Division went to the region of Mulhouse to be reorganized. On April
25 the division was again engaged (south of Douaumont-Caillette Wood)
and again suffered heavily. It is probable that each of its regiments
were completely reorganized after each attack at Douaumont (more than 60
per cent losses).

6. At the end of May the division was relieved and sent to rest in the
region of Ville au Montois.


CHAMPAGNE.

7. In the middle of June it was sent to Champagne and occupied quiet
sectors northeast of Prunay, then east of Auberive. It remained there
till the end of September. It exchanged its 20th Infantry Regiment for
the 396th Infantry Regiment, organized September 26. (See illustration.)


SOMME.

8. At the beginning of October sent to the Somme and was engaged in the
region of Gueudecourt and again suffered heavily, October 8 to 29.


ARGONNE.

9. Withdrawn from the Somme front at the end of October; went to the
Argonne in the sector Fille-Morte-Boureuilles, November 30 to beginning
of April, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. At the beginning of April, 1917, the division was sent to Alsace. It
stayed about two weeks in the region of Mulhouse.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. About April 20 sent to Champagne and took over a sector south of
Moronvilliers where it was subjected to the French attack of April 30.
It had to be relieved a few days after, as it suffered great losses at
Mont-Haut (50 to 75 men per company).

3. The division returned to Alsace and was reorganized behind the front
in the region of Mulhouse.


RUSSIA.

4. About July 1 sent to the Eastern Front in Galicia, where it held a
sector in the Skalat region.


FRANCE.

Withdrawn from this front at the beginning of October it entrained for
France, beginning the 7th, southeast of Tarnopol, and traveled via
Lemberg-Cracow-Dresden-Cassel-Coblentz-Treves-Thionville-Montmedy-
Charleville-Vouziers.


AISNE.

5. After staying a few days around Vouziers and Marle the division was
sent on October 23, the date of the French offensive, precipitately near
Laon. October 24 and 25 it took over a sector on the Ailette in the
region of Lizy (Urcel sector) and was still holding it January 24, 1918,
after a period of rest in Laon in November.


                              RECRUITING.

Same remarks as for the 5th Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 3d Army Corps was always considered as one of the star corps of the
Prussian Army. The 6th Division was among the best in Germany.

The military qualities seem to have been considerably lessened after the
losses suffered, notably before Verdun and in the Mont Haut sector. It
must be noted, however, that, according to the examination of a deserter
on November 2, 1917, the 396th Regiment is still considered as an
excellent unit whose morale is intact.

Losses before Verdun (February to May, 1916): 20th Infantry, 2,904 men
(633 killed); 24th Infantry, 2,691 (584 killed); 64th Infantry, 2,819
(603 killed); 3d Battalion of Chasseurs, 1,422 (219 killed). Total,
9,831 men (2,039 killed).


                                 1918.


AISNE.

1. The division was relieved by the 6th Bavarian Reserve Division
January 12. It, in turn, relieved the 6th Bavarian Reserve Division the
24th. February 22 it was again relieved by the 6th Bavarian Reserve
Division. It rested then in the Maubeuge area, where it underwent a
thorough course of training. The division then marched via Catillon,
Bohain, Fresnoy le Grand, Le Verguier, Berthaucourt, Vermand,
Marteville, Trefcon, Monchy Lagache.


PERONNE.

2. It came into line S. E. of that city near Meharicourt, March 24,
relieving the 113th Division.


AISNE.

3. It was withdrawn from line about the 10th of April, and went to the
Guise area, where, with the 5th Division, it was put through another
course of training. It reinforced the battle front near Juvigny, May 27.
It was withdrawn from line August 4.

It moved via Anizy le Chateau, southwest of Laon, Guise, Grougis,
Bohain, Bertry, Neuvilly, Solesmes, Valenciennes, Ghent, to Turkyen
(northwest of Roulers). The division remained here until September 7,
when it entrained at Roulers and traveled via Lille and Denain to Iwuy,
remaining in reserve in the Sancourt-Proville area until the 14th, when
it was moved up into support near Ribecourt.


CAMBRAI.

4. During the night of September 17–18 it reentered the line and
counterattacked against Havrincourt (southwest of Cambrai). It was
withdrawn October 1, after suffering heavy losses.

5. The division came back into line near Escadoeuvres (northeast of
Cambrai), October 7. It was withdrawn on the 17th.


VALENCIENNES.

6. October 23 the division entered line near Escautpont (north of
Valenciennes).

7. It was withdrawn a few days later, and reappeared in line south of
Valenciennes on the 29th. The night of November 7–8 it was relieved by
the 185th Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

According to an article by Prof. Wegener in the Koelnische Zeitung,
March 30, the 6th Division “particularly distinguished itself” in the
Somme offensive. It did very well, too, in the Aisne attack and also in
the German attempts to prevent the Allied advance beginning July 18. It
suffered very heavy losses—e. g., 1,550 prisoners in its two engagements
on the Cambrai front during September and early October; nevertheless,
it is still to be considered as one of the best German shock divisions.




                         6th Reserve Division.


                            COMPOSITION.[6]

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │11  Res. │20 Res.  │11 Res.  │20 Res.  │11 Res.  │20 Res.
              │         │24 Res.  │         │24 Res.  │         │35 Res.
              │12  Res. │26 Res.  │12 Res.  │26 Res.  │12 Res.  │24 Res.
              │         │35 Res.  │         │35 Res.  │         │19
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Landst.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │                   │3 Res. Uhlan Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │6 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │6 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │6 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Res. Co. 2 Pion. │1 Res. Co. 2 Pion. │1 Res. Co. 3 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  Btn. No. 3.      │  Btn. No. 3.      │  Btn. No. 3.
              │                   │6 Res. Pont. Engs. │3 Co. 34 Res.
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │6 Res. Tel. Detch. │206 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │6 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │6 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │151 Cyclist Co.
              │                   │                   │102 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │12 Res.  │20 Res.  │12 Res.  │20 Res.
              │         │24 Res.  │         │24 Res.
              │         │35 Res.  │         │35 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Res. Uhlan Rgt.? │
              │  (1 Sqn.).        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │94 Art. Command:   │94 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 6 Res. F. A. Rgt. │ 6 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(306) Pion. Btn.:  │1 Res. Co. (2 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  Btn. No. 3).
              │ 5 Co. 1 Pions.    │3 Co. 34 Res. Pion.
              │                   │  Btn.
              │ 1 Res. Co. 3      │274 Searchlight
              │  Pions.           │  Section.
              │ 206 T. M. Co.     │206 T. M. Co.
              │ 274 Searchlight   │4 06th Tel. Detch.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 406 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │516 Ambulance Co.  │516 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │19 Res. Field      │18 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │20 Res. Field      │19 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │20 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │144 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │706 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │151 Cyclist Co.    │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 6:

  At time of dissolution, Aug. 23, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

                     (Third District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1914.

The 6th Reserve Division belonged organically to the 3d Reserve Corps,
like the 5th Reserve Division.


BELGIUM.

1. At the beginning of the war the 3d Reserve Corps belonged to the 1st
German Army (Gen. von Kluck). The 6th Reserve Division detrained August
10 in the region of Crefeld, entered Belgium the 17th, passed through
Belgian Limburg at the beginning of September, moved on Malines to
oppose the Belgian offensive. September 9 the division attacked the
Belgian troops in the region of Louvain and then took part in the siege
of Antwerp.


YSER.

2. After the fall of Antwerp it moved toward the sea from October 13 to
16, through Ghent, Bruges, and Ostend. It concentrated near Thourout
October 19 and fought along the Yser Canal. It fought violently in the
region of Nieuport-Dixmude at the end of October and the beginning of
November.


RUSSIA.

3. At the beginning of December the 3d Reserve Corps went to Russia, the
6th Reserve Division being withdrawn from the Belgian front about the
middle of November.


                                 1915.


POLAND.

1. On arriving on the Eastern Front the division was engaged on the
Bzura and before Warsaw (9th Army, under Mackensen).

2. In July, 1915, it became a part of Von Buelow’s army, which marched
on the left wing (north) of the German forces during the offensive
against Russia (summer and fall of 1915).


DVINA.

3. In November the division still belonged to Von Buelow’s army, called
the Niemen army, and was engaged on the Dvina.


                                 1916.


COURLAND.

1. In February, 1916, the division (8th Army under Von Buelow) held a
sector in the region of Riga-Friedrichstadt.

2. During its stay in Russia the division did not have very heavy losses
except in July, 1916, when it opposed violent Russian attacks near
Kekkau.


                                 1917.


COURLAND.

1. Relieved from the Kekkau sector in May, 1917, and was sent to the
Western Front.


FRANCE.

2. Entrained about May 6 at Mitau and sent via Cottbus, Cassel,
Coblentz, Treves, Thionville to Dun, where it detrained May 13.


MORT HOMME-HILL 304.

3. At the end of May the division went into line on the left bank of the
Meuse in the sector Mort Homme-Hill 304. On June 29 some of the units of
the division supported an attack attempted by the 10th Reserve Division
against Hill 304 and suffered heavy losses. August 20 the French
offensive struck them. Its losses were enormous. Two of its regiments,
the 24th Reserve and 20th Reserve, were nearly wiped out. The 35th
Reserve was not weakened quite so much, yet was seriously diminished.
The division lost 2,800 prisoners.


RUSSIA.

4. Withdrawn from the front, the division was sent to Galicia at the end
of September. It was still there January 31 on the old Austro-Russian
frontier after furnishing reinforcements to the Western Front.


                              RECRUITING.

Brandenburg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 6th Reserve Division, a short time after its return from the Eastern
Front, was considered about as follows: “Its value is mediocre. In spite
of its units from Brandenburg and the recent creation of shock troops,
its long stay in Russia has greatly depreciated its fighting value”
(July 11, 1917).

This judgment was completely verified August 20, 1917: “The 6th Reserve
Division on the whole opposed no resistance to the French attack of
August 20 at any point. * * * The conduct of a good number of its
officers seems not to have been edifying. A good many seized the pretext
of intoxication or gave unsatisfactory reasons for withdrawing to the
rear” (October, 1917).

The German command thought best to send this division back to the
Eastern Front (September, 1917).


                                 1918.


FRANCE.

The 6th Reserve Division entrained at Zborow the evening of March 8, and
traveled via Sokal-Brest Litovsk-Varsovia-Kaliscz-Lissa-Gorlitz-Bautzen-
Dresden-Leipsic-Weimar-Erfurth-Eisenach-Bebra-Fulda-Hanau-Frankfort-
Mainz-Kreuznach-Thionville-Sedan to Balhain (northeast of Asfeld), where
it arrived March 15.

The division rested at Villers (near Asfeld) until the 25th of March,
when it reentrained and traveled to Crécy sur Serre. From there it
marched via Mesbrecourt-Pouilly sur Serre-La Fère-Liez-Commonchon to the
area northeast of Noyon, and remained in reserve for some days. Elements
of the division came into line west of Chauny at the end of March, but
were soon withdrawn. About the 1st of April the whole division marched
to Roye and remained there until the 15th, when it continued its march
via Erches and Arvillers to Plessier, relieving the 2d Guard Division
southwest of Moreuil May 1.

The beginning of August it was relieved by the 24th Division and shortly
after it was dissolved and the men composing it were sent as drafts to
the 5th and 6th Divisions.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The only aggressive action of the division on the Western Front during
1918 was a raid carried out by a battalion against the French lines in
the La Gaune woods (southwest of Moreuil) early in May; it was not a
success, and it is estimated that practically the whole attacking force
was wiped out. The 6th Reserve is rated as a third-class division.




                         6th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │11  Bav. │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.
              │         │13 Bav.  │         │13 Bav.  │         │13 Bav.
              │12  Bav. │6 Bav.   │12 Bav.  │6 Bav.   │12 Bav.  │6 Bav.
              │         │11 Bav.  │         │11 Bav.  │         │11 Bav.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Bav. Light Cav.  │2 Bav. Light Cav.  │2 Bav. Light Cav.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt. (2 Sqns.)
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │6 Bav. Brig.:      │6 Bav. Brig.:      │6 Bav. Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 3 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 3 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 3 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 8 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 8 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 8 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 and 3 Field Cos. │2 and 3 Field Cos. │2 Field Co. 3 Bav.
   Liaisons.  │  3 Bav. Pion. Btn.│  3 Bav. Pion. Btn.│  Pion. Btn.
              │                   │6 Bav. Pont. Engs. │6 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │6 Bav. Tel. Detch. │6 Bav. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │6 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │46 Bav. Anti-
              │                   │                   │  Aircraft Section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │6 Bav.
              │         │6 Bav.   │         │10 Bav.
              │         │13 Bav.  │         │13 Bav.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Bav. Light Cav.  │3 Sqn. 2 Bav. Light
              │  Rgt. (3d Sqn.)   │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │6 Bav. Art.        │6 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 8 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │ 3 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 1 Bav. Res.
              │                   │  Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 115 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 142 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 169 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(?) Bav. Pion.     │6 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 11 Bav. Pion. Co. │ 11 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 12 Bav. Pion. Co. │ 12 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 6 Bav. T. M. Co.  │ 6 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │ z (42) Searchlight│ 6 Bav. Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 6 Bav. Tel. Detch.│6 Bav. Signal
              │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 6 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 101 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │7 Bav. Ambulance   │7 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │Field Hospital.    │20 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │6 Bav. Vet.        │24 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │6 Bav. Vet.
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │686 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

             (Upper Palatinate and part of Lower Bavaria.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. In August, 1914, the 6th Bavarian Division with the 5th Bavarian
Division constituted the 3d Bavarian Corps and was part of the 6th
Bavarian Army (Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria). One of its brigades,
the 11th, detrained, beginning August 4, at Remilly as a covering force.
August 20 the division fought on the right of the 5th Bavarian Division
at Prevecourt and Delme. They crossed the French frontier with this
division on the 22d and were engaged the 25th at Maixe on the Sanon and
north of Luneville during the first days of September. Also with the 5th
Bavarian Division, it was near Champenoux September 8, at the time of
the attack against Nancy until the 11th, and then retreated.


COTES DE MEUSE.

2. Assembled at Metz from the 14th to the 17th, the division went on the
18th to the west of the Moselle. It reached and climbed the Cotes de
Meuse the 21st and attacked the fort of the Camp des Romains and St.
Mihiel the 27th.


ST. MIHIEL.

3. Following these attacks which continued during October and ended in
the capture of the fort and of St. Mihiel, the division established
itself from Chauvoncourt to Spada in November to December.


                                 1915.


ST. MIHIEL.

1. The division remained in the sector of the St. Mihiel salient
(Chauvoncourt-Spada-Lamorville) during the whole of 1915 and until June,
1916.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. About June 20, 1916, the 11th Bavarian Brigade was relieved from the
St. Mihiel sector and sent to Longuyon and from there to the Verdun
front. It participated in opposing the French attack of June 23 (with
the Alpine Corps) on Thiaumont and suffered heavy losses.

2. Sent to rest July 4.

3. The 12th Brigade withdrew from the St. Mihiel front July 13 and 16
and went into line before Fleury, beginning July 17 to 18 (11th
Regiment). Its losses were such that on July 26 the replacement depot of
the 11th Infantry at Ratisbonne was ordered by telegraph to furnish
immediately 500 replacements (letter).

4. On August 2 and 3 the whole division was fighting in this sector and
lost heavily.


SOMME.

5. The division left the Verdun front about August 5. After a short stay
in the Argonne it was sent to the Somme at the beginning of September,
fought between Flers and Gueudecourt September 15 to 27 and again
suffered serious losses.


ARTOIS.

6. On August 1 the division took over the sector of Neuve Chapelle-
Festubert, and remained there until May 10, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. At the end of January, 1917, the 11th Infantry and the 3d Field
Artillery were transferred to the 6th Bavarian Division (new).


ARTOIS.

2. The division was relieved from the Neuve Chapelle sector May 10 and
went into line northeast of Arras (Oppy, Fresnoy, Acheville), in the
middle of May. They suffered some loss from gas attacks.


FLANDERS.

3. The division left Artois September 10 and went to Flanders (sector
northeast of Langemarck) September 29. The British attack of October 4
caused it heavy losses and it lost Poelcappelle to the British.

4. Relieved October 8, sent to rest, and reorganized.


ARTOIS.

5. On October 18 it appeared south of the La Bassee Canal, where it
suffered again from gas attacks.


                              RECRUITING.

Upper Palatinate and part of Lower Bavaria (Third Bavarian district).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The morale of the division was good. On the Fresnoy front in 1917 it
showed activity and enterprise. It always reacted quickly against
attacks, but it seems that it could easily be persuaded to adopt a more
passive attitude if circumstances were such as to permit it (information
of the British, February, 1918).


                                 1918.

1. The 6th Bavarian Division was relieved south of the La Bassee Canal
by the 4th Ersatz Division, January 18, and went to rest in the area
south of Tournai.


LILLE.

2. About the middle of February it relieved the 187th Division south of
the Bois Grenier (west of Lille). About the 24th it was relieved by the
10th Ersatz Division, and went back nearer Lille, where it probably
received training in open warfare, although this fact has never been
definitely established.


CAMBRAI.

3. For the Somme offensive, the division was sent to the Cambrai front,
entering the line March 20, near Bullecourt, and attacking the following
day. Little progress was made by the Germans on this part of the front,
and the division lost heavily in many attacks. It was withdrawn about
March 26.


DIXMUDE.

4. April 4 it relieved the 214th Division south of Dixmude. A very
elaborate attack against the Belgians was planned to take place here
April 17, and it was to be made by the 6th Bavarian Division and some
elements of adjoining units. It was presumed that the German successes
at Mount Kemel had shaken the line to the north and that the whole Ypres
salient could be captured. Preparations were made, and the attack
attempted, but it failed completely, and the Belgians not only threw the
enemy back but took a great many prisoners. It was withdrawn about the
19th and went to rest for a week near Ruddervoorde (south of Bruges),
although some of its elements held part of the sector of the 1st
Landwehr Division east of Merckem for a day or two.


VERDUN.

5. The division was sent to the Verdun region via Brussels-Namur-Sedan-
Montmédy, and went into camp in the vicinity of Chauvency (west of
Montmedy), where it remained 10 days.


MEUSE.

6. May 24 it relieved the 22d Division near Beaumont (north of Verdun).


ROYE.

7. It was relieved about August 7, and after resting a few days moved up
to the Roye region. It was identified in the Bois des Loges August 16;
it had relieved the 206th Division. The division remained in line
retiring in the face of the Allied advance, but fighting stubbornly,
especially near Campagne, Montigny, and Essigny le Grand; at the last-
named place it counterattacked violently, but in vain, September 29. It
was still in line when the armistice was signed.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 6th Bavarian is rated as one of the 45 best enemy divisions. It
suffered extremely heavy losses, but since it always fought well—though
not brilliantly, during 1918—the German High Command sent it as many
replacements as it could. The morale has always been good, but quite
anti-Prussian.




                    6th. Bavarian Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │12 Bav.  │16 Bav.  │12 Bav.  │16 Bav.  │12 Bav.  │16 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │17 Bav.  │         │17 Bav.  │         │17 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │14 Bav.  │20 Bav.  │14 Bav.  │20 Bav.  │14 Bav.  │20 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │21 Bav.  │         │21 Bav.  │         │21 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Bav. Res. Cav.   │6 Bav. Res. Cav.   │6 Bav. Res. Cav.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │6 Bav. Res. F. A.  │6 Bav. Res. F. A.  │6 Bav. Res. F. A.
              │  Rgt. (9 Btries.).│  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│6 Bav. Res. Pion.  │6 Bav. Res. Pion.  │6 Bav. Res. Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  Co.              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │                   │                   │10 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Co.
              │                   │                   │206 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │6 Bav. Res. Pont.
              │                   │                   │  Engs.
              │                   │                   │6 Bav. Res. Tel.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │12 Bav.  │16 Bav.  │12 Bav.  │25 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │
              │         │17 Bav.  │         │16 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │20 Bav.  │         │20 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Bav. Res. Cav.   │3 Sqn. 5 Bav. Light
              │  Rgt. (? Sqns.)   │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │18 Bav. Art.       │18 Bav. Art.
              │  Command:         │  Command:
              │ 6 Bav. Res. F. A. │ 19 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Regt.            │
              │                   │ 12 Bav. Ft. A.
              │                   │  Btn.
              │                   │ 143 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 110 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 107 Bav. Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(19 Bav.) Pion.    │19 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 6 Bav. Res. Pion. │ 6 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 7 Bav. Res. Pion. │ 7 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 206 Bav. T. M. Co.│ 206 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 2 Bav. Res.       │ 19 Bav.
              │  Searchlight      │  Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 406 Bav. Res. Tel.│406 Signal Command:
              │  Detch.           │
              │                   │ 406 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 144 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │17 Bav. Ambulance  │17 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │53 Bav. Field      │53 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │54 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │752 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (16th Bavarian Reserve Regiment: First Bavarian District. 17th Bavarian
    Reserve Regiment: Second Bavarian District. 20th Bavarian Reserve
                             Regiment: (?).)


                                 1914.


FLANDERS.

1. This division was organized in Bavaria in September, 1914, and sent
to Belgium about October 21. Assembled in the vicinity of Lille and was
sent toward Dadizeele the 27th and was near Gheluvelt October 29, but
does not seem to have been in the fight.

2. November 1 it was sent south of Ypres between Hollebeke and Messines.
It attacked in the direction of Wytschaete November 2 and suffered heavy
losses: 11th Company, 4 officers and 181 men (16th Reserve Regiment);
6th company of the 17th Reserve Regiment, 5 officers and 228 men
(casualty lists). November 6 the 3d company of the 21st Reserve Regiment
was reduced to 3 provisional officers and 63 men (notebook).


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. The division remained in the Messines-Wytschaete sector until the
beginning of March, 1915.

2. Relieved between March 6 and 8 and sent the 11th as reinforcements to
the 7th Corps at Neuve Chapelle. Then sent to rest in the region of
Roubaix in March.


LILLE.

3. Beginning of April it went into line southwest of Lille between
Grenier Wood and Aubers and held this sector until the end of September,
1916.


                                 1916.

1. July 19, 1916, the division suffered heavy losses in opposing the
British attack southeast of Laventie.


SOMME.

2. Relieved from the Lille front about September 27 and engaged in the
Somme district near Eaucourt l’Abbaye and Gueudecourt until October 13.
Again suffered heavily.


ARTOIS.

3. October 25 it took over the Vimy-Lievin sector, south of Lens.


                                 1917.

1. The division held the front south of Lens during all the winter of
1916 to 1917 and executed many raids.

2. February 12 sent to rest near Douai and reorganized in February and
March. One of its regiments, the 21st Reserve, was transferred to the
16th Bavarian Division, newly organized.

3. March 14 it went into line north of the La Bassee Canal.

4. Withdrawn from this sector at the end of April and was engaged May 8
northeast of Arras, at Oppy Gavrelle, until May 11. In the middle of
June it returned to this sector for a few days and does not seem to have
suffered heavy losses.


YPRES.

5. After a rest near Douai until the end of June the division was sent
to Flanders. Was first placed in reserve south of Thielt during the
first few weeks of July and engaged the 18th southeast of Ypres in the
Ledeghem sector. Lost heavily from the artillery preparation and was
relieved July 30 before the British attack.


ALSACE.

6. Sent to Alsace and held the Altkirch sector from the middle of August
to beginning of October.


LAONNOIS.

7. About October 16 to 17 it was sent to the region of Lizy, southwest
of Laon. It relieved on the Ailette, east of Anizy le Chateau, about
October 25, the remains of the 14th and 52d Divisions, decimated by the
French attack of the 23d.

8. The division was not heavily engaged in the sector of Lizy. It
continued to hold it in November and December 1917 and January 1918.
During this period it was sent to Vervins for rest and training.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was organized as an attack unit. From January 24 to
February 19, 1918, it went through a training for the offensive in the
vicinity of Vervins including breaking-through maneuvers, Feb. 1 with a
Prussian division at Vallee aux Bleds; another divisional maneuver
February 11 before the German Crown Prince and Gen. Ludendorff; third
divisional maneuver February 18 (examination of prisoners, Feb. 28,
1918). It is to be noted that in Flanders, where the division had the
only important fight it had in 1917 it suffered heavily. Its morale was
so weakened that it had to be withdrawn before the British attack.


                                 1918.


VERVINS.

1. The 6th Bavarian Reserve Division was relieved in the Anizy le
Chateau region by the 6th Division, January 24 and went to the vicinity
of Vervins where it was put through a course of training in open
warfare, in which artillery and aeroplanes participated. These exercises
were supervised by the Crown Prince and Ludendorff.

2. February 22 it relieved the 6th Division in its former section. About
the end of the month the division was relieved by elements of the 13th
Landwehr Division, and by the extension of the flanks of the neighboring
divisions, going to rest in the Chauny region.


SOMME.

3. Toward the middle of April the division relieved the 206th Division
near Mesnil St. Georges (southwest of Montdidier). It was relieved by
the 25th Reserve Division April 21.


AILETTE.

4. There is some doubt as to where the division went; it was reported
northeast of Ghent, northeast of Laon, and in Lorraine. There is some
evidence to show that it relieved the 222d Division near Anizy le
Chateau during the night of May 2–3. This front was very quiet until the
German offensive of May 27, in which attack the 6th Bavarian Reserve
Division did not attack in the front line—being “leap-frogged” by the
5th and 6th Divisions acting as shock units—but followed up the advance
coming into line between these two divisions during the night of the
27th–28th. It was at this time definitely identified. In the attack on
Terny (May 28), the division met with strong resistance and suffered
heavily. June 1 it captured Le Port, but lost it again to the French on
June 7, with severe losses. It was relieved about the 15th by the 53d
Reserve Division.


MARNE.

5. July 17 it was identified near Passy sur Marne (west of Dormans). It
was withdrawn August 6 and spent a fortnight refitting.


BAPAUME.

6. August 23 it reinforced the front near Ervillers (northwest of
Bapaume) having traveled via Cambrai, Bourlon, and Beugnâtre. The
division was withdrawn early in September.


YPRES.

7. It relieved the 8th Division southwest of Messines during the night
of September 17–18. Just before coming into line the 17th Bavarian
Reserve Infantry Regiment was dissolved and its men drafted to the other
two regiments of the division. It was replaced by the 25th Bavarian
Infantry Regiment from the 14th Bavarian Division which was dissolved at
this time. Likewise, the 6th Bavarian Reserve Field Artillery Regiment
was dissolved and replaced by the 19th Bavarian Field Artillery Regiment
from the 10th Bavarian Division disbanded in July. The division remained
in line until the armistice was signed, withdrawing through Wytschaete-
Houthem-Comines-Marcke-Ooteghem and Krinstraat.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 6th Bavarian Reserve is rated as a second-class division, which
seems justified not only from opinions concerning its ability as a
fighting unit coming from Allied sources, but also from the fact that,
although it had a course of training in “breaking through” in February,
it was never so used by the German High Command, serving rather as a
“follow up” division. (Cf. May 27 offensive.) The division suffered
heavy losses during its 1918 engagements; indeed, some prisoners
captured the middle of September said that it was to be broken up. They
were mistaken, but one of the infantry regiments and the artillery
regiment were disbanded.




                    6th Bavarian Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │Von      │121 Ldw. │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │1 Bav.
              │  Frech. │         │  Mixed  │  Ldw.   │  Mixed  │  Ldw.
              │         │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │
              │1 Bav.   │123 Ldw. │2 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │2 Bav.
              │  Mixed  │         │  Mixed  │  Ldw.   │  Mixed  │  Ldw.
              │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │
              │2 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │         │3 Bav.   │         │3 Bav.
              │  Mixed  │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │  Ldw.   │         │         │         │         │
              │         │2 Bav.   │         │12 Bav.  │         │12 Bav.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │3 Bav.   │         │         │         │
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │         │         │
              │         │12 Bav.  │         │         │         │
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1 Ldw. Sqn. of the │1 Ldw. Sqn. and 2
              │                   │  1 Bav. C. Dist.  │  Ldw. Sqn. of 1
              │                   │                   │  Bav. C. Dist.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │                   │6 Bav. Ldw. F. A.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │2 Bav. Ldw. F. A.
              │                   │                   │  Abt.
              │                   │                   │10 Bav. Mountain
              │                   │                   │  Art. Btry.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │16 Bav. Res. Pion.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Co.
              │                   │                   │250 Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │14 C. Dist. 1 Ldw.
              │                   │                   │  Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │1 Bav. C. Dist. 1
              │                   │                   │  Landst. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │1 Bav. C. Dist. 2
              │                   │                   │  Landst. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │Landshut Inf. Btn. │                   │3 and 5 Cos.
              │  (1 Bav. C. Dist. │                   │  (Wurtt) Ski Btns.
              │  Btn. Landst. No. │                   │
              │  7).              │                   │
              │Nuremberg Inf. Btn.│                   │Fribourg Landst.
              │  (3 Bav. C. Dist. │                   │  Inf. Btn. (14 C.
              │  Landst. Btn. No. │                   │  Dist. 1 Btn. No.
              │  1).              │                   │  7).
              │                   │                   │1 Cologne 2 Landst.
              │                   │                   │  Inf. Btn. (8 C.
              │                   │                   │  Dist. Btn. No.
              │                   │                   │  14).
              │                   │                   │65 Labor Btn.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │2 Bav.   │1 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │1 Bav.
              │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.   │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │2 Bav.   │         │3 Bav.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │12 Bav.  │         │12 Bav.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2d Sqn. 2 Bav.     │2 Sqn. 2 Bav. Light
              │  Light Cav. Rgt.  │  Cav. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │2d Sqn. 2 Bav.     │
              │  Light Cav. Rgt.  │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │23 Bav. Art.       │6 Bav. Ldw. F. A.
              │  Command:         │  Rgt. (3 Abt.,
              │                   │  Staff, and 8
              │                   │  Btry.).
              │ 6 Bav. Ldw. F. A. │
              │  Rgt.             │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│26 Bav. Pion. Btn.:│26 Bav. Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 16 Bav. Res. Pion.│ 16 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │ 306 Bav. T. M. Co.│ 26 Bav.
              │                   │  Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 10 Bav. Res.      │ 506 Bav. Signal
              │  Searchlight      │  Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 506 Bav. Tel.     │ 506 Bav. Tel.
              │  Detch.           │  Detch.
              │                   │ 192 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │560 Ambulance Co.  │19 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.
              │19 Bav. Field      │60 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │59 Bav. Field      │59 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │36 Vet. Hospital.  │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │47 Bav. M. T. Col. │794 Bav. M. T. Col.
              │49 Bav. M. T. Col. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │Neustadt Landst.   │
              │  Inf. Btn. (2 Bav.│
              │  C. Dist. Btn. No.│
              │  4).              │
              │Bomberg Landst.    │
              │  Inf. Btn. (2 Bav.│
              │  C. Dist. Btn. No.│
              │  10).             │
              │Ansbach Landst.    │
              │  Inf. Btn. (3 Bav.│
              │  C. Dist. Btn. No.│
              │  2).              │
              │1 Cologne 2 Landst.│
              │  Inf. Btn.  (8 C. │
              │  Dist. Btn. No.   │
              │  14).             │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                       (First Bavarian District.)


                                 1914.


ALSACE.

1. The division was sent into the Vosges at the beginning of the
campaign (3 brigades, of which one was from Wurtemberg). It fought in
the valley of the Fecht in August, 1914. Beginning with October it
occupied the region Ste. Marie aux Mines-Col du Bonhomme. October 2 the
1st Bavarian Brigade entrained at Colmar for Belgium and garrisoned
Antwerp until December.

2. At the beginning of November the 3d Bavarian Landwehr Division took
part in the attacks on the Violu.


                                 1915.

1. From February to April, 1915, the units which at that time made up
this division were again separated. The 1st Bavarian Landwehr (mixed)
Brigade came back from Belgium in the middle of December and went to
Champagne (Souain-Somme-Py) to reinforce the 15th Division; the 2d Mixed
Brigade continued to hold the Orbey la Poutroye sector south of Bonhomme
(valley of the Weiss). The Wurtemberg Brigade (von Frech) was
transferred in April to the 7th Landwehr Division (Wurtemberg) in upper
Alsace.

2. In April, 1915, the remaining two brigades were assembled on the
Vosges front (Orbey, Valley of the Weiss) and from that time on held
this sector without much change.

3. In July some units of the division fought in the region of the Linge.


                                 1916.

1. Vosges sector (valley of the Weiss, Col du Bonhomme). At the end of
December, 1916, the 2d Bavarian Landwehr was transferred to the 2d
Bavarian Landwehr Division (new).


                                 1917.

1. In 1917 the division extended its sector from the region of Col du
Bonhomme to the valley of the Fecht (Munster).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was in line in the region of Orbey (south of Col du
Bonhomme) from 1915 on. It is a mediocre division made up of elderly
men. The companies have no shock troops. All the important operations
are executed by the assault company of the division.


                                 1918.


ALSACE.

1. The 6th Bavarian Landwehr Division occupied the sector extending from
south of Le Bonhomme to just west of Muenster, all through the year,
being still in line when the armistice was signed.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division is a fourth-class one, being used only to hold one of the
calmest sectors on the western front. All the young men were taken away
from the division (except those in machine-gun and assault companies)
and exchanged for older ones. In October the father of six children was
captured. Morale was low, discipline poor. Several prisoners stated that
the men did not hesitate to say, even in front of their officers, that
the war had been lost by Germany and that they were thoroughly sick of
it.




                   6th Cavalry Division (Dismounted).


                              COMPOSITION.

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │5 Cav.                 │2  Drag.
                        │                       │3  Uhlan.
                        │                       │7 Cuirassier.
                        │45 Cav.                │7 Res. Drag.
                        │                       │13 Hus.
                        │                       │13 Horse Jag.
                        │3 Cav.                 │2 Cuirassier.
                        │                       │9 Uhlan.
                        │                       │12 Hus.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │133 Art. Command.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│21 Pion. Btn.
                        │319 T. M. Co.
                        │674 Wireless Detch.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│256 Ambulance Co.
                        │106 Field Hospital.
                        │261 Vet. Hospital.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │70 Ldw. Inf. Brig.
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.


ALSACE.

1. The division held the Badonviller sector until the last of April,
when it was relieved by the 21st Landwehr Division. It rested at
Mulhausen until July. At this time it was reorganized as a division of
nine dismounted cavalry regiments.


YPRES.

2. On July 1 it entrained at Sierenz and traveled via Saarburg-Eupen-
Liege-Brussels-Courtrai to Ingelmunster, where it detrained on July 3.
The division then went into rest billets in the Iseghem-Winkel St. Eloi
and Lendelede area, and on the night of July 27–28 it relieved the 1st
Landwehr Division east of Ypres.


CAMBRAI.

3. It was relieved in Flanders and railed via Cambrai to Fins, where it
detrained August 31. On September 4 it was in line at Manancourt and
Nurlun. It was engaged in heavy fighting until September 25, when it was
withdrawn from the battle front southwest of Cambrai after losing 400
prisoners.


BELGIUM.

4. It reinforced the Ypres battle front at Ledeghem on October 1 and
fought there for about one week. It rested out of line a week and
returned on October 15 to line east of Gulleghem. Two weeks later it was
withdrawn in the Waereghem area.

5. On November 3 the division was again in line at Hermelgem. It was
withdrawn within a few days and on the day of the armistice it was
considered to be in reserve of the 4th German Army.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. Its use in the active Ypres and
Cambrai fronts indicates that it should have been rated higher after its
reorganization in the summer.




                             7th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │13.      │26.      │13.      │26.      │14.      │26.
              │         │66.      │         │66.      │         │27.
              │14.      │27.      │14.      │27.      │         │165.
              │         │165.     │         │165.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │10 Hus. Rgt. (3    │10 Hus. Rgt. (3    │10 Hus. Rgt. (3
              │  Sqns.).          │  Sqns.).          │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │7 Brig.:           │7 Brig.:           │7 Brig.:
              │ 4 F. A. Rgt.      │ 4 F. A. Rgt.      │ 4 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 40 F. A. Rgt.     │ 40 F. A. Rgt.     │ 40 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 4.│1 Pion. Btn. No. 4:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 4 Pions.│ 1 Co. 4 Pions.
              │                   │ 7 Pont. Engs.     │ 7 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 7 Tel. Detch.     │ 7 Pont. Engrs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 7 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │14.      │26.      │14.      │26.
              │         │165.     │         │165.
              │         │393.     │         │393.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.│2 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │7 Brig.:           │7 Art. Command:
              │ 40 F. A. Rgt.     │ 40 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 4 Abt. 24 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1244 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1298 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1301 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│118 Pion. Btn.     │4 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  (formerly 1 Pion.│
              │  Btn. No. 4):     │
              │ 1 Co. 4 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 4 Pions.
              │ 3 Co. 4 Pions.    │ 3 Co. 4 Pions.
              │ 7 T. M. Co.       │ 43 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 7 Tel. Detch.     │7 Signal Command:
              │ 7 Pont. Engs.     │ 7 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 132 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │10 Ambulance Co.   │10 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │37 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │41 Field Hospital.
              │                   │7 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │540 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │88 Labor Btn. (5th │
              │  Co.).            │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (Fourth District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1914.

The Seventh Division was recruited in the Province of Prussian Saxony
and, with the 8th Division, belonged to the 4th Army Corps (Magdeburg).


MARNE.

1. The 14th Brigade, which had already obtained reservists July 30,
entrained on the evening of August 2 and was one of the six brigades
ordered to take Liege. The whole division moved into the region of Liege
August 15. It belonged to the 1st Army (Von Kluck), and passed through
Louvain August 18 and through Brussels the 20th. On the 23d it was on
the Haine, west of St. Ghislain. On the 24th between Quiévrain and
Audregnies it threatened to envelop the Allied left. Going through Le
Cateau and Peronne on August 28, the division passed through Grand Morin
and arrived at Choisy, southeast of Coulommiers, from where it was sent
in all haste to the aid of the right wing of the 1st Army (Etavigny,
etc.).


BELGIUM.

2. After the retreat it went to the north of the Aisne below Soissons
until the last days of September (fights at Cuisy en Almont, Morsain,
Nouvron, Fontenoy).

3. At the end of September it was attached to the 6th Army (Crown Prince
of Bavaria) and sent to Artois.


ARTOIS.

4. At the beginning of October it fought south of Arras (Monchy aux
Bois, Ransart, Wailly). It established itself south of the Scarpe.

5. It held the sector until the end of May, 1915. During this period it
limited itself to organizing defensively.


                                 1915.

1. In March the division was reduced to three regiments by the transfer
of the 66th Infantry to the 52d Division (new).

2. In May, 1915, at the time of the French offensive in Artois some
units of the division were sent as reinforcements to the region of
Neuville-St. Vaast. It left some prisoners and suffered heavy losses on
May 12 to 13.


ARTOIS.

3. June 12 the division left the sector south of the Scarpe and went
into line the 13th between Lorette and Angres (from the Souchez-Aix
Noulette Road to the Blanc work). The French offensive struck it June 13
and the days following north of the road from Souchez to Aix Noulette.
It was forced to give ground and lost many prisoners (250 men, among
them 6 officers from the 26th Infantry north of Bois Carre; the 2d
Battalion of the 26th Infantry lost 12 officers and 597 men out of
action, according to the Prussian casualty lists).

4. At the beginning of July the division established itself south of the
railroad from Grenay to Lens, north of Souchez. September 25 it fought
in the third battle of Artois, north of Bois en Hache, before Angres and
Lievin. It showed considerable energy, but again had many of its men
captured.

5. The division remained in this sector southwest of Loos (south of the
Lens-Béthune Road; Lene-Grenay Railroad) until July, 1916.


                                 1916.

1. Until the beginning of July, 1916, the division had no serious
battles.

2. About July 3 the division was relieved from the Loos front. On the
13th it was at Cambrai.


SOMME.

3. July 14 and 15 it began to be engaged in the battle of the Somme
between Pozieres and Bazentin le Petit. It suffered terrible losses.
Relieved May 28.


ARTOIS.

4. After a rest in the region of Valenciennes it went into line east of
Arras August 9 and stayed there until September 17. At this time it
transferred its 27th Infantry to the 211th Division and took in exchange
the 393d Infantry, composed of levies from the regiments of the 7th,
8th, and 12th Divisions, 50th Reserve Division and 38th Landwehr
Brigade.


SOMME.

5. About September 18 it again took part in the battle of the Somme in
the sector of Courcelette. It fought bravely and again suffered heavily.


ARTOIS.

6. Withdrawn from the Somme about October 2 and went into the sector
southeast of Loos October 5. Again withdrawn from this sector November
10 it went almost immediately into the line south of the La Bassee Canal
and stayed there until May 28, 1917.


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. During the winter of 1916–17 the division had no big battles, but
suffered from raids executed by the British troops.


FLANDERS.

2. May 28 it was withdrawn from the La Bassee front and sent to the
region of Ypres (sector of Hollebeke-Wytschaete) June 8 to 19.


ALSACE.

3. At the beginning of July it was sent to Alsace to the vicinity of
Mulhouse where it rested.

4. July 27 to 28 it entrained again for Artois via Mulhouse-Strassbourg-
Sarreguemines-Metz-Thionville-Sedan-Hirson-Valenciennes-St. Amand.


ARTOIS.

5. After a few days’ rest in the region of St. Amand and Orchies July 28
to August 3, it went into the lines north of Lens (Loos sector) where it
lost heavily from August 9 to the beginning of September.


BELGIUM.

6. Relieved then and sent to rest at Pont a Marcq, it went back into the
line between the La Bassee Canal and Hulluch September 21. Withdrawn
from this sector during October and sent to the region of Ypres where it
held a front on October 29 between Becelaere and Gheluvelt. It was still
identified there January 29, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Province of Magdeburg (Prussian Saxony) and part of Thuringia. The 393d
Infantry gets replacements from the depot of the 153d Infantry
(Altenburg). Its resources from these replacements are as a rule
sufficient and the Fourth District has even furnished recruits to the
regiments of the Fourteenth. In exchange when it has relatively few
replacements it has been helped out by Polish drafts from Silesia (Sixth
District).


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved on February 4 and rested in the Eecloo
area, participating in a large-scale maneuver.

2. It returned to line in the Becelaere sector on March 3, relieving the
8th Bavarian Reserve Division. It was withdrawn March 26.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

3. It fought near Hollebeke, Messines, Wytschaete, between April 9 and
May 1. It took part in the attack on the Ypres-Comines Canal on April
25.

4. During May it was at rest in Belgium near Deyuze (Cruyhautern). It
entrained for Nesle about June 8, moving through Audenarde, Coutrai,
Lille, Douai, Cambrai, and Ham. It marched to the front, southeast of
Montdidier by Roye and Tilloloy June 9–11.

5. It was in line near Ressons-Marqueglise from June 14 to 24.

6. The division rested south of St. Quentin June 26 to 29, then at
Origny June 30 to July 4. It entrained at Origny on July 4 and moved to
Sedan by Guise, Hirson, Liart, and Charleville. It was north of Grandpre
from July 5 to 10. On the 10th it was sent toward the Champagne front by
Grandpre, Monthois, and Maure.


BATTLE OF RHEIMS.

7. The division was engaged at Repon, east of Tahure, on July 15. Heavy
losses were incurred during the attack of July 15. It was taken out on
August 15.


AILETTE.

8. It was moved by railroad to Chauny (by Laon) and detrained about
August 20. About this time a dozen men per company were received.

9. On August 26–27 it entered line south of Juvigny (north of Soissons).
In the fighting that followed the division was withdrawn to Leuilly on
the night of August 31-Sept 1. It was relieved on the 3d after losing
605 prisoners. The German communique of August 30 credited the 165th
Regiment with the destruction of 20 tanks in one attack.


BATTLE OF THE ARGONNE.

10. The division rested near Attigny until September 24, when it
reinforced the Somme-Py front. It was engaged until October 22 with very
heavy losses. It returned from the second line two days later to assist
in covering the retreat between La Neuville en Tourne a Fuy and
Juniville. From there it fell back on the Aisne (Ambly) and was retired
on October 14.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class.




                         7th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │13 Res.  │27 Res.  │13 Res.  │27 Res.  │14 Res.  │36 Res.
              │         │36 Res.  │         │36 Res.  │         │66 Res.
              │14 Res.  │66 Res.  │14 Res.  │66 Res.  │         │72 Res.
              │         │72 Res.  │         │72 Res.  │         │
              │ 4 Res. Jag. Btn.  │ 4 Res. Jag. Btn.  │ 4 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Res. Heavy Cav.  │                   │1 Res. Heavy Cav.
              │  Rgt. (3 Sqns.).  │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │7 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │7 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │7 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │  (9 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  Btn No. 4.       │  Btn. No. 4:      │  Btn. No. 4:
              │                   │ 7 Res. Pont.-Engs.│ 248 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 7 Res. Tel.-Detch.│ 207 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 7 Res. Pont.-Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 7 Res. Tel.-Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │14 Res.  │36 Res.  │14 Res.  │36 Res.
              │         │66 Res.  │         │66 Res.
              │         │72 Res.  │         │72 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Res. Heavy Cav.  │3 Sqn. 9 Drag. Rgt.
              │  Rgt. (1 Sqn.).   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │95 Art. Command:   │95 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 7 Res. F. A. Rgt. │ 7 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.)      │
              │                   │ 52 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 889 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1106 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1126 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│307 Pion. Btn.:    │307 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 4 Pions.    │ 4 Co. 4 Pions.
              │ 248 Pion. Co.     │ 248 Pion. Co.
              │ 207 T. M. Co.     │ 207 T. M. Co.
              │ 407 Tel.-Detch.   │ 180 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │407 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 407 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 42 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │504 Ambulance Co.  │504 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │22 Res. Field      │22 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │49 Res. Field      │24 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │407 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │707 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (Fourth District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1914.

1. At the beginning of the war the 7th Reserve Division was part of the
4th Reserve Corps.


BELGIUM.

2. It detrained August 10 to 12, 1914, near Dusseldorf, and was part of
the 1st Army (Von Kluck). Reached Brussels via Tongres (Aug. 19) and
Louvain, and advanced toward Paris through Enghien, Ath, Conde, Amiens
(Aug. 30–31), Clermont, Creil, and Senlis (Sept. 4).


MARNE.

3. At the battle of the Marne it was engaged northwest of Crouy sur
Ourcq (Puisieux, Neufmoutiers, Monthyon) and suffered heavy losses,
September 6 and 7.

4. From September 8 to 11 it withdrew through Villers Cotterets,
Coeuvres, Port Fontenoy. It fought for a long time in the region of
Nouvron.


AISNE.

5. After the front was stabilized it held the lines between the
Soissons-Laon Road to southwest of Nouvron.

6. November 12 it had considerable losses at the attack of the Plateau
of Nouvron.


                                 1915.

1. The division held the Nouvron sector until September, 1915.

2. In January, 1915, some of the units of the division were engaged in
the fights around Soissons, January 12 and 13.

3. In June several battalions were sent toward Quennevieres as
reinforcements at the beginning of the French attack.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. Relieved about September 22 to 25, the division was sent to Champagne
at the beginning of October. Suffered heavy losses in the region of
Tahure October 30.


                                 1916.

1. Withdrawn at the end of January, 1916, from the sector of Tahure. It
was sent to rest north of Rethel. It went back into line only for a
short time toward the end of February north of Prosnes (the 36th Reserve
Regiment alone appeared in this sector).

2. About May 10 the division was sent to the camp of Sissonne.


VERDUN.

3. It was sent to the Verdun front and took part in the attack of June 1
on Thiaumont-Damploup in the sector of Bois de la Caillette. Suffered
very heavy losses June 2 and 3 and at the attack of Bois de Vaux
Chapitre on June 21. Total of losses before Verdun, 8,200 men. On June
16 the companies of the 36th Reserve were reduced to an average of 30
men (prisoners’ statements). From June 1 to 5 the 10th Company of the
72d Reserves received no less than 138 replacements.


ARGONNE.

4. The division was withdrawn from the Verdun front about July 1. Sent
to the Argonne and occupied the sector north of Ville sur Tourbe
(between Main de Massiges and the Aisne) until the end of August. It was
reorganized in this region.


SOMME.

5. After a rest in the vicinity of Longwy it was sent to the Somme and
fought in the region of Gueudecourt September 23 to October 11.


ARGONNE.

6. About October 14 the division took over its old sector north of Ville
sur Tourbe, south of Cernay en Dormois.


                                 1917.


MEUSE.

1. Withdrawn from the Argonne front about January 8, 1917, and sent,
February 5, before Verdun (region of Louvemont, north of Chambrettes),
where it was kept until the beginning of April.

2. The division next held the sector of Cernay les Reims at the end of
April to May 25.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. About May 30 and 31 it was sent into line before Teton (region of
Moronvilliers) until the middle of August.

4. After a rest in the vicinity of Aussonce the division went into line
at the beginning of September in the region of Nauroy, sector of Mont
Haut-Cornillet. Relieved January, 1918, and sent to rest north of
Rethel.


                              RECRUITING.

Prussian Saxony and part of Thuringia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

At Tahure in October, 1915, and at Verdun the division obtained only
mediocre results in spite of heavy losses. “This division seems to be
rather a sector division than a shock unit.”


                                 1918.


RETHEL.

1. On January 14 the division was relieved by the 14th Bavarian Division
and sent to Wassigny (north of Rethel) to rest and train. On March 14 it
started by night marches toward St. Quentin, bivouacking in the woods by
day and avoiding all villages. The itinerary followed was Dezy le Gros-
Bucy les Pierrepont-Marle-Origny et Mesnil-St. Laurent, where it arrived
March 21.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. From the 22d to the 28th the division was in army reserve. It
followed the general advance through Itancourt, Essigny, Grand
Serancourt, St. Simon, Golancourt, Muirancourt, and Candor. On March 29
it relieved the 1st Bavarian Division west of Lassigny, where it
attacked on the day following. It suffered such heavy losses that it was
hastily relieved on the night of March 31-April 1.


AISNE.

3. It came into line near Reims on April 26 relieving the 25th Reserve
Division between the Miettl and the Aisne. It took part in the offensive
of May 27. About June 1 the division was relieved in the sector east of
Ville en Tardenois.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. The division moved to Champagne and relieved the Guard Cavalry
Division on July 6. It passed into the second line on July 14 to permit
a fresh division to pass through for the attack. It returned to line on
the 20th, relieving the 1st Division near St. Hilaire. During July the
66th Reserve Regiment is known to have received drafts, raising the
company strength to 100.


SOISSONS.

5. Between August 4 and 20 the exact date is not known, the division was
moved from line in Champagne to the front west of Chavigny, where it was
engaged on August 24. It took part in heavy fighting in that region
until its relief about August 31.

6. The division arrived at Fourmies from Laon on September 8, where it
rested and trained until September 17. It entrained at Trelon and moved
to Grandpre, from where it marched to the front by way of St. Juvin and
Brieulles.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

7. The division was in line on the day of the American attack September
26, holding the sector immediately west of the Meuse. It was swamped on
the opening attack without offering any considerable resistance. It was
withdrawn on the 28th, but on October 9 elements were returned to fill a
gap in the former sector of the 1st A. H. division. The last elements
were finally withdrawn about October 25. The losses of the division in
the Argonne are estimated at 3,500, including 2,260 prisoners.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a second-class division. Its efforts in 1918
were generally unsuccessful in spite of heavy losses. By the time of the
armistice it had been almost annihilated.




                         7th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │Mathy    │119 Ldw. │52 Ldw.  │119 Ldw. │51 Ldw.  │119 Ldw.
              │  (55).  │         │         │         │         │
              │         │40 Ldw.  │         │121 Ldw. │         │123 Ldw.
              │52.      │123 Ldw. │         │123 Ldw. │52 Ldw.  │121 Ldw.
              │         │121 Ldw. │         │         │         │126 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │2 Ldw. Sqn. (13 C. │2 Ldw. Sqn. (13 C.
              │                   │  Dist.).          │  Dist.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │1 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.  │1 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │2 Ldw. Co. 13 C.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │                   │4 Ldw. Co. 13 C.
              │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │                   │6 Ldw. Co. 13 C.
              │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │                   │307 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │                   │1 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │13 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │                   │59 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │52 Ldw.  │122 Res. │52 Ldw.  │122 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │121 Ldw. │         │121 Ldw.
              │         │126 Ldw. │         │126 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Ldw. Sqn. (13 C. │
              │  Dist.).          │
              │1 Sqn. 20 Uhlan    │
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │1 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (except the 3d
              │                   │  Abt. Staff and 7
              │                   │  and 9 Btries.).
              │ 1 Ldw. F. A. Rgt. │1025 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(407) Pion. Btn.:  │407 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 13     │ 2 Ldw. Co. 13 C.
              │  Pions.           │  Dist. Pions.
              │ 3 Ldw. Co. 13     │ 141 Searchlight
              │  Pions.           │  Section.
              │ 307 T. M. Co.     │507 Signal Command:
              │ 334 Searchlight   │ 507 Tel. Detch.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 507 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │571 Ambulance Co.  │571 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │258 Field Hospital.│258 Field Hospital.
              │33 Ldw. Field      │33 Ldw. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │47 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │776 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │1 Cyclist Co.      │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (Thirteenth District—Wurtemberg.)


                                 1914.


ALSACE.

1. The 7th Landwehr Division did not leave Alsace from its organization
in 1915 until February, 1917. Its first units appeared there beginning
August 9, 1914, the date of the detraining of the 121st Landwehr at Neuf
Brisach. The 119th Landwehr fought south of Mulhouse beginning August
19, and the 40th Landwehr at Dornach near Mulhouse on the same day.

2. In October, 1917, the 52d and 55th Brigades, which were to compose in
1915 the 7th Landwehr Division, were part of the Gaede Army Group and
occupied the region of Munster, Guebwiller, Cernay.

3. In December the 123d Landwehr took part in the attacks on
Hartmannswillerkopf.


                                 1915.


ALSACE.

1. In March, 1915, the 52d Brigade was in line in the valleys of the
Fecht and the Lauch. The 119th Landwehr was south of Cernay. In April
the 40th Landwehr (Baden) left the division and was transferred for some
time to the 6th Landwehr Division (Bavarian).

2. The 7th Landwehr Division then contained the 119th, 121st and 123d
Landwehr, to which a fourth regiment was joined, the 126th Landwehr,
formed by drafts from the three others. The division, from then on
exclusively Wurtemberger, from that time held the sector Wattwiller-
Rhone-Rhine Canal (Cernay-Altkirch).


                                 1916.


ALSACE.

1. Cernay-Altkirch sector.


                                 1917.


ALSACE-LORRAINE.

1. The division remained on the Mulhouse front (Cernay-Altkirch) until
February 20, 1917. Relieved on that date and sent to Lorraine (Leintrey-
Badonviller sector), where it replaced the 33d Reserve Division. It was
at this time that the division was decreased to three regiments; its
119th Landwehr and 123d Landwehr were transferred to the 26th Landwehr
Division and it obtained the 122d Reserves from the 54th Reserve
Division.


RUSSIA-VOLHYNIA.

2. The division left the Lorraine front in the middle of May. Entrained
beginning May 14 at Sarrebourg and sent to the Eastern Front via
Nurnberg-Warsaw-Lublin-Kovel-Vladimir Volynski. It took over the
Kisselin sector (Volhynia).


                              RECRUITING.

From April, 1915 on, the division was entirely composed from men from
Wurtemberg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

A mediocre division, much reduced by transferring its most energetic
units to active regiments and Wurtemberg reserve regiments and receiving
in exchange older men.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. In February, 1918, the 7th Landwehr Division left the Kisselin region
and advanced into the Ukraine. “We are going into Russia to succor the
Ukrainians,” wrote a man of the 122d Reserve Regiment from the Rovno
region on February 26. On April 1, the 126th Landwehr Regiment was
identified between Kiev and Odessa; along with the 122d Reserve Regiment
it was identified near Odessa on the 9th.

2. On May 11 the division was identified south of Ekaterinoslav and on
the 4th of July at Rostov on the Don.

3. The division was reported to have been sent to the Danube front about
the middle of October, but it was never actually identified there.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                   7th Cavalry Division (Dismounted).


                              COMPOSITION.

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │28 Cav.                │11 Uhlan.
                        │                       │15 Uhlan.
                        │                       │4 Res. Uhlan.
                        │30 Cav.                │9 Hus.
                        │                       │15 Drag.
                        │                       │25  Drag.
                        │41 Cav.                │26  Drag.
                        │                       │5  Cuirassier.
                        │                       │4 Uhlan.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│19 Pion. Btn. (1, 2, and 3 Cos.):
                        │ 6 Cav. Pion. Detch.
                        │ 312 T. M. Co.
                        │ 186 Wireless Detch.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│606 Ambulance Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Odd Units              │10 M. G. S. S. Detch. (1, 2, and 3 Cos.).
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached               │5 F. A. Rgt. (10 and 11 Btries.).
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

1. The division held the Guebwiller (Alsace) sector until the end of
May. It rested in the Saarebourg area until mid-July, when it was railed
to Belgium (Courtrai area).

2. After resting near Courtrai for two weeks, the division entrained at
Lauwe on August 13 for Armentieres, where it remained until August 23.
It went into line in the Kemmel area for three days. The division was
then railed back to Tourcoing, from where it was transferred by trucks
to Lagnicourt on August 26 and came into line on the following day at
Ecoust.


ARRAS-CAMBRAI.

3. In two weeks the division was heavily engaged in the Arras battle. It
was relieved on September 9, after losing more than 700 prisoners. The
division rested in the Cambrai area until September 22, when it relieved
the 1st Guard Reserve Division north of Moeuvres. It was withdrawn on
September 30.


BELGIUM.

4. The division entrained at Solesmes on October 5 and detrained at
Mouscron. It remained here until October 14, when it moved to Deerlyck,
and on the 17th elements counterattacked between Courtrai and Harlebeke.
It was engaged until its relief on October 29 by the 49th Reserve
Division northwest of Anseghem. The division was considered to be in
reserve of the 10th German Army at the time of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. Its use on the Cambrai and
Belgium fronts in September and October indicate that it might have been
considered a third-class division after its reorganization.




                             8th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │15.      │36 Fus.  │15.      │36 Fus.  │16.      │72.
              │         │93.      │         │93.      │         │93.
              │16.      │72.      │16.      │72.      │         │153.
              │         │153.     │         │153.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │10 Hus. Rgt. (3    │10 Hus. Rgt. (3    │10 Hus. Rgt. (3
              │  Sqns.).          │  Sqns.).          │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │8 Brig.:           │8 Brig.:           │8 Brig.:
              │ 74 F. A. Rgt.     │ 74 F. A. Rgt.     │ 74 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 75 F. A. Rgt.     │ 75 F. A. Rgt.     │ 75 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 4:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 4:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 4 Pions.│ 2 Co. 4 Pions.
              │                   │ 8 Pont. Engs.     │ 8 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 8 Tel. Detch.     │ 8 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 8 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │72 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │7 Balloon Sqn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │16.      │72.      │16.      │72.
              │         │93.      │         │93.
              │         │153.     │         │153.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │10 Hus. Rgt. (     │5 Sqns. 10 Hus.
              │  Sqns.).          │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │8 Art. Command:    │8 Art. Command:
              │ 74 F. A. Rgt.     │ 74 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 1 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 815 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 983 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1247 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│118 Pion. Btn. or 1│118 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No. 4:│
              │ 2 Co. 4 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 4 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 4 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 4 Pions.
              │ 8 T. M. Co.       │ 8 T. M. Co.
              │ 8 Tel. Detch.     │ 95 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │8 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 8 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 95 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │11 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │31 Field Hospital. │36 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │39 Field Hospital.
              │                   │8 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │72 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Section.         │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (Fourth District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. With the 7th Division, the 8th Division formed the 4th Army Corps. It
detrained August 10 to 12 near Dusseldorf and, with that corps, was part
of the 1st Army (Von Kluck). Entered Belgium the 15th, passed through
Louvain the 19th, and through Brussels the 20th, and executed with the
7th Division an enveloping movement on the left of the Allies. Fought at
Solesmes the 26th and arrived east of Coulommiers September 6, from
where it was sent in a great hurry to the right of the 1st Army, with
the 7th Division (Lizy sur Ourcq-Plessis, Placy, etc.). September 8 the
11th Company of the 93d Infantry was reduced to 96 men (notebook).

2. After the retreat, beginning the 15th, it was engaged against the
left wing of the British north of Soissons (battle of the Aisne,
Cuffies, Chavigny, Pasly, etc.).

3. At the end of September it went with the 4th Army Corps to Artois
with the 6th Army.

4. At the beginning of October it took part in the attacks south of
Arras and held the lines near Monchy aux Bois.


                                 1915.

1. The division held the Monchy sector during the first few months of
1915. At the end of May it was relieved from this sector and put in the
reserve of the army near Douai after transferring the 36th Fusiliers to
the 113th Division, newly formed (March).

2. During the first two weeks of June it went into line in the Souchez
sector and opposed the French attacks. Relieved at the beginning of
September and became army reserve near Tourcoing and Roubaix.


LOOS.

3. At the battle of Loos during the counterattack the division suffered
heavy losses in September and October.


                                 1916.

1. In 1916 until the battle of the Somme the division did not take part
in any serious engagements. It was established in the Loos sector. July
3 it left this front for the Somme.


SOMME.

2. In the middle of July it went into battle on the Pozieres-Longueval-
Bois Delville front and suffered very heavy losses.

3. Toward the end of July it was relieved and sent to rest in the region
of Valenciennes.

4. August 9 it took over a quiet sector before Arras and stayed there
about five weeks.

5. About September 18 it again went into the battle of the Somme. It
held the Thiepval-Courcelette sector, where it had some hard fighting,
which caused it heavy losses.


ARTOIS.

6. October 1 it left this sector to again hold the trenches northeast of
Loos.


                                 1917.

1. During the winter of 1916–17 the division had no heavy fighting.
However, in April, May, and June it had serious losses due to the many
raids executed by the British.

2. Toward the end of July and the beginning of August the division
suffered considerably from artillery fire. It was relieved before the
attack of the British before Lens.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. August 5 it entrained for Rethel. Rested for some time in the region
of Semide, then held the sector west of Butte du Mesnil from August 15
to September 15.


BELGIUM.

4. About September 18 it was sent in the region of Bouziers and October
4 went into line west of Becelaere (Belgium), and shortly afterwards,
October 9, south of Hollebeke. It was still there January 20, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Province of Prussian Saxony, Duchy of Anhalt, and part of Thuringia.
Same remarks as for the 7th Division. The fluctuations in the resources
of the region are evidenced by the following facts: On November 4, 1917,
a man came to the 5th Company of the 93d Infantry who was born in 1898
in the Eighth District, was a farmer, and had been called up September
3, having had just two months of training. He was sent by a depot in
Cologne.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Since the battles of 1914 the division remained entirely on the
offensive. It always defended itself well in attacks and held its
positions with tenacity.

During its stay on the Champagne it did not show any activity, but also
it had no desertions. It may be said that its morale is good.
(September, 1917).


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved by the 17th Reserve Division in the
Hollebeke sector about January 31. It rested and trained near Coutrai
during February and until March 7.

2. On March 7 it was engaged west of Zandvoorde, where it was in line
until April 11.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

3. The division came into the battle line west of Merville on April 11,
which town it captured. About the 23d it passed to the second line.

4. The division rested for two weeks at Canteleu (a suburb of Lille). It
returned to a rest camp north of Kemmel about May 12th.


YPRES.

5. It was engaged south of Ypres from May 15 until the 1st of July in
the sector, with division headquarters at Halluin.

6. The division rested near Coutrai during July, from where it returned
to its former sector south of Ypres on July 26 and was in line until the
night of September 17–18.


LE CATELET.

7. It was moved south to relieve the Alpine Corps at Vendhuile, where it
came in on September 23. In the fighting the division was driven back by
Aubencheul-Villers Cutreaux on Maretz-Clary early in October. After
suffering heavy casualties and losing over 400 prisoners, it was
withdrawn on October 14.

8. The division rested in the Guise area until October 22.

9. It was reengaged north of Le Cateau on October 22–23, but withdrew
about November 1. On the 5th it was identified in line north of Maulde,
where it remained until the end.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was regarded as a first-class division. A majority of its
men came from the younger classes. Its effectives were high and the
morale good. Apart from the Armentieres offensive in April, the division
was on the defensive during 1918.




                         8th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │56 Ldw.       │109 Ldw.      │56 Ldw.       │109 Ldw.
              │              │110 Ldw.      │              │110 Ldw.
              │              │109 Landst.   │              │109 Landst.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Ldw. Sqn. 14 C. Dist.      │2 Ldw. Sqn. 14 C. Dist.
              │                             │  (dissolved late 1916).
              │                             │3 Landst. Sqn. 14 C. Dist.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Landst. F. A. Abt. (14 C.    │8 Ldw. F. A. Regt.
              │  Dist.).                    │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Co. 14 Pions.              │4 Co. 14 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │2 Res. Co. 14 Pions.         │2 Res. Co. 14 Pions.
              │                             │308 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd.         │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │Fribourg Landst. Inf. Btn.   │68 Labor Btn.
              │  (14 C. Dist. Btn. No. 7).  │
              │2 Heidelberg Landst. Inf.    │Pforzheim Landst. Inf. Btn.
              │  Btn. (14 C. Dist. Btn. No. │  (14 C. Dist. Btn. No. 21).
              │  13).                       │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │56 Ldw.       │109 Ldw.      │56 Ldw.       │109 Ldw.
              │              │110 Ldw.      │              │110 Ldw.
              │              │111 Ldw.      │              │111 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 5 Horse Jag. Rgt.     │1 Sqn. 5 Horse Jag. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │             (?)             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │8 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │ 8 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.           │803 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1416 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│408 Pion. Btn.:              │408 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 14 Pions.        │ 1 Res. Co. 14 Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 14 Pions.        │ 2 Res. Co. 14 Pions.
              │ 308 T. M. Co.               │ 308 T. M. Co.
              │ 305 Searchlight Section.    │ 216 Searchlight Section.
              │ 508 Tel. Detch.             │508 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 508 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 177 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │559 Ambulance Co.            │559 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │321 (?) Field Hospital.      │321 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │7 Field Hospital.
              │                             │563 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │777 M. T. Col.               │777 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd.         │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

              (Fourteenth District—Grand Duchy of Baden.)


                                 1915.

The 8th Landwehr Division was formed February, 1915, from Baden troops,
which entered Alsace at the beginning of the campaign (the 110th
Landwehr detrained Aug. 11, 1914, at Neuenburg near Mullheim and the
109th Landwehr on the same date), and the 109th Landsturm organized at
the beginning of 1915 from five Baden Landsturm battalions.


ALSACE.

The division held the same sector between Altkirch and the Swiss
Frontier from its formation until January, 1917.


                                 1916.

1. In February, 1916, the 109th Landwehr and the 110th Landwehr, which
had up to that time remained on the defensive, took part in the attacks
between Seppois and Largitzen and against the Scoonholz, northwest of
Altkirch. They executed many raids during 1916.

2. The 109th Landsturm, which was in line at one end of the front, was
broken up in May, 1916, and replaced in the division by the 111th
Landwehr, newly formed, consisting in reality of three Landsturm
battalions already stationed in Alsace, of which two were part of the
109th Landsturm (XIV 23 and XIV 25).


COTES DE MEUSE.

About January 23, 1917, the division was withdrawn from the Alsace front
and sent to the Cotes de Meuse, where it took over the sector west of
Fresnes en Woevre. April 15 the division moved toward the north and held
the lines to the Etain-Verdun road.


                              RECRUITING.

Entirely from Baden.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was a defense division (May, 1918). Each company had one
shock-troop squad per platoon (prisoners’ statements Dec. 8, 1917).

Like the 2d and 7th Landwehr Divisions, but to a smaller degree, the 8th
Landwehr Division had some of its men transferred to active units; thus,
in November, 1917, it transferred some men to 121st Division, then near
it.


                                 1918.

The division continued in the Woevre sector during 1918. Through failure
to identify it, it was considered as out of line September 21 and
September 25.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

It was rated as a fourth-class division. Its losses apart from the St.
Mihiel attack were negligible. In the attack it did fairly well, without
heavy loss. The morale was fair.




                    8th. Bavarian Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │15 Bav. Res.  │18 Bav. Res.  │15 Bav. Res.  │18 Bav. Res.
              │              │19 Bav. Res.  │              │19 Bav. Res.
              │16 Bav. Res.  │22 Bav. Res.  │16 Bav. Res.  │22 Bav. Res.
              │              │23 Bav. Res.  │              │23 Bav. Res.
              │              │              │    Wurtt. Mountain Btn.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Bav. Res. Cav. Detch.      │8 Bav. Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │8 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.       │8 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │9 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.       │9 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│9 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.        │8 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │9 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
              │                             │208 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                             │8 Bav. Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │8 Bav. Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │8 Bav. Res. Cyclist Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │81 Anti-Aircraft Section.
              │                             │
              │                             │6 Bav. Labor Btn.
              │                             │64 Labor Btn.
              │                             │69 Labor Btn.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │15 Bav. Res.  │18 Bav. Res.  │15 Bav. Res.  │19 Bav. Res.
              │              │19 Bav. Res.  │              │22 Bav. Res.
              │16 Bav. Res.  │22 Bav. Res.  │              │23 Bav. Res.
              │              │23 Bav. Res.  │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Bav. Res. Cav. Detch.      │8 Bav. Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │8 Bav. Art. Command:         │8 Bav. Art. Command:
              │ 8 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.      │ 9 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 9 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.      │ 19 Bav. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 105 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 171 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 172 Bav. Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(20 Bav.) Pion. Btn.:        │20 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 5 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.       │ 8 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 8 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.       │ 9 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 9 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.       │ 20 Bav. Searchlight Section.
              │ 208 Bav. T. M. Co.          │ 208 Bav. T. M. Col.
              │ 3 Bav. Res. Searchlight     │408 Bav. Signal Command:
              │  Section.                   │
              │ 803 Tel. Detch.             │ 408 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 99 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │18 Bav. Ambulance Co.        │18 Bav. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │30 Bav. Ambulance Co.        │65 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │55 Bav. Field Hospital.      │57 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │753 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │8 Bav. Res. Cyclist Co.      │1 Landst. Inf. Btn. 10 C.
              │                             │  Dist.
              │                             │1, 2, and 3 Abtls. 24 Res. F.
              │                             │  A. Rgt.
              │                             │69 Ldw. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │14, 33, and 34 Mortar Btries.
              │                             │52 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │94 Pion. Btn.
              │                             │66 Balloon Sqn.
              │                             │115 Observation Section.
              │                             │2 Sound Ranging Section.
              │                             │286 Reconnaisance Flight.
              │                             │ Elements attached in
              │                             │  October, 1918.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (19th Bavarian Reserve: First Bavarian District. 22d Bavarian Reserve:
     Second Bavarian District. 23d Bavarian Reserve: Third Bavarian
                               District.)


                                 1915.


ALSACE.

1. The division was organized in January, 1915 (second series of new
reserve divisions) and was identified on the front for the first time at
the beginning of February, 1915, in the valley of the Lauch and at
Hartmannswillerkopf. It fought at the end of February in the region of
Munster-Metzeral-Sultzeren. On the 24th it took part in the attack of
Reichackerkopf and lost heavily.

2. Since that time and until May the division remained in the same
sector of Alsace.


GALICIA.

3. Relieved at the end of May and sent to Galicia, where it became part
of the 11th Army and cooperated in the capture of Przemsl June 3.


ALSACE.

4. Returned to the Western Front at the beginning of July and went to
rest in the region of Schelestadt (Alsace); then went into line again
about July 14 in the valley of the Fecht (Reichackerkopf-Metzeral). It
repulsed an attack of the French July 20 at Reichackerkopf.


                                 1916.


ALSACE.

1. The division remained in Alsace, sector of Metzeral-Sondernach, for a
year from July, 1915, to July, 1916. During this period it did not take
part in any action.


SOMME.

2. About July 10, 1916, it entrained at Mulhouse, Colmar, and
Pfaffenheim, south of Colmar, and went to the Somme, south of Péronne,
and was in reserve until July 20. July 21 and 22 it was engaged between
Maurepas and Guillemont (the 23d Bavarian Reserve was detached and went
to the east of Estrees).

3. Relieved August 15 after suffering heavy losses during the attacks of
July 30 and August 12. Reorganized in the region of St. Quentin, then
went back into line for a short time west of Roye at the beginning of
September.

4. Withdrawn from the region of Roye in the middle of September and sent
to the Roumanian front October 13 to 23, via Mons-Maubeuge-Namur-
Liége—Aix-la-Chapelle-Cologne-Cassel-Halle-Leipzig-Prague-Brunn-
Budapest-Arad.


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA.

5. Took part in the operations on the frontier of Transylvania in the
region of the Oltu in October to November and in the valley of the
Trotus in December.


GALICIA.

2. In July it left Roumania and went to Galicia. At the end of July it
was in the region of Nowitza. August 27 it fought at Bojan. In September
it was at Czernowitz and went to rest near Radautz in Bukowina beginning
September 6. After being reviewed by the Emperor September 27 it was
filled up again (men of the 1918 class with less than four months’
training were sent to the 22d Reserve Infantry) and sent to the Western
Front.


BELGIUM.

3. It entrained October 15 at Kolomea. Itinerary: Stanislau-Lemberg-
Cracow-Leipzig-Northeim-Paderborn-Aix la Chapelle-Liege-Louvain-Malines-
Brussels-Bruges, and detrained at Thourout October 23.

4. October 26 the division took over the Aschhoop sector near Dixmude.


                              RECRUITING.

It seems to come from all over Bavaria.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division had no serious fighting from August, 1916, on. Its losses
on the Eastern Front were few. It was trained especially for mountain
warfare, and they carried on this sort of warfare for a long time in
Alsace, Galicia, and Roumania.


                                 1918.

1. On January 24 the division was relieved at Dixmude and sent to Ghent
for rest. From there it was transferred to Courtrai.


BELGIUM.

2. It relieved the 7th Division in the Becelaere sector on February 4, a
quiet part at that time, and remained until March 7, when it was in turn
relieved by the 7th Division.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

3. It rested at Ostend until the Lys battle began, when it returned to
attack on April 9 in the Estaires sector, which was defended by
Portuguese. It advanced toward Calonne sur Lys, where it was withdrawn
about April 14. The losses were 50 per cent of the effectives in this
fighting.


WOEVRE.

4. Upon relief the division entrained on April 20 at Roubaix and moved
to Conflans. On May 11 it relieved the 78th Reserve Division north of
Seicheprey. It was in line in this sector until June 27. A draft of 300
men were received late in June.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. The division rested at Conflans until July 4. It was then moved to
Wassigny (north of Rethel) on the 5th. It marched toward the front by
Herpy and St. Remy July 8 to 14. It was in reserve on July 15 east of
Reims, in support of the 15th Bavarian Division. The division was not
actively engaged in this offensive.

6. Withdrawn from Champagne, the division marched toward the front south
of the Vesle by Warnerville, Soivre, and Jonchery, Vendeuil.


VESLE.

7. It was engaged west of Reims (St. Euphraise, Vrigny) between July 22
and August 8.

8. About August 22 the division arrived in the area northeast of Ath
from the Aisne front to refit and train.


ARDENNES.

9. It was engaged west of La Pompelle on September 20, retreating to the
Suippe, south of Bazancourt, about October 1, then toward Chateau
Porcien and Faizy. It was relieved about October 15.

10. It rested for 10 days at Son and St. Fergeux, receiving 150 to 200
men per regiment as drafts.

11. On the 25th the division returned to line in the Chateau Porcien
sector. It retired in November by Son, Chappes, Dommely, and La Romagn,
where it was last identified on November 7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a first-class division, though it was
considered as a shade under the class of the best divisions. It fought
hard on the Lys, losing but 1 prisoner. It was not used later as an
attack division. The morale was good.




                         8th. Cavalry Division.


                            COMPOSITION.[7]

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │39 Cav.                │Guard Reiter.
                        │                       │17 Uhlan.
                        │40 Cav.                │Karabinier.
                        │                       │21 Uhlan.
                        │38 Cav.                │2 Jager.
                        │                       │6 Jag.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │12 Horse Art. Det.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│Pion. Detch.
                        │8 M. G. Btry.
                        │260 Searchlight Section.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│54 Field Hospital.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │44 Cav. Brig.:
                        │11 Horse Jag. Rgt.
                        │9 Res. Uhlan Schutzen Rgt.
                        │87 Cav. Schutzen Rgt.
                        │89 Cav. Schutzen Rgt.
                        │7 Landst. Inf. Rgt.
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────

Footnote 7:

  At the time of its dissolution, April, 1918.


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

The division continued on the Eastern Front, employed in small police
detachments, until about April 1, when it was dissolved.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a fourth-class division.




                             9th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │17.      │19.      │17.      │19.      │18.      │7 Gren.
              │         │58.      │         │58.      │         │19.
              │18.      │7 Gren.  │18.      │7 Gren.  │         │154.
              │         │154.     │         │154.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Uhlan Regt.      │                   │1 and 2 Sqns., 1
              │                   │                   │  Uhlan Regt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │9 Brig.:           │9 Brig.:           │9 Brig.:
              │ 5 F. A. Rgt.      │ 5 F. A. Rgt.      │ 5 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │ 41 F. A. Rgt.     │ 41 F. A. Rgt.     │ 41 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 5:
   Liaisons.  │                   │  55:              │
              │                   │ Field Co. 5 Pions.│ 1 Co. 5 Pions.
              │                   │ 9 Pont. Engs.     │ 9 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │ 9 Tel. Detch.     │ 9 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 9 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │37 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │18.      │7 Gren.  │18.      │7.
              │         │19.      │         │19.
              │         │154.     │         │154.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 1 Horse Jag.│2 Sqn. 1 Horse Jag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │9 Art. Command:    │9 Art. Command:
              │ 5 F. A. Rgt.      │ 5 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (except 4 Abt.)
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 6 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt. (5, 6,
              │                   │  and 12 Btries.).
              │                   │ 907 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1175 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1201 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│120 Pion. Btn.:    │120 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 5 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 5 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 5 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 5 Pions.
              │ 9 T. M. Co.       │ 9 T. M. Co.
              │ 304 Searchlight   │ 194 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 9 Tel. Detch.     │9 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 9 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 53 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │14 Ambulance Co.   │14 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │45 Field Hospital. │48 Field Hospital.
              │48 Field Hospital. │52 Field Hospital.
              │52 Field Hospital. │9 Vet. Hospital.
              │9 Vet. Hospital.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │542 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │37 Searchlight     │
              │  Section.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (Fifth District—Lower Silesia.)


                                 1914.


COTES DE MEUSE.

1. The 9th Division with the 10th Division, formed the 5th Army Corps
(Posen), and at the beginning of the war was part of the 5th Army
(German Crown Prince). Detrained August 9 to 10 in annexed Lorraine,
near Bouzonville, and fought August 22 at Virton. After a number of
marches and countermarches in Woevre, it established itself during the
first days of September with the 10th Division in a sector of Cotes de
Meuse (Calonne trench). It remained there about two years from
September, 1914, to September, 1916, with rest billets in the villages
of the Woevre at the foot of the hills (Thillot, Woël, Hannonville,
etc.).


                                 1915.


LES EPARGES.

1. In the spring of 1915 it took part in the battles of Les Eparges
where it suffered heavily. In March it transferred its 58th Infantry to
the 119th Division, newly formed, which was operating in Galicia
beginning with April.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. At the beginning of September, 1916, the division was withdrawn from
the sector of Calonne trench and relieved the 14th Bavarian Division in
the woods of Vaux Chapitre (Verdun). In this last sector it suffered
huge losses. October 24, 1916, it lost 700 men captured.

2. Relieved at the beginning of November and reorganized with men of all
ages from depots of the Fifth District.

3. November 4 it entrained behind Douaumont; was sent to the Aisne and
put in the line November 8 in the sector of Nouvron, where it remained
until the middle of February, 1917.


                                 1917.


COTES DE MEUSE.

1. Entrained at Laon during the last two weeks of February, 1917, and
sent to Vigneulles, via Charleville-Conflans-Chambley; and again went
into the sector of Calonne trench between February 18 and the end of
April.


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

2. Relieved at the end of April and sent from Mars la Tour-Vigneulles
(via Conflans-Sedan-Liart) to the region of Rozoy sur Serre. After a few
days’ rest in the vicinity of Sissonne it was engaged beginning May 6 in
the attacks on the plateaus of Vauclerc and Californie, where some of
its regiments suffered heavy losses, especially on the Winterberg.

3. Beginning May 18 the division did not attack any more but merely held
the sector (Californie-Chevreux les Courtines). However, our attack of
May 22 to 24 caused it heavy losses.

4. At the end of May the 9th Division was replaced by the 41st Division.
It received reinforcements. (The 19th Infantry received 200 men June 14.
About May 25, 60 men of the 1918 class were sent to the 6th Company of
this regiment.) From May 13 to June 13 the 10th Company of the 154th
Infantry received 68 men at least, most of them of the 1918 class.

5. About June 17–18 the division appeared in the sector of Juvincourt,
where it attacked on the night of August 4–5 without success. Relieved
about September 8 without having losses in this last sector.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

6. During September it was sent to rest in the region of Pierrepont-
Missy-Liesse. Engaged in the sector of Bovettes-Pargny-Filain from
October 23 to 27 and withdrawn from this front at the beginning of
November after some of its regiments had suffered heavy losses during
the battle of October 23 to 25.

7. About the middle of November the division went to the sector of
Chevregny, after a rest of about two weeks in the region of Laon, during
which it was filled up again. It held this sector until the beginning of
December. December 8 it was in the vicinity of Laon. January 11, 1918,
some of the units were at Liesse.


                              RECRUITING.

The division (Fifth District) was recruited in Lower Silesia, where the
German population is much more numerous than the Polish population.
Although it received men from the Second and Third Districts in 1913 and
men from the Seventh District in 1916, it could without great difficulty
get all its men from its original territory. Its replacements come
almost entirely from Lower Silesia, and in emergency from Silesia. It is
more homogeneous than the 10th Division, where the Polish elements have
to be balanced off by Germans.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Among the various German units which were engaged in front of Verdun and
at Californie Plateau, the 9th Division was one of those which showed
the least resistance.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved on the Chemin des Dames front on December
29 and went to rest and train in the Guise area until the middle of
March, when it proceeded to the battle front.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was at Marcyon March 20. On the 21st it followed up the attack
without being engaged through Happencourt, Artemps, Tugny, Dury, Pithon,
Ham, and Nesle (Mar. 25). It was engaged on the 26th near Roye and
advanced by Montdidier to west of Mesnil-St. Georges March 27–28. Its
attack of March 30 on Ayencourt-Royancourt met with heavy losses.


MONTDIDIER.

3. The division was withdrawn on April 1 for a short rest, during which
it received a draft of 400 men. It returned to line southwest of
Montdidier and was in line from April 5 to 8.

4. Until the 18th it was in reserve near La Boissiere and later near
Nesle until April 24.

5. It rested near Hirson and Vervins during May, again receiving drafts
to the number of 300 men.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

6. On May 20 it marched by night stages to the Aisne front, passing
through Froidmont, Verneuil sur Serre, and Bruyeres. On the opening day
it advanced in reserve by Presles, Monampteuil, and Pargny Filain. It
was engaged on the 28th at Sancy-Vregny and advanced in the first line
south of Soissons, Venizel, Missy sur Aisne, Courmelles, Noyant,
Chazelle, and Poisy (May 30). Its losses in front of Chazelle were
particularly heavy. It was relieved on June 8. An official German
document gives the division losses between May 28 and June 2 as 96
officers and 2,830 men.

7. It rested in the vicinity of Rethel and Novion-Porcien (June 15 to
July 7) and reconstituted by drafts. It moved toward the Aisne front on
July 10, going into reserve northeast of Rheims for a week. Alerted on
the 17th it moved to Oulchy le Chateau.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

8. The division was engaged near Hartennes and Varcy from July 20 to
August 2. It was driven back on Fismes on that date and relieved the
next day.

9. In August it rested and trained near Vailly and in the vicinity of
Laon. After the 24th it was north of Rheims.


CHAMPAGNE.

10. The division was engaged east of La Pompelle from September 20 to
the beginning of October. On the 3d it was forced back on Isles
Bazancourt, and later to Nanteuil sur Aisne. On October 17 it was
relieved.

11. Two days later it was entrained for Flanders, but at Mons directed
toward Avesnes and La Capelle.

12. Its last engagement was north of Guise from October 21 to November
4; then near Novin and Avesnes. 1,800 prisoners were taken on November
4.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a first-class division. Its performance in
1918 was not of the best, however. It was engaged in the Somme, Aisne,
and Marne actions without winning special credit. Discipline was
reported to be lax, and morale poor at the end.




                         9th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │17 Res.  │6 Res.   │17 Res.  │19 Res.  │17 Res.  │6 Res.
              │         │7 Res.   │         │7 Res.   │         │19 Res.
              │         │19 Res.  │         │6 Res.   │         │102
              │         │         │         │         │         │  (Ldw.).
              │         │5 Res.   │         │5 Res.   │         │5 Res.
              │         │  Jag.   │         │  Jag.   │         │  Jag.
              │         │  Btn.   │         │  Btn.   │         │  Btn.
              │         │         │         │         │         │98 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │         │395.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Res. Dragoon Rgt.│                   │3 Res. Dragoon Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │9 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │9 Res. F. A. Rgt.  │9 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Co. 2 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │  Btn. No. 5.      │  Btn. No. 5       │  No. 5.
              │2 Res. Co. 2 Pion. │2 Res. Co. 2 Pion. │2090 T. M. Co.
              │  Btn. No. 5.      │  Btn. No. 5       │
              │                   │9 Res. Pont. Engs. │9 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │9 Res. Tel. Detch. │9 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │18 Res.  │6 Res.   │18 Res.  │6 Res.
              │         │19 Res.  │         │19 Res.
              │         │395.     │         │395.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 and 3 Sqns. 3    │3 Sqn. 3 Res. Drag.
              │  Res. Dragoon Rgt.│  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │97 Art. Command:   │97 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 9 Res. F. A. Rgt. │ 9 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 29 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │  (Staff and 1 and
              │                   │  3 Btries.).
              │                   │ 735 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1287 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1361 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│309 Pion. Btn.:    │309 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 55 Pions.   │ 4 Co. 5 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 18     │ 1 Res. Co. 18
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 209 T. M. Co.     │ 209 T. M. Co.
              │ 409 Tel. Detch.   │ 29 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │409 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 409 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 28 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │519 Ambulance Co.  │519 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │13 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │25 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │409 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │708 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                        (Fifth District—Posen.)


                                 1914.

The division was part of the 5th Reserve Corps with the 10th Reserve
Division.


MEUSE-WOEVRE.

1. At the beginning of the war it belonged to the 5th German Army
(Imperial Crown Prince). Concentrated in the region of Sarrebruck and
crossed the southern part of Belgian Luxemburg; fought August 22 near
Ville en Montois and September 1 in the region of Consenvoye-Flabas, and
was kept east of the Meuse near Sivry September 2. Toward the end of
September and the beginning of October the division sent a few units to
the left bank of the Meuse (Forges-Malancourt-Chattancourt). The
division established itself in Woevre during the last two weeks of
October and at the beginning of November in the region Etraye-Wavrille-
Romagne, where it did some fighting at Maucourt November 10.


FLANDERS.

2. About November 13 the division was sent from the region of Verdun to
Flanders. Some units of the division fought near Poelcappelle and south
of Bixschoote in support of the 3d Reserve Corps. It suffered very heavy
losses.

3. Again sent to Woevre during the month of December.


                                 1915.


WOEVRE.

1. In January, 1915, the division held the region Gincrey-Etrain-Warcq.
It remained in this section during the whole of 1915 and until the end
of February, 1916. In April it transferred its 7th Reserve Infantry to
form the 121st Division.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. A few days before the Verdun offensive (end of February, 1916,) the
regiments of the division were relieved. The 6th Reserve and the 19th
Reserve organized with their best units one attack battalion each. These
battalions took part with the 15th Army Corps in the violent action at
the beginning and suffered heavy losses.

2. March 7 its units were reorganized behind the front and the division
advanced through Maucourt-Ornes and established itself north of Vaux.
March 9 and 10 the three regiments of the division attacked successfully
the village and fort of Vaux. They were repulsed nearly everywhere with
very heavy losses.

3. About March 12 the division was relieved from before Vaux and sent to
rest in the region of Senon-Amel.

4. Went back into line about March 20 south of Damploup. It did not
attack any more, but bombardments caused it heavy losses.

5. Relieved about the end of April and sent to rest in the vicinity of
Saverne (Alsace) until June 12.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. About June 20 it went into line in Champagne (sector of Souain-
Tahure) but did not take part in any important action.


SOMME.

7. Withdrawn from the front about September 20 or 25 and sent to the
Somme. Engaged between the eastern limit of Bouchavesnes and the main
Péronne road until October 18. It had a few losses.

8. After a period of rest, probably in the vicinity of Vouziers, it was
again sent to the Somme, first behind the front southeast of Bapaume
December 1, then about December 17 in line in the sector of Bouchavenes-
Bois de St. Pierre-Vaast until February, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. In February, 1917, the division held on the Somme the sector north of
the Ancre—south of Achiet le Petit.

2. Withdrawn from the front about March 10 and sent to rest in the
region of Cambrai, and was established on a new front about March 20
west of Catelet near Gouzeaucourt, Villers Guislain.


ARTOIS.

3. About April 15 it was relieved and went into line south of the
Scarpe, northeast of Monchy le Preaux, from the beginning of May till
the beginning of June.


FLANDERS.

4. It was again at the front east of Armentieres from the middle of June
till about July 10, then after a rest in the vicinity of Ghent it was in
line on the Ypres road at Menin, east of Klein-Zillebeke, from August 10
to September 25, and fought especially on the 20th, on which date it
suffered heavily. The 11th Company of the 6th Reserve Infantry was
reduced to 20 men, and the 12th to 27. The 19th Reserve Infantry had the
same losses. The 3d Company of the 395th Infantry lost half of its men.
(Summary of information Sept. 21 and Oct. 24, 1917.)


CAMBRAI.

5. Reorganized in the region of Cambrai and from that time on held
various sectors of this front. It fought November 23 to 30 at Banteux,
Masnières, and in December south of Marcoing. In January, 1918, it was
at La Vacquerie and was relieved there February 21.


                              RECRUITING.

The Province of Posen, with a few units from other districts, for
example the ninth, to reduce the proportion of Poles.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division fought well in many battles at the end of 1917, especially
east of Ypres and before Cambrai.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division reinforced the front southwest of Cambrai on March 22
and advanced by Montauban-Maricourt to west of Albert. It was relieved
about the 1st of April. After losing heavily in the offensive it was
withdrawn.


LENS.

2. It came into line in the quiet sector near Lens about April 10,
relieving the 12th Reserve Division. On the 23d it shifted its sector
south to Avion. The 12th Reserve Division returned from the Lys front to
relieve it on about April 29.

3. The division moved north and entered the battle line in the Festubert
sector on April 29. It continued in this sector until September 27,
effecting only local reliefs. It reentered at once at Marcoing on
September 29. A month later it arrived at Ath from line and went into
line on November 2 at Hermes. The last identification was at Ellezelle
on November 10.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a second-class division. During 1918 its
length of stay on the British front was remarkable. Nothing is known of
its morale or losses.




                         9th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │43 Ldw.       │32 Ldw.       │76 Ldw.       │79 Ldw.
              │              │83 Ldw.       │              │83 Ldw.
              │49 Mixed Ldw. │116 Ldw.      │49 Ldw.       │116 Ldw.
              │              │118 Ldw.      │              │118 Ldw.
              │              │56 Ldw.       │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │Ldw. Cav. Rgt. (18 C. Dist.).│Ldw. Cav. Rgt. (18 C. Dist.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Ldw. F. A. Rgt.              │Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ldw. Pion. Co. (18 C.      │2 Ldw. Pion. Co. (10 C.
   Liaisons.  │  Dist.).                    │  Dist.).
              │                             │1 Ldw. Pion. Co. (18 C.
              │                             │  Dist.).
              │                             │309 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │76 Ldw.       │83 Ldw.       │76 Ldw.       │83 Ldw.
              │              │116 Ldw.      │              │116 Ldw.
              │              │118 Ldw.      │              │118 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 4 Res. Drag. Rgt.     │1 Sqn. 4 Res. Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │9 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 9 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(409) Pion. Btn.:            │409 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Ldw. Pion. Co. (10 C.     │ 2 Ldw. Co. 10 C. Dist.
              │  Dist.).                    │  Pions.
              │ 1 Ldw. Pion. Co. (18 C.     │ 1 Ldw. Co. 18 C. Dist.
              │  Dist.).                    │  Pions.
              │ 309 T. M. Co.               │ 309 T. M. Co.
              │ 509 Tel. Detch.             │ 183 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │509 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 509 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 136 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │566 Ambulance Co.            │566 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │62 Field Hospital.           │62 Field Hospital.
              │86 Field Hospital.           │13 Ldw. Field Hospital.
              │396 Field Hospital.          │509 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │221 M. T. Col.               │
              │904 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │151 Labor Btn.               │
              │171 Labor Btn.               │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (83d Landwehr: Eleventh District—Thuringia and Electoral Hesse. 116th
 Landwehr and 118th Landwehr: Eighteenth District—Grand Duchy of Hesse.)


                                 1915.


ARGONNE.

1. This division was organized in the Argonne at the beginning of 1915
from infantry units in sector in that region and in Champagne. The 43d
Landwehr Brigade detrained at Boulay (Lorraine) August 20, 1914, and
fought in the Woevre the 24th. The 49th Landwehr Brigade was sent to
Luxemburg August 20, followed the Eighteenth Reserve Corps, and took
part with it in the battle of the Marne. In October the two brigades
were in the Argonne.

2. From the time of its organization did not leave the Argonne. From the
beginning of 1915 it held the sector at or near the Aisne (north of
Ville sur Tourbe and north of Vienne le Chateau).


                                 1916.


ARGONNE.

1. Sector north of Vienne le Chateau, from the region of Rouvroy to the
ravine of Fontaine aux Charmes.


                                 1917.


ARGONNE.

1. Sector north of Vienne le Chateau.


                              RECRUITING.

83d Landwehr: Electorate Hesse and Thuringia. 116th and 118th Landwehr:
Grand Duchy of Hesse and Rhenish country. The document of July 11, 1917,
calls the two regiments in question “Rhenish.”

At the end of 1917 and during the first months of 1918 the division
exchanged a large number of men with the divisions stationed near it,
which modified its regional composition to a certain degree.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Sector division. (1918.)

The division had one storm company in July, 1917, and each regiment had
a “Stosstrupp.”


                                 1918.

The division continued to hold the sector in the Argonne Woods until the
American attack on September 26. It was engaged on the opening days and
withdrew on the 28th. The shattered elements were re-formed and
reentered at once on the extreme right flank of the 4th French Army in
the vicinity of the Aisne. The last identification was at Villers sur le
Mont on November 10.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a fourth-class division. On the defensive it
showed some fighting ability.




                     9th Bavarian Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │      1918[8]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │17 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │17 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │17 Bav.  │11 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.
              │         │14 Bav.  │         │14 Bav.  │         │14 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │3 Bav.   │         │3 Bav.   │         │3 Bav.
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1 Sqn. 1 Bav. Res. │1 Sqn. 1 Bav. Res.
              │                   │  Cav. Rgt.        │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │11 Bav. Res. F. A. │9 Bav. Art.        │9 Bav. Art.
              │  Rgt. (9 Btries.).│  Command:         │  Command:
              │                   │ 11 Bav. Res. F. A.│ 11 Bav. Res. F. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(21) Pion. Btn.:   │8 Bav. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 8 Bav. Pion. Co.  │12 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Co.
              │                   │ 12 Bav. Res. Pion.│209 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │ 209 Bav. T. M. Co.│409 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 409 Tel. Detch.   │105 Bav. Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │13 Bav. Ambulance  │13 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │  Co.
              │                   │30 Bav. Field      │30th Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │58 Bav. Field      │58th Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │29 Bav. Vet.       │29 Bav. Vet.
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │30 Bav. Vet.       │
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │M. T. Col.         │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 8:

  Composition at time of dissolution, July 24.


                                HISTORY.

 (Third Bavarian District—Upper Palatinate, Upper and Middle Franconia.)


                                 1916.

1. This division was formed at the beginning of October, 1916, at Caudry
and vicinity, and was one of the series of divisions organized at that
time from drafts of units from already existing divisions.


AISNE.

2. Went into line at the beginning of October east of Craonne, in the
sector of Ville au Bois.

3. At the beginning of December it was sent to rest between Cambrai and
Le Cateau.


                                 1917.


SOMME.

1. The division was sent to the Somme and sent in its regiments singly
to reinforce the sectors of Saillisel and Transloy in January, 1917.


AISNE.

2. At the beginning of February the division was sent back to the region
of Laon-La Malmaison. It returned to the sector of Ville au Bois, where
it opposed the French offensive of April 16 and lost 2,300 captured and
many casualties; the 2d and 3d Battalions of the 14th Reserve Infantry
were almost all taken prisoners.


LORRAINE.

3. Relieved April 20 and sent to Lorraine, where it occupied the sector
of Moncel-Arracourt May 1 to the beginning of August.


FLANDERS.

4. August 1 it entrained at St. Avold for Flanders. Detrained at Roulers
and was placed in reserve in the region Staden-Zarren from August 9 to
16. It fought August 17 north of Ypres at Bixschoote-Langemarck,
suffered heavy losses, and remained in line only three days.


WOEVRE.

5. August 24 it took over the sector of the Apremont forest near St.
Mihiel until the end of October.


FLANDERS.

6. Returned to Flanders and sent to rest in the vicinity of Bruges and
Ostend in October and November. About November 22 it went into line in
the sector of Lombartzyde and left it at the beginning of December.


CAMBRAI.

7. It returned almost immediately to the front south of Cambrai
(Gonnelieu-Villers-Guislain) in December, then to the sector of
Hargicourt in January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Almost entirely from the Third Bavarian District-Upper Palatinate, Upper
and Lower Franconia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division opposed a considerable resistance to the French attack of
April 16, 1916, and gave proof of good qualities and defense.


                                 1918.

1. The division was not engaged on March 21, being in reserve near
Estrees from the 21st to the 24th. It was then used to clear up the
ground near Bellenglise until March 27. It marched to the front by Mont
St. Quentin, Vermandovillers, and Harvonnieres.


VILLERS BRETONNEUX.

2. From April 4 to 21 it was engaged near Villers Bretonneux. In the
counterattack of the opening day a battalion of the 11th Bavarian
Reserve Regiment ran away. For a week the division was in reserve south
of Bray sur Somme. On April 27 it returned to line northeast of Villers
Bretonneux, remaining until May 6.

3. It rested west of St. Quentin from May 11 to 17.


BATTLE OF THE MATZ.

4. On the 19th the division entered the line on the Oise east of Noyon.
After the 26th it was in front of Noyon. The division took part in the
attack of June 6 on Suzay-Thiescourt-Passel. Relieved about the middle
of June, the division was disbanded about June 27. Its regiments were
turned into the 12th Bavarian Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a second-class division. It was inferior to
the other Bavarian units. Its morale was bad prior to its dissolution.




                         9th Cavalry Division.


                            COMPOSITION.[9]

 ───────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────
                        │                     1918
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┬───────────────────────
                        │       Brigade.        │       Regiment.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┼───────────────────────
 Cavalry.               │13 Cav.                │4 Cuirassier.
                        │                       │8 Hus.
                        │14 Cav.                │11 Hus.
                        │                       │5 Uhlan.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────┴───────────────────────
 Artillery.             │10 Horse Art. Abt.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Engineers and Liaisons.│5 M. G. Btry.
                        │7 M. G. Btry.
                        │9 Cav. Pion. Detch.
                        │415 T. M. Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Medical and Veterinary.│574 Ambulance Co.
 ───────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────
 Attached.              │Saxon Res. Reiter Rgt.
                        │3 Heavy Res. Cav. Schutzen Rgt.
 ───────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────

Footnote 9:

  At the time of its dissolution, June, 1918.


                                HISTORY.


                                 1918.

The division was employed in police duty in the Ukraine until about July
1, when it was dissolved.


                          VALUE 1918—ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             10th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │19.      │6 Gren.  │19.      │6 Gren.  │20.      │6 Gren.
              │         │46.      │         │46.      │         │47.
              │20.      │47.      │20.      │47.      │         │50.
              │         │50.      │         │50.      │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Horse Jag. Rgt.  │                   │1 Horse Jag. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (3 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │10 Brig.:          │10 Brig.:          │10 Brig.:
              │ 20 F. A. Rgt.     │ 20 F. A. Rgt.     │ 20 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 56 F. A. Rgt.     │ 56 F. A. Rgt.     │ 56 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Co. 5 Pions.     │1 Pion. Btn. No. 5:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 5:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │3 Co. 5 Pions.     │ 2 Co. 5 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 5 Pions.
              │                   │ 3 Co. 5 Pions.    │ 3 Co. 5 Pions.
              │                   │ Field Co. 16      │ 1 Res. Co. 27
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │                   │ 10 Pont. Engs.    │ 10 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 10 Tel. Detch.    │ 10 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 10 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │20.      │6 Gren.  │20.      │6 Gren.
              │         │47.      │         │47.
              │         │398.     │         │398.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 1 Horse Jag.│3 Sqn. 1 Horse Jag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │10 Art. Command:   │10 Art. Command:
              │ 56 F. A. Rgt.     │ 56 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 11 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (5, 6, and 7
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 890 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1171 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1194 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Pion. Btn. No. 5:│5 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Co. 5 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 5 Pions.
              │ 3 Co. 5 Pions.    │ 3 Co. 5 Pions.
              │ 10 T. M. Co.      │ 10 T. M. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 46 Heavy Field    │ 70 Searchlight
              │  Searchlight      │  Section.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 10 Tel. Detch.    │10 Signal Command:
              │ 308 and 309       │ 10 Tel. Detch.
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Sections.        │
              │                   │ 146 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │13 Ambulance Co.   │13 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │46 Field Hospital. │218 Ambulance Co.
              │50 Field Hospital. │46 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │50 Field Hospital.
              │                   │164 Field Hospital.
              │                   │10 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │543 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                        (Fifth district—Posen.)


                                 1914.

The 10th Division at mobilization belonged to the 5th Army Corps
(Posen). Detrained August 10 and 11 near Sarrelouis and belonged to the
5th Army (Prussian Crown Prince). Entered Luxemburg the 18th, passed
through Arlon the 20th, and left it on the evening of the 21st.

1. Took part in the combat of August 22, 1914 at Ethe, near Virton, next
to the 9th Division. August 28 it was north of Thionville, expecting to
leave for Russia. August 30 it continued its march in the Woevre,
reached the Cotes de Meuse, and attacked the fort of Troyon September 7.


LES EPARGES.

2. After the battle of the Marne it held the sector of the Cotes de
Meuse east of Verdun (Les Eparges-Callone) which it held almost all the
time until October 1916. Took part in the series of combats which took
place in this sector between April and July, 1915.


                                 1915.

1. At the time of our offensive of September and October, 1915, in
Champagne, the 10th Division sent some of its units there, but they
returned to Woevre about December 10, 1915, after four weeks’ rest in
Lorraine.


WOEVRE.

2. After this and until the beginning of October, 1916, the Division
held its sector of the Cotes de Meuse.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. In October 1916 the division was relieved and took over the sector of
Douaumon in November. It suffered heavy losses December 15, when the
French defeated it severely, and had to be withdrawn from the front.


                                 1917.


COTES DE MEUSE.

1. Reorganized at the beginning of January, 1917, after a three weeks’
rest in the region of Mars la Tour, and took over again its former
sector of the Cotes de Meuse at the beginning of March, remaining there
until the end of April.


AISNE.

2. Entrained May 1 at Mars la Tour and sent via Conflans-Montmedy-Sedan-
Charleville-Hirson to the region north of the Aisne, where it took over
a sector northwest of Braye en Laonnois. It made an attack there May 18
but did not lose very heavily.

3. On June 20 it was relieved and sent to rest near Crecy sur Serre.
Left this region about July 25 and spent six days at Gizy and vicinity.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

4. On July 30 it went into line in the sector from Ailles to Hurtebise.
Its regiment suffered a great deal from our artillery fire. During the
attack of August 31 to September 1 the division suffered heavy losses.

5. About September 15 the division was relieved. On the 20th it took
over the sector of St. Gobain.

6. At the beginning of the French attack at the end of October an
emergency call was sent the 23d for some of the units of the division
which were at rest in the region of Crepy en Laonnois and during the
night of the 23d–24th they went into line to cover the retreat of the
divisions in line.


FOREST OF ST. GOBAIN.

The greater part of the division remained in line in the forest of St.
Gobain during this attack. The division was relieved about the middle of
December; and on December 15 it was behind the St. Quentin front. At the
end of January 18 the division relieved the 211th division in the sector
of Ailles.


                              RECRUITING.

The 10th Division differs from the 9th in that its normal recruiting
district (Province of Posen) is composed mostly of Poles. There are,
therefore, a large number of Poles in its ranks, but it is evident that
they are trying to mix them with Prussians, who are less liable to
desert. The 47th Infantry on December 15, 1916, before Verdun contained
men from the ninth and tenth districts. The 398th Infantry, whose
companies were taken from various divisions, for example the 9th, the
10th and the 103d, obtained from the 103d Division Hessian and
Thuringian units. There is the same variety in the 6th Grenadiers, which
contained at the end of 1912 besides the original drafts from the
district, men from the ninth and tenth districts, as well as from the
eighteenth district, the latter belonging to the trained Landsturm (2d
Bav.).


                                 VALUE.

Until the attack of Verdun, the 10th division always had the reputation
of being a good division composed of good units. At the time of the
attack of the French December 10, 1915, however, the division which was
in the sector north of Verdun did not seem to defend itself as
stubbornly as might be expected. It should, however, be noted that 15
per cent of the forces were at that time weakened by sickness. During
the German attack of May 18, 1917, the 47th Infantry clearly gave the
impression that it was quite inferior to the two other regiments of the
division. (The presence of Poles in the 47th should be noted.) August
31, 1917 at the Chemin des Dames, the units of the 10th division
resisted well and counterattacked with vigor September 1.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved in the Ailles on February 20 and went to
rest and train for a month. It was at Montcornet, later near Saint
Richaumont, Voulpaix, and La Vallee-aux-Bleds. It marched toward the St.
Quentin front on March 20, by Origny-St. Benoite and Itancourt.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was in the second line on March 21 and 22, advancing through
Urvillers and Essigny. It was engaged March 23 to 25, crossing the
Crozat Canal to the west of Jussy, Cugny, and Guiscard. It rested on the
25th and 26th. The division was reengaged on March 27 to the 30th in the
vicinity of Libermont, Ognolles, Beuvraignes (27th) Conchy les Pots
(28th–31st). The losses were heavy on the 27th and 28th. The division
passed into the second line on the 31st and then to reserve at Solente
(east of Roye) until the 30th of April.

3. The division rested and trained from May 5 to 20 at Jeantes la Ville
and Nampcelle la Cour (east of Vervins). It received a draft of 800 men
on May 18.

4. The division marched toward the Aisne front through Montigny le
Franc, Marchais, Montaigu, and Mauregny, May 25 and 26, by night.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

5. It attacked on the Chemin des Dames on May 27, near Ailles, its
former sector. It was in the front line of the advance through Paissy,
Oeuilly, Barbonval, Blanzy, Bazoches (27th), Mareuil en Dole, (28th),
south of Fere en Tardenois, (29th), south of Beuvardes (30th), south of
Bouresches. It retired from the front about June 8.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

6. The division was at rest near Sissonne after the middle of June to
July 7. It marched to the front via Eppes, Brenelle, Foret de Fere, July
7 to 11. It crossed the Marne on the morning of the 15th, by pontoons,
having passed through the sector of the 10th Ldw. Div. The division’s
objective was a line 8 klms. south of the river, which was to have been
reached by 11 a. m. The advance was completely checked by the American
Division (3d) south of the Marne. The division lost 400 prisoners and
many casualties.

7. The division was taken out within a few days and rested at Arcy-St.
Restitute. It was engaged near Vierzy on the 26th and was thrown back on
the Vesle by August 1, when it was relieved.


THE WOEVRE.

8. The division was taken to Athies-sous-Laon, where it entrained on
August 5 for Mars-la-Tour. The itinerary included Hirson, Charleville,
Sedan. It camped at Sponville until the night of August 18–19. It
relieved the 277th Division in the sector Richecourt, Lahayville, St.
Baussant. The division had absorbed the 255th Division, dissolved on
August 7, and its losses in men and material had been made up. The
division sustained the American attack of September 12 and was thrown
back north of Thiaucourt on Jaulny, Rembercourt. The division lost
heavily in casualties and prisoners. Practically the entire 3d Battalion
of the 398th Regiment was captured on the first day. It was taken out on
September 20.


MOSELLE.

9. The division was reassembled at Loringen, near Metz. From the
dissolved 77th Reserve Division the 257th Reserve Regiment was turned
into the 6th Gren. Regiment (10th Division), the 419th into the 398th
Regiment, and the 332d into the 47th Regiment. Other drafts from Germany
were received to reconstitute the division. On the 5th of October the
division entered the sector east of the Moselle (Nomeny), where it
remained until October 28.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

10. The division returned to Metz and moved by rail for Pelte, via Metz-
Longuyon-Montmedy. It went into position on November 3 northwest of
Stenay. The last identification was on the Meuse on November 11.


                                 VALUE.

The division was rated as a first-class division. It behaved creditably
in the Somme and Aisne offensives. It was completely defeated on the
Marne, from which it never recovered. The inferior qualities of the
drafts received in August and September lowered the fighting value of
the division.




                         10th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │18 Res.  │37 Res.  │19 Res.  │37 Res.  │19 Res.  │37 Res.
              │         │46 Res.  │         │46 Res.  │         │98 Res.
              │77.      │37 Fus.  │         │98 Res.  │77.      │37 Fus.
              │         │155.     │77.      │37 Fus.  │         │155.
              │         │         │         │155.     │         │
              │         │         │   (37 Res. Rgt.   │         │
              │         │         │ passed to 119 D.  │         │
              │         │         │   April, 1915.)   │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │6 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │6 Res. Uhlan Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │10 Res. F. A. Rgt. │10 Res. F. A. Rgt. │10 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │Res. Co. 5 Pions.  │1 Res. Co. 5 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │10 Res. Pont. Engs.│210 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │10 Res. Tel. Detch.│10 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │10 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │77.      │37 Res.  │77.      │37 Fus.
              │         │37 Fus.  │         │155.
              │         │155.     │         │37 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │(?) 6 Res. Uhlan   │1 Sqn. 3 Res. Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │61 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ Res. F. A. (Regt. │ 10 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).        │
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 66 F. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 3 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 736 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1107 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1123 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(310) Pion. Btn.:  │310 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 5      │ 1 Res. Co. 5
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 5      │ 2 Co. 5 Res.
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 210 T. M. Co.     │ 210 T. M. Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.       │ 192 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │410 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 410 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 1 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │505 Ambulance Co.  │505 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │26 Res. Hospital   │26 Res. Field
              │  Field.           │  Hospital.
              │28 Res. Field      │28 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │410 Vet. Hospital. │410 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │709 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │10 M. G. S. S.
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │254 Mountain M. G.
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │234 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │(Elements attached
              │                   │  Sept. 22, 1918.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                        (Fifth District—Posen.)


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. At mobilization the division, with the 9th Reserve Division, formed
the 5th Reserve Corps. It was part of the 5th Army (Crown Prince of
Prussia) and took part in the offensive which went around Verdun from
the north. It fought at Ville en Montois August 22, in the Region of
Consenvoiye-Flabas September 1, and in the vicinity of Sivry sur Meuse
September 2. It remained on the right bank of the Meuse until the end of
September.


MEUSE.

2. About October 1 some of the units of the 10th Reserve Division were
sent to the left bank (Cuisy-Forges-Gercourt).

3. At the beginning of November the division was regrouped in the region
of Damvillers (right bank). Took part in the attacks toward Azannes
November 10 and established itself in the sector of Consenvoye-Azannes
(northeast of Orne-Bois des Caures in November and December).


                                 1915.

1. The division held the region east of Consenvoye-Flabas-Bois des
Caures-Azannes until the Verdun offensive February, 1916.


WOEVRE.

2. At the end of September, 1915, at the beginning of the French attack
in Champagne, some units of the division (battalions of the 37th
Reserves and 98th Reserves were sent as reinforcements to vicinity of
Ville sur Tourbe and Massiges.)


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. About February 15, 1916, the division was relieved from the sector on
the right bank of the Meuse and put in reserve. During the first days of
the offensive it engaged only a few attack battalions. Beginning March
12 it was in line before Vaux and Fort Vaux and had very heavy losses.
April 3 the 8th of the 37th Fusiliers received at least 64 replacements
(recuperated men who entered the service the preceding November and
recovered wounded and sick).

2. The division was relieved at the end of April and sent to rest in the
region of Mulhouse from the beginning of May to June 12.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. Sent to Champagne and held the sector north of Tahure, south of Somme
Py, until September 20.


SOMME.

4. After a few days rest it was sent to the Somme south of the St.
Pierre Wood-Vaast from October 5 to 15. It suffered very heavy losses
there.

5. At rest for 13 days, then entrained, and went to Dun via Hirson-
Mézières-Charleville-Sedan October 23.


MORT HOMME.

6. It held the sector of Mort Homme (left bank of the Meuse) from
October 28 to February 8, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. The division was at rest in the middle of February, 1917, in the
region of Sedan, then of Dizy le Gros.


AISNE.

2. At the beginning of March it went into line in the region of Berry au
Bac (from Hill 108 to Spigneul). It was relieved at the beginning of the
French attack April 16. The French artillery preparation caused it heavy
losses.


MORT HOMME-HILL 304.

3. From April 24 to May 15 it was in line in its old sector—Cumierès-
Mort Homme—and from the middle of May till July 19 in the adjoining
sector—Hill 304-Avocourt Wood. It attacked June 28 and 29 and opposed
our counterattacks of July 12 to 17, suffering heavy losses.

4. Withdrawn from the front about July 19.

5. At rest near Sedan and reorganized (replacements from the Fifth
District and Eighteenth District (Frankfort on Main)).


CHAMPAGNE.

6. It then took over the sector Vitry-Cernay les Reims about August 8.
Remained there until about October 27.

7. November 9 it went into line north of Craonne in the region of
Chermizy-Bouconville (?). Some of the units of the division were not in
this sector. After a rest in the camp of Sissonne and at Poilcourt, end
of October to middle of December, they went into line in the sector
Miette-Aisne about December 17. About that date the division was
regrouped north of Berry au Bac, where it was still in February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Province of Posen. The differences were made up by the Sixth District
mostly.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division is considered as a “big attack” division. In April, 1917,
in the region of Berry au Bac it executed a well-conducted attack on
Satigneul. The offensive value of the division showed itself again
during the attacks of June 28–29 of 1917 at Hill 304.

There is no lack of volunteers for dangerous missions, and the motto of
the division is said to be: “Get after the enemy and beat ’em wherever
you find ’em.” The commanding general of the division and the colonel
commanding the 155th consider that their men are able to endure hard
battles (November, 1917).


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was relieved about March 15 and sent to reenforce the
Somme front. It was engaged near Beaulieu les Fontaines on March 25–26,
where it remained until April 7. Heavy casualties were reported in this
offensive.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

2. The division rested until May 27, when it took part in the offensive
at Mont Notre Dame. About June 15 it was withdrawn to Athies (Laon),
where it rested fallen until July 15.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

3. On July 15 the division was again engaged south of the Marne at
Montvoisin and Oeuilly on the opening day. It retired from the Vesle
front, to which it had fallen back, about August 5.


VESLE.

4. After resting three weeks at Asfeld the division returned to the
Vesle front on August 28 near Chalon sur Vesle and was engaged until
September 18.

5. On the 18th the division was directed by stages to Laon and entered
the line south of Laon at Ferme-Colombe on the 22d. The division appears
to have been constantly in action until November 1, and possibly until
the armistice. It was successively identified at Chevrigny, Montceau le
Waast (Oct. 14), southeast of Toulle (Oct. 27), south of Banogne (Nov.
1). The last identification was at Maubert-Fontaine on November 10.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a first-class division. It fought hard in most
of the offensives of the year, and when on the defensive put up a hard,
steady fight for two months without relief.




                         10th Ersatz Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │37 Ers.  │37, 38,  │37 Ers.  │37, 38,  │25 Mixed │369.
              │         │  39, and│         │  39, and│  Ers.   │
              │         │  40     │         │  40     │         │
              │         │  Brig.  │         │  Brig.  │         │
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │  Btns.  │         │  Btns.  │         │
              │25 Ers.  │25, 26,  │25 Ers.  │25, 26,  │         │368.
              │         │  27, 28,│         │  27, 28,│         │
              │         │  and 79 │         │  and 79 │         │
              │         │  Brig.  │         │  Brig.  │         │
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │  Btns.  │         │  Btns.  │         │
              │43 Ers.  │43, 44,  │43 Ers.  │43, 44,  │43 Mixed │370.
              │         │  76, and│         │  76, and│  Ers.   │
              │         │  83     │         │  83     │         │
              │         │  Brig.  │         │  Brig.  │         │
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │  Btns.  │         │  Btns.  │         │
              │         │         │         │         │         │371.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Ers. Cav. Detch. of│Ers. Cav. Detch. of│10 Cav. Sqn.
              │  25 Ers. Brig.    │  25 Ers. Brig.    │
              │Ers. Cav. Detch. of│Ers. Cav. Detch. of│2 Sqn. Horse Jag.
              │  43 Ers. Brig.    │  43 Ers. Brig.    │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ers. Abt. (46 and│1 Ers. Abt. (46 and│94 F. A. Rgt.
              │  62 F. A. Rgts.). │  62 F. A. Rgts.). │
              │1 Ers. Abt. (22 and│1 Ers. Abt. (22 and│95 F. A. Rgt.
              │  43 F. A. Rgts.). │  43 F. A. Rgts.). │
              │1 Ers. Abt. (47 and│1 Ers. Abt. (47 and│
              │  55 F. A. Rgts.). │  55 F. A. Rgts.). │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ers. Co. 10      │1 Ers. Co. 10      │2 Res. Co. 27
   Liaisons.  │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │3 Ers. Co. 11      │3 Ers. Co. 11      │2 Ldw. Pion. Co. (3
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │  C. Dist.).
              │                   │2 Ldw. Pion. Co. (3│307 Pion. Co.
              │                   │  C. Dist.).       │
              │                   │                   │309 Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │163 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │27 Balloon Sqn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │43 Ers.  │369.     │43 Ers.  │369.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │370.     │         │370.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │371.     │         │371.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 1 Horse Jag.│1 Sqn. 1 Horse Jag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │Ers. Sqn. 2 Horse  │
              │  Jag. Rgt.        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │95 F. A. Rgt.      │95 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │156 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │
              │                   │1058 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │
              │                   │1060 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1065 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:        │510 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 10     │ 246 Pion. Co.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 307 Pion. Co.     │ 308 Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 308 Pion. Co.     │ 163 T. M. Co.
              │ 163 T. M. Co.     │ 57 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 261 Searchlight   │560 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 304 Tel. Detch.   │ 560 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 109 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │66 Ambulance Co.   │66 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │139 Field Hospital.│139 Field Hospital.
              │140 Field Hospital.│140 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │212 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │765 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

     (369th and 370th: Seventh District—Westphalia. 371st: Eleventh
                          District—Thuringia.)


                                 1914.

This division was organized as early as August, 1914. It comprised the
25th, 37th, and 43d Mixed Ersatz Brigades, themselves constituted by the
Brigade Ersatz Battalions of the Tenth, Seventh, and Eleventh Districts
(Hanover, Oldenburg, Brunswick, Westphalia, Electoral Hesse, and
Thuringia).


LORRAINE.

1. Detrained August 17 and 18 near Sarrelouis and brought quickly to the
rear of the 3d Bavarian Corps August 20, and crossed the frontier the
25th. September 7 it had heavy losses at the attack against Nancy
(Champenoux). The 40th Brigade Ersatz Battalion lost half its forces
(notebook). It continued, however, to take part in the operations in
Lorraine in the region of Moncel until September 12, 1914, after which
it went to rest near Chateau Salins.


HAYE.

2. September 28 it entrained for Novéant and went into line on the Haye
front, where it held various sectors (Loupmont, Richecourt, Apremont).


                                 1915.


HAYE.

1. During 1915 the division continued to hold the Lorraine front (Haye):
Loupmont, Seicheprey, Lahayville, Mort Mare Wood.

2. At the end of July the division was reorganized. Its brigade Ersatz
battalions were grouped into regiments and formed the 368th, 369th,
370th, and 371st Infantry. The companies were filled up again. The 9th
company of the 370th Infantry received not less than 76 replacements in
August (1915 class called up in May).


                                 1916.


WOEVRE.

1. The division remained in the Flirey-Limey sector until the end of
August, 1916. At that date it was relieved by the Guard Ersatz Division
and sent to rest in the region of Thiaucourt.


SOMME.

2. By September 5, leaving the 368th Regiment, which was transferred to
the 213th Division, it entrained at Montmédy and went to the south of
the Somme via Laon, Tergnier, and St. Quentin. It fought south of Berny
en Santerre from September 14 to 25 and suffered considerable losses.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. After a short rest in the region of St. Quentin the division was sent
to Champagne. Until November 12 it held, without any particular
incidents, the Ste. Marie à Py and Somme Py sector.

4. From the middle of November to the middle of December it was sent to
rest in the region of Attigny.


MEUSE.

5. December 28 it took over the Ornes-Bezonvaux sector.


                                 1917.

1. Held the Verdun front (Bezonvaux) until April 19, 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Between April 20 and 25 it returned to Champagne and took part in the
attack south of Moronvilliers from the beginning of May to the beginning
of June. From June 9 to beginning of August it was in line in the region
of Regniéville-Remenauville (Haye).


FLANDERS.

4. After a rest behind the Lorraine front, the division entrained at
Chambley August 21 for Belgium. About September 24 it was engaged before
Ypres near Poelcappelle.


GALICIA.

5. Withdrawn from the Belgium front about October 7 and entrained the
10th for Galicia, where it was identified south of Skala, November 17.


                              RECRUITING.

Westphalia and Rhine Provinces: 369th and 370th Infantry. Thuringia:
371st Infantry.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division suffered heavy losses in Champagne in May, 1917, and at
Ypres in September and October, 1917. The division has only moderate
value.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The division remained in line until the attack on the Lys in April.
It was engaged north of the La Bassee Canal (Givenchy, Festubert,
southeast of Lacre), from April 9 to 24. The losses were heavy,
including 700 prisoners. The 360th Regiment suffered the most in the
fighting.

2. It was relieved on the 12th and rested in rear of the line until the
29th, when it returned to its former sector at Locre until May 3.

3. The division rested near Roubaix (Bondues, Wambrechies) until the
beginning of July. According to reports, sickness was very general
throughout the division at the time.


LA BASSEE CANAL.

4. On July 14 the division entered the line south of the La Bassee
Canal, coming via Lille and Seclin. It remained in this sector until
October 2.

5. It moved southward to reenforce the Cambrai-St. Quentin battle front
on October 7, coming into line east of Tilloy. It fell back toward
Valenciennes through Escaudoevres, Iwny (Oct. 11), Verchain (Oct. 21),
Maing (Oct. 24–25), Famars (Oct. 27), north of Le Quesnoy (Oct. 27). It
retired to the second line about November 1, but was reengaged southeast
of Antoingt on November 9.


                                 VALUE.

The 10th Ersatz Division was rated as a third-class division. Its
service in 1918 was as a sector-holding division. It appears to have
been a division of average value.




                        10th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │              │1 E.          │(?)           │372.
              │              │  Konigsberg  │              │
              │              │  (377).      │              │
              │              │3 E.          │              │373.
              │              │  Konigsberg  │              │
              │              │  (378).      │              │
              │9 Ldw.        │24 Ldw.       │180.          │377.
              │              │48 Ldw.       │              │378.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │91 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.            │91 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │97 F. A. Rgt.                │97 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │3 Co. 2 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │310 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │437 Inf. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │180.          │372.          │180.          │372.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │377.          │              │377.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │378.          │              │378.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 7 Dragoon Rgt.        │5 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │130 Art. Command:            │130 Art. Command:
              │ 97 F. A. Rgt.               │ 97 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│410 Pion. Btn.:              │3 Field Co. 1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                             │  2.
              │ 3 Co. 2 Pions.              │1 Landst. Co. 5 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 310 T. M. Co.               │310 T. M. Co.
              │ 320 Searchlight Section.    │510 Tel. Detch.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │213 Ambulance Co.            │213 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │147 Field Hospital.          │147 Field Hospital.
              │148 Field Hospital.          │148 Field Hospital.
              │210 Vet. Hospital.           │— Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │— M. T. Col.                 │— M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │1 Landst. Pion. Btn. (4 C.   │
              │  Dist.).                    │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (First District—Eastern Prussia.)


                                 1915.

The present 10th Landwehr Division (the old 10th Landwehr Division took
the name of the 1st Landwehr Division) was built around the 9th Landwehr
Brigade (Brandenburg), which was brought to Koenigsburg as early as
August 14, 1914, to constitute its war garrison. It found at Koenigsburg
some of the mobile depot battalions of the regiments of the 1st Army
Corps, from which came the three Koenigsburg Ersatz infantry regiments,
which became, respectively, the 376th, 377th, and 378th Infantry. The
present 372d Infantry is the former Ersatz infantry regiment of the 10th
Landwehr Division.


POLAND.

1. These troops, at first fighting in eastern Prussia, took part in the
campaign in Poland with the 1st Landwehr Corps, beginning with the first
part of 1915.

2. About the end of July, 1915, the division took part in the offensive
against the Russians, forced the passage of the Narew, and advanced east
of Vilna to the region of Vileiki in September.


LAKE NAROTCH.

3. After the front was stabilized it established itself between Spiagla
and Lake Svir, south of Lake Narotch.


                                 1916.

1. The division remained in line near Lake Svir until July, 1916.


VOLHYNIA.

2. About July 27 the units of the division were relieved from the front
of Lake Narotch and sent to Volhynia to the Von Linsingen Army. The 9th
Landwehr Brigade became independent and did not follow the division,
which was reduced to three regiments. These were engaged on the banks of
the Stokhod at the end of July at Lokatchi and Kachovka and remained in
line in the region of Kisselin and Sviniouki until the beginning of
1918.


                                 1917.


VOLHYNIA.

1. January to December, 1917, in the Kisselin-Sviniouki sector.

2. In November, 1917, the three regiments of the division furnished 60
men per company for the Western Front, picked from the strongest, and
received in exchange older men. In October, 16 men per company had
already been transferred to the 14th Division following the latter’s
losses on the Aisne.


                              RECRUITING.

The division is sufficiently homogeneous, the regiments as a rule coming
from eastern Prussia. However, the necessity of filling up the ranks
before being sent to France brought it a number of men from other
Provinces.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In spite of its drafts, which are good, and the large number of
officers, many of whom are in the active army, the division remained on
the Eastern Front until March, 1918. Up to the present time it has
received no training with a view to warfare on the Western Front, and
must be considered for the time being as of mediocre value (April,
1918). The men of more than 35 years of age were left in Russia as
abrüstungs kommando (cleaning up and salvage).


                                 1918.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

1. On June 3 the division entrained in the Woevre and traveled via
Conflans-Sedan-Mezieres-Laon to Malmaison, where it detrained on June 4.
It marched to the front via Fismes, Fere en Tardenois, and Fresnes. It
came into line on the Marne near Mont St. Pere about June 10. Here it
was in line until July 15, when it dropped back to permit an attacking
division to pass through. In the retreat the division again came into
line a few days later and was heavily engaged on the defense until about
August 1.

2. Heavy losses, including 300 prisoners on July 23, led to the
dissolution of the division. Its effectives were turned into other fresh
divisions. The 372d, 377th, and 378th went to the 37th Division, 36th
Division, and 201st Division in the order named.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a fourth-class division.




                        10th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │20 Bav.       │16 Bav.       │20 Bav.       │16 Bav.
              │              │6 Bav. Res.   │              │6 Bav. Res.
              │              │8 Bav. Res.   │              │8 Bav. Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 5 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.│5 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt. (3
              │                             │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │10 Bav. Brig.:               │10 Bav. Brig.:
              │ 19 Bav. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 19 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 20 Bav. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 20 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries., of which 3 are    │
              │  How.).                     │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│20 Bav. Pion. Co.            │20 Bav. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │10 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                             │10 Bav. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │10 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │10 Bav. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[10]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │20 Bav.       │16 Bav.       │20 Bav.       │16 Bav.
              │              │6 Bav. Res.   │              │6 Bav. Res.
              │              │8 Bav. Res.   │              │8 Bav. Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 5 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.│3 Sqn. 5 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │10 Bav. Art. Command:        │10 Bav. Art. Command:
              │ 19 Bav. F. A. Rgt.          │ 20 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │ 20 Bav. F. A. Rgt.          │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│10 Bav. Pion. Btn.:          │10 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 20 Bav. Pion. Co.           │ 20 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 23 Bav. Pion. Co.           │ 23 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 10 Bav. T. M. Co.           │ 19 Searchlight Section.
              │ 19 Searchlight Section.     │ 10 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │ 10 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 97 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │10 Bav. Ambulance Co.        │10 Bav. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │31 Bav. Field Hospital.      │31 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │34 Bav. Field Hospital.      │34 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │10 Bav. Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │690 Bav. M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │10 Bav. Cyclist Co.          │10 Bav. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │19 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 10:

  Composition at time of dissolution, August, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

   (16th Bavarian: First Bavarian District—Lower Bavaria. 6th Reserve
  Bavarian and 8th Reserve Bavarian: Second Bavarian District—Bavarian
                              Palatinate.)


                                 1915.

This division was organized in Belgium in March, 1915. Its three
infantry regiments were drawn from already existing Bavarian
divisions—the 16th Bavarian from the 1st Bavarian Division, the 6th
Reserve Bavarian from the 5th Bavarian Reserve Division, and the 8th
Bavarian Reserves from the 4th Bavarian Division.

1. In April, 1915, the division was in the region of Tournai.


SOMME.

2. In May it took over the sector of Lihons-Estrees road to Foucaucourt,
which it occupied until the Franco-British offensive of 1916.

3. In October some units of the division were sent as reinforcements to
Neuville-St. Vaast and to Champagne.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. Remained in the Foucaucourt-Lihons sector until the middle of June,
1916.

2. At the end of June it was sent south of Bapaume and took part in the
battle of the Somme near Contalmaison, Bazentin le Petit, and Longueval
from July 1 to the end of July. The 6th Reserve Infantry suffered
heavily. Its 2d Battalion lost 11 officers and 724 men (casualty lists).


GALICIA.

3. About the middle of August the division was sent to the Eastern Front
(Stanislau) and the trip lasted from August 13 to 18.


BUKOVINA.

4. September and October: Bukovina (Dorna-Vatra, Kirlibaba, west of Mont
Capoul). It fought against the right wing of the Roumanian Army.


TRANSYLVANIA.

5. From November, 1916, to the end of January, 1917, it held the sector
of Tolgyes in Transylvania.


                                 1917.


GALICIA.

1. At the beginning of February, 1917, the division left the Roumanian
front and went to Galicia (sector of Zalosce) from February to May,
being attached to the 2d Austro-Hungarian Army.


FRANCE.

2. In May the division returned to France, via Zloczow (May 19),
Lemberg, Cracow, Breslau, Frankfort on Main, Treves.


ALSACE.

Detrained about May 25 in the region of Mulhouse; then was sent to rest
and training in Upper Alsace at the beginning of June and sent to
Belgium (June 12 to 14).


FLANDERS.

3. Fought south of the Ypres-Comines canal where it opposed the attack
of July 31. It then went to the region of Catelet (sector of Gonnelieu)
from August 12 to the end of September. It was near Becelaere in
October.


RUSSIA.

4. At the end of October it was again sent to the Eastern Front. After a
few weeks’ rest at Brest Litovsk it returned to France without having
fought. Entrained November 22 at Brest Litovsk and detrained in Lorraine
the 27th. Itinerary: Warsaw-Posen-Erfurt.


LORRAINE.

5. On November 29 to 30 it went into line in the forest of Bezange and
was relieved in the middle of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 16th Infantry: Lower Bavaria. The two other regiments: Bavarian
Palatinate.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The greater part of the division is composed of young men. It does not
seem to have suffered any losses for a long time. However, its morale
seems to have been shaken at times. When it was sent from St. Quentin to
Ypres at the end of September, 1917, it is believed that the officers of
the 16th Infantry had trouble in preventing a mutiny. (British
Information Bulletin, Oct. 12, 1917.)


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved in the Vosges on May 13 and rested near
Dieuze until May 30. It entrained and moved by Metz and Sedan,
Charleville, Liart, and detrained near Laon on the 30th–31st. It moved
to the front by Bruyeres, Braye en Laennois, Mont Notre-Dame, Neuilly-
St. Front.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE AND MARNE.

2. It was reengaged southeast of Troësnes-Passy en Valois (on the Ourcq)
from June 5 to July 18. It was thrown back on Rozet St. Albin (July 20)
and then west of Armentieres (21st). About that date the division was
relieved.

The division was dissolved in August and its units sent to the 6th
Bavarian Reserve Division, 11th Bavarian Division, and 14th Bavarian
Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a second-class division. In 1918 it saw but
six weeks of active fighting before it was dissolved.




                             11th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │21.      │10 Gren. │21.      │10 Gren. │21.      │10 Gren.
              │         │38 Fus.  │         │38 Fus.  │         │38 Fus.
              │22.      │11 Gren. │22.      │11 Gren. │22.      │11 Gren.
              │         │51.      │         │51.      │         │51.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Uhlan Rgt.       │1 and 4 Sqns., 2   │
              │                   │  Uhlan Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │11 Brig.:          │11 Brig.:          │11 Brig.:
              │ 6 F. A. Rgt.      │ 6 F. A. Rgt.      │ 6 F. A. Rgt. (6
              │                   │                   │  4.9 cm. gun
              │                   │                   │  Btries.).
              │ 42 F. A. Rgt.     │ 42 F. A. Rgt.     │ 42 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 6:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 6:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 6 Pions.│ 1 Co. 6 Pions.
              │                   │ 11 Pont. Engs.    │ 5 Co. 6 Pions.
              │                   │ 11 Tel. Detch.    │ 11 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 11 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 11 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │Anti-aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │38 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │21.      │10 Gren. │21.      │10 Gren.
              │         │38 Fus.  │         │38 Fus.
              │         │51.      │         │51.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.│2 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │11 Art. Command:   │11 Art. Command:
              │ 42 F. A. Rgt.     │ 42 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │ 131 (M) Ft. A.
              │                   │  Btn. (Staff, and
              │                   │  1, 2, and 3
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 904 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1367 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1368 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│122 Pion. Btn.:    │122 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 6 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 6 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 6 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 6 Pions.
              │ 11 T. M. Co.      │ 11 T. M. Co.
              │ 269 Searchlight   │ 187 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 11 Tel. Detch.    │11 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 11 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 3 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │16 Ambulance Co.   │16 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │55 Field Hospital. │59 Field Hospital.
              │59 Field Hospital. │61 Field Hospital.
              │61 Field Hospital. │11 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │544 M. T. Col.     │544 M. T. Col.
              │644 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │Anti-aircraft      │
              │  Section.         │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                       (Sixth District—Silesia.)


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. The 11th Division belonged to the 6th Army Corps and detrained at
Merzig August 10 and 11, 1914, passed through Luxemburg the 17th, and
entered Belgian Luxemburg the 18th.

2. It belonged to the 5th Army (Prussian Crown Prince) and took part in
the battle of August 22 at Tintigny, St. Vincent, and Belle Fontaine. It
crossed the Meuse the 29th below Stenay, passed through Varennes and
Ste. Menehould. September 7, at the high point of the German advance, it
was near Revigny.


RHEIMS.

3. After the battle of the Marne it established itself at the western
edge of the Argonne (from Binarville to Cernay en Bormois).


ARGONNE.

4. October 4 it fought at Binarville. October 21 the 22d Brigade was at
Beine, east of Rheims. The 21st Brigade remained in the Argonne.


                                 1915.

1. At the end of January, 1915, the 21st Brigade returned to the Rheims
sector.


CHAMPAGNE.

In February the 22d Brigade was attached temporarily in support of the
8th Reserve Corps on the Champagne front (east).

2. About the middle of June the division went to Artois to reinforce the
6th Army in preparation for the French offensive.


SOUCHEZ.

3. At the end of June it held the sector north of Souchez, east of
Neuville St. Vaast. It executed many unsuccessful attacks on Souchez and
the Chateau of Carleul. It suffered considerable losses during July.
September 25 and 26 it had more losses before La Folie. Relieved at the
end of September and sent to rest in the region of Cambrai. The casualty
lists for the 10th Grenadiers show 432 killed, 1,023 wounded, 64
missing; total, 1,519 men. The losses were hastily made good from
October 5 to 14 by replacements with less than three months’ training
(oldest class Landsturm 2d Band and 1915 class men who entered service
in July). The 9th Company of the 10th Grenadiers received in this way at
least 119 men and the 12th Company of the 38th Fusiliers about the same.

4. During the first two weeks of October the division went into line in
the sector astride the Somme.


                                 1916.


FRISE.

1. At the end of January, 1916, the division took part in the attack
which ended in the taking of the village of Frise and suffered very
heavy losses.

2. On May 25 it was relieved, and a short time afterwards took over the
sector south of the Amiens-St. Quentin road. (At the end of June the
first 1917-class soldiers arrived with older classes put back, taken
from the mines and factories of Silesia.)


SOMME.

3. In this sector it opposed the French attack of July 1 and days
following. It suffered heavily and lost a large number of prisoners to
the French. (The 11th Grenadiers, whose battalions had fought in three
different places, separated from the rest of the division, had to have
at least 181 replacements to complete the 11th Company. They arrived
from July 6 to 20.)

4. It was withdrawn from this sector about the end of July and sent to
the region of St. Quentin to be reorganized.

5. On August 1 the division took over the trenches in the sector
Andechy-Beuvraignes.


SOMME.

6. September 4 it again went in to the battle of the Somme between
Deniecourt and Vermandovillers. During these two actions in the Somme it
suffered 83 per cent losses.

7. Relieved October 10 and took over the sector of Prunay the 24th,
which it held until December 12, then went to rest near St. Quentin. The
11th Grenadiers left the division in October and were transferred to the
101st Division in Macedonia.


                                 1917.

1. On January 4, 1917, the division went into line in the sector of
Lassigny, then on February 10 in the sector of Ablaincourt, south of the
Somme.

2. About the middle of the month of March the division retreated, with
the other German forces engaged in the Somme, to the Hindenburg line.

3. March 29 it was sent to the Arras front.


ARTOIS.

April 19 it opposed south of the Scarpe the first shock of the British
attack. In spite of a desperate defense it was routed and lost 2,200
prisoners to the British. The 51st Infantry was reduced to 600 men
(prisoners’ statements) and its 12th Company to 6 men.

4. On April 11 the division was relieved and reorganized in the region
of Bruges. It received replacements especially from the 623d Infantry,
which was dissolved, organized, and trained at the camp at Neuhammer.


FLANDERS.

5. At the beginning of June it was in support of the Wytschaete-Messines
front when the British attacked. It then held this sector until June 26
and suffered heavy losses again (June 8 and 9).


WOEVRE.

6. After a few days’ rest it was sent to Metz and then put in line in
the sector of Flirey (in Haye), end of July to September 15.

7. Relieved about the middle of September, and in October took over a
sector on the Champagne front.


FLANDERS.

8. At the end of October it was sent to Flanders and went into line near
Passchendeale. Withdrawn at the end of December and went to the rear of
the front in the region of Maubeuge.


                              RECRUITING.

The division was recruited in the regions of Breslau, Glatz, and
Schweidnitz from a German population. The Poles, therefore, coming from
the Province of Silesia, are in the minority. The Sixth District is
thickly populated and was able by itself to maintain the division even
during the period of heavy losses.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In spite of the heavy losses suffered at the Somme, Arras, and
Wytschaete the division always fought well. Its value is diminished by
the presence of a certain number of Poles who were generally ready to
desert when they had a chance. Lieut. Col. Schwerck, commanding the 51st
Infantry, received the order “Pour le Merite” after the battle of Arras.
This reward, which has been given to only six other regimental
commanders, seems to prove that the fighting value of the 11th Division
at Arras in April, 1917, was greatly appreciated by the German High
Command.


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 11th Division rested first in the Maubeuge region, and later near
Charleville and Laon for about two months. About March 1 it relieved the
51st Reserve Division in the Butte de Mesnil. Here nothing except minor
trench raids was attempted. Most of the older men were exchanged for
young ones. It was relieved by the 88th Division April 15.


LASSIGNY.

2. April 20 it relieved elements of the 34th and 37th Divisions south of
Dives, (east of Lassigny). It was relieved by the 202d Division during
the night of May 22–23. It rested then for about 10 days in the Guiscard
region.


MONTDIDIER.

3. June 9 it reinforced the Montdidier-Noyon battle front south of
Thiescourt (west of Noyon). It attacked the first day of the offensive
as an attack division. It attacked on a front of 1,500 yards, with
Compiegne as its final objective (its orders were captured), but did
poorly, succeeding only in reaching Machemont—less than half way. In
this engagement it suffered heavy losses. It was withdrawn the 16th and
went to rest in the Guiscard region, where it received some 1,300
replacements.

4. The division relieved the 222d Division near Rubescourt (south of
Montdidier) July 19. In the fighting which followed, the division lost
heavily. The 10th Regiment received 300 replacements August 2; relieved
about the 12th.

5. It reentered line near Varesnes the 22d and was withdrawn the 28th.


ST. QUENTIN.

6. September 8 it came back into line southwest of St. Quentin near
Jussy. It was withdrawn about the 20th.

7. Four days later the division was identified north of St. Quentin in
the Gricourt sector; withdrawn the 2d of October.

8. It came back into line about the 12th near Barisis (south of LaFere).
The division took part in the general German retirement and was
identified successively at Remies, Mesbrecourt, Léa Ferte-Chevresis,
Monceau le Neuf, Le Herie la Vieville, St. Algis, and Champ Bouvier. It
was still in line when the armistice was signed.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 11th is rated as a good second-class division. It did not do well in
the battle of the Oise, but everywhere else its conduct under fire was
characterized by considerable tenacity. Losses were very heavy. Numerous
cases of desertion, especially to the interior; a large number of
replacements—returned prisoners from Russia—are said to have mutinied at
Breslau.




                         11th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │21 Res.  │10 Res.  │21 Res.  │10 Res.  │23.      │10 Res.
              │         │11 Res.  │         │11 Res.  │         │22.
              │23.      │22.      │23.      │22.      │         │156.
              │         │156.     │         │156.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Res. Hus. Rgt. (3│                   │4 Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │11 Res. F. A. Rgt. │11 Res. F. A. Rgt. │11 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  Btn. No. 6.      │  Btn. No. 6.      │  Btn. No. 6.
              │                   │11 Res. Pont. Engs.│211 T. M. Co.
              │                   │11 Res. Tel. Detch.│11 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │11 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │95 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │23.      │10 Res.  │23.      │22.
              │         │22.      │         │156.
              │         │156.     │         │10 Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 4 Res. Hus. │1 Sqn. 4 Res. Hus.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(s) Art. Command:  │11 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │ 11 Res. F. A. Rgt.│1 Abt. 5 Res. Ft.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │748 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1242 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1296 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(311) Pion. Btn.:  │311 Pion Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 6 Pions.    │4 Co. 6 Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 25     │2 Res. Co. 25
              │  Pion. Btn.       │  Pions.
              │ 211 T. M. Co.     │211 T. M. Co.
              │ 4 Heavy Field     │39 Searchlight
              │  Searchlight      │  Section.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 411 Tel. Detch.   │411 Signal Command:
              │                   │117 Wireless Detch.
              │                   │411 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │506 Ambulance Co.  │506 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │29 Res. Field      │29 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │32 Res. Field      │32 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │411 Vet. Hospital. │411 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                       (Sixth District-Silesia.).


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. This division, with the 12th Reserve Division, formed the 6th Reserve
Corps.


LORRAINE-MEUSE.

2. At the beginning of the war it belonged to the 5th Army (Prussian
Crown Prince). Fought at Arrancy from August 22 to 25; crossed the Meuse
the 21st of September. Fought in the region of Cierges September 2;
advanced nearly to Triaucourt September 9 and retreated through the east
of the Argonne near Montfaucon September 11 to 17.

3. At the end of September it established itself at the eastern edge of
the Argonne (Varennes-Malancourt wood). It occupied this region until
the Verdun offensive in February, 1916.


                                 1915.

1. January to December, 1915, the division held the sector of Malancourt
wood, south of Montfaucon, in Argonne. In April the 11th Reserve
Infantry was transferred to form the 117th Division.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. In February, 1916, when the battle of Verdun commenced, the division
was still in its sector on the left bank of the Meuse.

2. In March it fought near Bethencourt. It took this village April 9.
Relieved about May 15 after suffering very heavy losses (68 per cent of
its infantry).

3. Sent to rest and reorganized with replacements from the 1916 class.


SOMME.

4. It was at first army reserve in the region of Cambrai at the
beginning of June. Then a hurry call was sent for the division June 27
and it went into the battle of the Somme.

5. July 2 to 3 it relieved some units of the 12th Division and 10th
Bavarian Division on the front Hardecourt to the Somme and suffered
enormous losses from July 2 to 9.

6. Received replacements July 10 and suffered again heavily between the
10th and 20th in the same region. It was withdrawn from the Somme front
about July 24.


FLANDERS.

7. Reconstituted again with replacements from the depots of the 12th
Army Corps and sent at the end of July and beginning of August to the
east of Armentieres, south of the Lys, and held this sector until
September 20 to 27.


SOMME.

8. At the end of September the division returned to the Somme, between
the Somme and Barleux. It opposed the attack of the French October 18 to
19 in the sector of Biaches.

9. The division was relieved from the Somme area at the beginning of
November.


ARTOIS.

10. Sent to Artois and went into line at the beginning of December in
the sector of Lens, between Loos and Lievin.


                                 1917.

1. About March 24 to 25, 1917, the division was withdrawn from the
Artois front.

2. In line for six weeks between Cambrai and St. Quentin, in the sector
Bellicourt-Bellenglise, from the end of March to May 10. Returned about
May 14 to 15 to the region of Lens, where it stayed until August 20.
(Attack of the Canadians on its right flank Aug. 15.)


ARTOIS-FLANDERS.

3. At rest in the vicinity of St. Amand (Artois) at the end of August
and beginning of September. Held the front south of Lens (sector Frenoy-
Acheville) September 9. In November it was sent to Flanders near
Passchendaele, where it alternated with the 12th Reserve Division until
January, 1918. At rest from the middle of January and went back into
line February 24 south of the forest of Houthulst.


                              RECRUITING.

Silesia. Drafts from other districts—for example, the fourth—to
counterbalance the Polish element.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

At the present time (February, 1918) it is difficult to form a precise
opinion of the fighting qualities of this division, as it has not been
seriously engaged since the battle of the Somme. In the sector of Lens
and Frenoy the heavy losses which it suffered from gas have no doubt
caused a certain weakening of the morale. (One company of the 156th
Infantry was reduced to 24 men.)

In Flanders the division held a difficult sector, but arrived at a time
when active operations were coming to an end. The nature of the ground
has been the main cause of its losses. (Information from the British,
Feb. 9, 1918.)


                                 1918.


PASSCHENDAELE.

1. The division remained in line south of Passchendaele until January
16, when it was relieved by the 31st Division. It then moved to the
Oostroosebeke area, where it underwent a course of training in open
warfare.


YPRES.

2. February 24 the division relieved the 199th Division astride the
Ypres-Staden railway (northeast of Ypres).


ARMENTIERES.

3. It was relieved about the 18th of March by the extension of front of
the neighboring divisions, and one regiment was identified by prisoners
as having reenforced the front south of Villers-Carbonnel (southwest of
Peronne). This regiment was relieved March 26 and went to join the
remainder of the division which was resting in the Turcoing area. April
9 the division reenforced the front in the Croix du Bac sector (north of
the La Bassee Canal). It was withdrawn about the 16th, after losing
heavily, and went to rest in the vicinity of Laventie.

4. April 28 it relieved the 81st Reserve Division southwest of Meteren.
It was withdrawn about the 6th of May, going to be reconstituted in the
area southeast of Bailleul.

5. It relieved the 12th Division southwest of Meteren during the night
of May 18–19, remaining in line until June 7, when it was withdrawn to
rest in the Courtrai area.

6. During the night of June 22–23 the division relieved the 216th
Division in the Locre sector (west of Kemmel). Here it fought until a
day or two before the armistice, when it seems to have been withdrawn.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 11th Reserve is rated as a second-class division. It has fought a
great deal during 1918, especially since June, and has lost heavily. Its
record has not been brilliant.




                        11th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │33 Ldw.       │75 Ldw.       │33 Ldw.       │75 Ldw.
              │              │76 Ldw.       │              │76 Ldw.
              │70 Mixed Ldw. │5 Ldw.        │70 Mixed Ldw. │5 Ldw.
              │              │18 Ldw.       │              │18 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │92 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.            │92 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │98 F. A. Rgt.                │98 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │910 Btry. F. A.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │1 and 2 Ldw. Pion. Cos. (3 C.
   Liaisons.  │                             │  Dist.).
              │                             │311 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │11 Ldw. Div. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │33 Ldw.       │18 Ldw.       │70 Ldw.       │18 Ldw.
              │              │75 Ldw.       │              │75 Ldw.
              │              │76 Ldw.       │              │424.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 11 Dragoon Rgt. (?).  │1 Sqn. 11 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │131 Art. Command:            │98 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 98 F. A. Rgt.               │1018 Light Am. Col.
              │ 910 Btry. F. A.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(411) Pion. Btn.:            │4 Landst. Co. 3 C. Dist.
   Liaisons.  │                             │  Pions.
              │ 1 Co. 1 Pions.              │359 Searchlight Section.
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 3 Pions.         │79 Searchlight Section.
              │ 311 T. M. Co.               │511 Signal Command:
              │ 353 Searchlight Section.    │ 511 Tel. Detch.
              │ 272 Searchlight Section.    │
              │ 511 Tel. Detch.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │217 Sanitary Co.             │217 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │10 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │105 Field Hospital.
              │17 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │150 Field Hospital.
              │                             │211 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │11 Ldw. Div. Cyclist Co.     │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │70 Ldw. Brig.:               │
              │ (424 Inf. & Consbruch Rgts. │
              │  “1 and 2 Allenstein.”)     │
              │ (20 C. Dist. 1 and 2 Btns.  │
              │  Landst.).                  │
              │ 1 Lotzen Landst. Btn. (20 C.│
              │  Dist. Btn. No. 4).         │
              │ Neustadt Landst. Btn. (17 C.│
              │  Dist. Landst. Btn. No. 9). │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (18th Landwehr: Twentieth District—Eastern part of West Prussia. 75th
   Landwehr and 76th Landwehr: Ninth District—Schleswig—Holstein and
                             Mecklemburg.)


                                 1914.


EAST PRUSSIA-POLAND.

1. This division is the former Von Einem Division, which, with the
Jacobi Division (former 10th Landwehr Division), formed the 1st Landwehr
Corps on the Eastern Front in 1914–15. It took part in the battle of
Tannenberg in August and fought near Lyck in October, 1914.

2. From November to December the 1st Landwehr Corps held the defiles of
the Masurian Lakes, the 33d and 70th Landwehr Brigades being in the
region of Angerburg and Loetzen.


                                 1915.

1. In February, 1915, the 1st Landwehr Corps was identified between
Mariampol and Suwalki.

2. From March to August the Von Einem Division, which became the 11th
Landwehr Division, was in line before the fortress of Ossowiec.


VICHNEV.

3. The offensive against the Russians brought it to the railroad
Molodetchno-Lida, near Vichnev, in September. It established its
positions there and remained more than two years, from September, 1915,
to the beginning of 1918.


                                 1916.

1. Vichnev-Krevo sector.

2. Toward the end of 1916 the 424th Infantry was assigned to the 11th
Landwehr Division, which had given its 5th Landwehr to the 218th
Division in October.


                                 1917.

1. Vichnev-Krevo sector.

VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

On the Russian front since the beginning of the war. Mediocre quality.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. The 11th Landwehr Division, which was still in line south of Krevo in
January, 1918, marched to the east in February. On April 30 it was
identified in the Ukraine between Kiev and Koursk. About the middle of
May it was in the Soumy region. A man of the 75th Landwehr Regiment
wrote on the 16th of June: “I am still at Kiev, but I tell you one
thing, it is much worse here than in the trenches, for there one has the
enemy in front, while here it is just the opposite. The people are so
badly disposed toward us they would eat us alive if they were able, but
they can not.”


RUSSIA.

2. The middle of July the division was identified south of Moscow.
During all this time men were taken from the division and sent as
replacements to the Western Front.

3. Early in November elements of the division were identified along the
Danube.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                        11th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │21 Bav.       │3 Bav.        │21 Bav.       │3 Bav.
              │              │22 Bav.       │              │22 Bav.
              │              │13 Bav. Res.  │              │13 Bav. Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │4 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │21 Bav. F. A. Rgt.           │21 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│19 Bav. Pion. Co.            │19 Bav. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │21 Bav. Pion. Co.            │21 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │                             │11 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                             │11 Bav. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │11 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │11 Bav. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │21 Bav.       │3 Bav.        │21 Bav.       │16 Bav.
              │              │22 Bav.       │              │3 Bav.
              │              │13 Bav. Res.  │              │22 Bav.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.│2 Sqn. 7 Light Cav. Rgt.
              │                             │  (Bavarian).
              │2 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.│
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │11 Bav. Art. Command:        │11 Bav. Art. Command:
              │ 21 Bav. F. A. Rgt.          │ 21 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 11 Bav. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 124 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 125 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 129 Bav. Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(11 Bav.) Pion. Btn.:        │11 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 19 Bav. Pion. Co.           │ 19 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 21 Bav. Pion. Co.           │ 21 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 11 Bav. T. M. Co.           │ 11 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │ 11 Bav. Tel. Detch.         │11 Bav. Searchlight Section.
              │                             │11 Bav. Signal Command:
              │                             │ 11 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 179 Bav. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │11 Bav. Ambulance Co.        │11 Bav. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │35 Field Hospital.           │35 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │37 Field Hospital.           │37 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │11 Vet. Hospital.            │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │691 M. T. Col.
              │691 Divisional M. T. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │11 Bav. Cyclist Co.          │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │M. G. S. S. Detch. No. 47.   │
              │308 Supply Train.            │
              │1107 Wireless Detch.         │
              │286 and 287 Field Signal     │
              │  Sections Pigeon Loft.      │
              │2 Co. 29 Pions.              │
              │3 Co. 29 Pions.              │
              │1 Co. 7 Pions.               │
              │Pfungstadt Landst. Inf. Btn. │
              │2 Munster Landst. Btn.       │
              │1 Co. 60 Labor Btn.          │
              │1 Co. 12 Labor Btn. (Bayr.). │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (3d Bavarian: First Bavarian District.) (22d Bavarian: Second Bavarian
      District.) (13th Reserve Bavarian: Third Bavarian District.)


                                 1915.

Organized in April, 1915, in Galicia, in the Carpathians.


GALICIA.

1. This division belonged to Mackensen’s army during the offensive in
Galicia and took part in the capture of Przemysl May 31, 1915.


BUG.

2. Sent north, fought at Rava Ruska, and reached the Bug in the region
of Cholm-Vlodava. Withdrew from the front at the end of August.


SERBIA.

3. In September and October the division took part in the campaign
against Serbia with Mackensen’s army. Crossed the Danube October 8 to
11; Valley of the Morawa; region of Monastir (November).

4. Left the front November 15 and went to rest in Hungary at
Weisskirchen until the beginning of February, 1916.


                                 1916.


FRANCE.

1. From February 9 to 10, 1916, the division entrained for the Western
Front. Itinerary: Temesvar-Szegedin-Baja-Marburg-Graz-Salzburg-Munich-
Ingolstadt-Wurzburg-Frankfort on Main-Coblentz-Cologne-Liège-Malines.
Detrained at Antwerp February 15.

2. At rest in the region of Antwerp until March 1, and on that date it
entrained for Vouziers.


VERDUN.

3. Sent to the Verdun front (sector of Avocourt wood, Mar. 8), attacked
March 20 and 22 and April 11 and suffered considerable losses; 75 per
cent of its infantry out of action.

4. Relieved at the beginning of June and sent to rest in the region of
Thionville, then sent to Cambrai.


RUSSIA.

5. June 14 it returned to Russia. Itinerary: Solesme Busigny-Maubeuge-
Liège-Aix la Chapelle-Hanover-Brest Litovsk-Kovel.


KOVEL.

6. Went into action immediately and counterattacked near the Kovel-Rovno
Railroad and suffered heavy losses.


ROUMANIA.

7. In October it took part in the Roumanian campaign (Valley of the
Jiul).


                                 1917.


FRANCE.

1. Withdrawn from the Braila front at the beginning of January, 1917,
and again entrained for France on the 10th. Itinerary: Bucarest-
Budapest-Vienna-Salzburg-Munich. Detrained the 22d at Barr (Alsace).


ALSACE.

2. In April held the sector Burnhaupt-Rhone-Rhine canal.


AISNE.

3. Sent from Mulhouse to Marle April 26 to 28, then to the south of Laon
and took over the sector of Cernay May 5 to 6, where its losses were due
especially to artillery fire.

4. At rest in the region of Laon June 6 to August 3.

5. Coucy sector August 3 to September 15. The division did not have any
hard action here, but suffered again from bombardment.

6. September 15, at rest in the vicinity of Sedan for one month.


FLANDERS.

7. Entrained at Sedan October 15 to 17; detrained at Courtrai October
18; went into line the 22d in the sector of Passchendaele, where it
suffered heavily from the British attack of the 26th. Relieved
immediately after this engagement and reorganized.

8. November 2 the division went back into line south of Passchendaele,
but did not have any serious actions.

9. November 10, relieved and sent to rest.


COTES DE MEUSE.

10. From November 18 to January 12, 1918, the division held the sector
Chauvoncourt-Seuzey north of St. Mihiel. It took part in no infantry
actions.


                              RECRUITING.

The whole of the Bavarian country.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

This division may be considered good. It took part on the Eastern and
Western Fronts in a large number of battles, “Przemysl, Verdun, Argesul,
Filipesci” (speech of William II), and did well everywhere (January,
1918).


                                 1918.


LOUVRE.

1. The 11th Bavarian Division remained in the Seuzey sector, resting and
being reconstituted, until relieved by the 82d Reserve Division on
January 12.

2. About the middle of February it relieved the 1st Division in the
Etain sector. This, too, was a very quiet sector and the division was
not identified by contact. It was relieved about March 27 by the 10th
Landwehr Division, and remained in rear of the Verdun front for a
fortnight. It is probable that it was trained during this period, but
the fact has never been definitely established.


ARMENTIERES.

3. The division was then sent to the Armentieres front, where it
relieved the 214th Division in the Neuve Eglise sector (northwest of
Armentieres) April 13–14. Here it took part in very heavy fighting,
especially south of Mount Kemmel, and suffered heavy losses as a result.
It was withdrawn on the 26th of April, and proceeded to the area
northeast of Ghent, detraining at Wachtebeke on the 29th. Here it was
brought up to strength and reviewed by the King of Bavaria on May 20.


SOISSONS.

4. About June 3 the division left the Ghent region; it was identified in
rear of the front in the region of Soissons on June 9. A few days later
it reinforced the front near Coeuvres (southwest of Soissons). It was
relieved by the 14th Division on June 21.

5. After resting immediately in rear of the front, it suffered severe
losses from bombardment by gas shells during this period. The division
came back into line in the Courmelles sector (south of Soissons) about
July 15. July 18 it lost over 2,400 in prisoners alone. It was withdrawn
about July 22.


YPRES.

6. The division rested for about a month. It was reconstituted, it being
found necessary to dissolve one company in each battalion. August 26 the
division relieved the 49th Reserve Division east of Boesinghe (northwest
of Ypres). It fought, taking part in the general retirement, until
withdrawn October 2, after losing more than 500 prisoners.


GHENT.

7. The division reinforced the front near Beveren (southwest of Ghent),
and had not been withdrawn up to the time the armistice was signed.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 11th Bavarian is rated as being in the first of four classes of
divisions. It fought well during 1918, but not brilliantly. Its losses
were heavy, but not in comparison with other German divisions.




                             12th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │34.      │23.      │24.      │23.      │24.      │23.
              │         │62.      │         │62.      │         │62.
              │78.      │63.      │78.      │63.      │         │63.
              │         │157.     │         │157.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │11 Horse Jag. Rgt. │                   │6 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │12 Brig.:          │12 Brig.:          │12 Brig.:
              │ 21 F. A. Rgt.     │ 21 F. A. Rgt.     │ 21 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 57 F. A. Rgt.     │ 57 F. A. Rgt.     │ 57 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 6:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 6:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 6 Pions.│ 2 Co. 6 Pions.
              │                   │ 12 Pont. Engs.    │ 3 Co. 6 Pions.
              │                   │ 12 Tel. Detch.    │ 12 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 12 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 12 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │17 Antiaircraft
              │                   │                   │  section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │24.      │23.      │24.      │23.
              │         │62.      │         │62.
              │         │63.      │         │63.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.│4 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │12 Art. Command:   │12 Art. Command:
              │ 21 F. A. Rgt.     │ 21 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 68 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 851 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 887 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 937 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Pion. Btn. No. 6:│6 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Co. 6 Pions.    │2 Co. 6 Pions.
              │ 3 Co. 6 Pions.    │3 Co. 6 Pions.
              │ 12 T. M. Co.      │12 T. M. Co.
              │ 6 Searchlight     │100 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 10 Tel. Detch.    │12 Signal Command:
              │ 116, 117, and 118 │ 12 Tel. Detch.
              │  Signal Detch.    │
              │                   │ 182 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │15 Ambulance Co.   │15 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │51 Field Hospital. │57 Field Hospital.
              │57 Field Hospital. │60 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │12 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │27 Supply Train.   │545 M. T. Col.
              │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │17 Antiaircraft    │
              │  section.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (6th Corps District—Upper Silesia.)


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. The 12th Division, forming with the 11th Division the 6th Army Corps
(Breslau), formed a part of the 5th Army (German Crown Prince) at the
beginning of the war, took part in the battle of August 22 at Rossignol
les Bulles, entered France August 24, passed the Meuse above Mouzon on
August 28, and took part in the battle on September 7 at Laheycourt and
Villotte near Louppy.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. After the battle of the Marne it was engaged (Sept. 21) at Berru and
at Nogent l’Abbesse (east of Rheims). It remained on the Rheims front
until the middle of June, 1915.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. In April the 12th Division gave the 157th Infantry Regiment to the
117th Division, a new formation.

2. Toward the middle of June, 1915, the 6th Army Corps was relieved on
the Rheims front and transferred to Artois. The 12th Division then
occupied a sector to the south of Souchez, from which it was relieved
toward the end of September. In the Souchez sector it took part in some
very heavy engagements (1st to the 16th of July).

3. After a rather short rest period in the region of Cambrai, the
division took its position in the sector which crosses the Somme (during
the first half of October).


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. On the 1st of July, 1916, the 12th Division received the entire
weight of the English attack north of the Somme (sectors Contalmaison-
Hardecourt) and suffered very heavily (losses 61.5 per cent).

2. It was relieved on July 12 and reorganized in the vicinity of
Cambrai.

3. About the 20th of July the 12th Division again took part in the
battle of the Somme (in the sector northeast of Pozières), where it
suffered heavy losses.

4. About the 9th of August it was relieved, and on the 21st went into
the calm sector of Monchy aux Bois (south of Arras), which it held until
October 16.


ANCRE.

5. The 12th Division then held (Oct. 25 to Nov. 19) the sector north of
the Ancre (Beaumont-Hamel) and suffered heavy losses (Nov. 14).

6. It was transferred to Champagne and took over the sector of Prunay on
December 12.


RUSSIA.

7. At the end of December it was relieved from this quiet sector and
entrained on December 28, at Warmeriville for the Russian front by the
route Aix la Chapelle-Cologne-Hanover-Luneburg-Hamburg-Stettin-
Königsberg-Tilsit-Chavli-Ponieviej. It detrained southwest of Illuxt on
January 2, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. On the Russian front the 12th Division did not take part in any
important battles. (Sector in the region of Dwinsk.)


FRANCE.

2. Relieved about the end of May, 1917, it returned to the Western
Front. Itinerary Jelowka (May 27) -Insterburg-Posen-Leipzig-Weimar-
Cologne-Saarbrucken. Detrained at Metz June 3 and reentrained on the 9th
at Ars sur Moselle for Mouscron, by way of Metz-Luxemburg-Namur-Tournai,
and detrained at Gheluwe.

3. It remained in reserve first on the Wytschaete-Messines front, and
then (Aug. 1) relieved the 22d Reserve Division in the sector east of
Klein-Zillebeke after the Franco-British attack. In this sector the
division did not engage in battle but suffered greatly from artillery
bombardments.


ITALY.

4. It was relieved on August 20 and transferred to Alsace for
reorganization and rest. It remained in the region west of Bale until
the end of September. It was then sent to the Italian front, to the 14th
German Army, where it was engaged in the Tolmino sector on October 25,
and relieved on the Piave about the 8th of December.


FRANCE.

5. The 12th Division was brought back from Italy to the French front
about December 25. At the beginning of January, 1918, it was in the
neighborhood of Zabern.


                              RECRUITING.

The 12th Division is recruited from Upper Silesia, a great mining and
industrial center, which suffices to insure its own full recruiting and
even helps out other districts less populated or temporarily below
strength. The sending of these men outside of the district has the
advantage of reducing, in its own regiments, the Polish element, which
dominates in Upper Silesia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 12th Division fought well at the Somme.

It appears to have been reorganized during its stay at Zabern (January,
1918). It has always been considered a good division.


                                 1918.


LORRAINE.

1. On January 24 the 12th division entered the Domevre sector, relieving
the 233d Division. It was relieved on February 20 and went to rest and
train in Alsace. On March 18 it entrained at Froeschweiler and moved to
Ath, from where it marched to the Gory-Belloune area, south of Douai (a
march of 40 miles).


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. On the 23d the division moved to Drury and up the Cambrai-Arras road
to Vis en Artois, coming into line on the night of March 23–24. It
attacked on the 24th, but was held up by the British artillery fire. It
remained in line until April 1, making little progress in spite of heavy
and costly fighting.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

3. The division rested in the suburbs of Douai until mid-April. It was
engaged northeast of Merris on the 17th. It appears to have received
replacements in the interim. The division passed into the second line on
May 18, after suffering especially heavy losses. In recognition of the
service of the 12th Division, south of Arras and in the Lys battle, Gen.
Lequis, the division commander, received the Order of Merit in May.

4. The division was at rest near Renaix (Belgium) from May 29 to July
12. It entrained at Audenarde on the 12th and moved to Perenchies (via
Coutrai and Lille).


METEREN.

5. The division was engaged south of Meteren on the night of July 19–20;
here it remained until August 28. In a local operation on August 18 the
division lost 300 prisoners, otherwise the sector was quiet.


BATTLE OF CAMBRAI.

6. It entrained near Armentieres on August 28 and went to a point north
of Douai (Le Forest). It was engaged southeast of Morchies on September
3, and in the days following was driven back on Inchy en Artois,
Marquion (3d to 13th). By the end of September it had passed Bourlon,
Epinoy, Aubencheul au Bac, and Fressies. The division was relieved about
October 6. The division lost more than 1,100 prisoners.

7. It was reengaged on October 11 southeast of Armentieres. It retreated
by Lille (Oct. 20) east of Tourcoing, and at Helchin. On the 25th it was
relieved.

8. On November 3 it was again in line east of Joulain and remained until
the armistice. In withdrawing the division passed Maresches, Jenlain,
Autreppe, and Blangies.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a second-class division. It was actively
engaged in the spring offensives and did well. After the middle of July
it was almost constantly engaged in hard defensive fighting.




                         12th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │22 Res.  │38 Res.  │22 Res.  │38 Res.  │22 Res.  │23 Res.
              │         │51 Res.  │         │51 Res.  │         │38 Res.
              │23 Res.  │22 Res.  │23 Res.  │22 Res.  │         │51 Res.
              │         │23 Res.  │         │23 Res.  │6 Res.   │Jag. Btn.
              │6 Res.   │Jag. Btn.│6 Res.   │Jag. Btn.│         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │4 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │4 Res. Uhlan Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │12 Res. F. A. Rgt. │12 Res. F. A. Rgt. │12 Res. F. A. Regt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No. 6.│  Pion. Btn. No. 6.│  Pion. Btn. No. 6.
              │                   │12 Res. Pont. Engs.│212 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │12 Res. Tel. Detch.│12 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │12 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │7 and 132 Anti-
              │                   │                   │  Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Sections.
              │                   │                   │8 Bav. Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │22 Res.  │23 Res.  │22 Res.  │23 Res.
              │         │38 Res.  │         │38 Res.
              │         │51 Res.  │         │51 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │        (?)        │2 Sqn. 4 Res. Hus.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │99 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 12 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 12 Res. F. A.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │  Regt.
              │                   │ 133 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 830 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1243 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1297 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│312 Pion Btn.:     │312 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 6      │ 1 Res. Co. 6
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 6      │ 2 Res. Co. 6
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 212 T. M. Co. (23)│ 212 T. M. Co.
              │  (?) Searchlight  │
              │  Section.         │
              │ 412 Tel. Detch.   │ 105 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │412 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 412 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 114 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │520 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │30 Res. Field      │30 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │31 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │412 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │711 M. T. Col.     │711 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

          12th Reserve Division: (6th Corps District-Silesia).


                                 1914.

The 12th Reserve Division formed, with the 11th Reserve Division, the
6th Reserve Corps, formed in Silesia at the time of mobilization.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

1. At the outbreak of the war, the division detrained at Sarrebruecken;
fought in the neighborhood of Arrancy from the 22d to the 25th of
August; remained at Mangiennes from the 27th to the 30th; crossed the
Meuse on September 1; was beaten back with heavy losses on September 2
near Cierges; was at Rarécourt on the 7th and near Triaucourt on the
9th; spread out to the east of the Argonne upon Gercourt (11th to the
13th) and Montfaucon (Sept. 17).

2. At the end of September to the end of October took up its position
east of Varennes in the district of Malancourt-Chattancourt and toward
the end of October took its final position north of Bethencourt
(southeast of Cuisy-Bois de Forges).

3. The division occupied this sector until the German offensive upon
Verdun (end of February, 1916).


                                 1915.

1. January to December, 1915, sector north of Bethencourt-Bois de
Forges.

In April the 27th Infantry Regiment Reserve was transferred to the 117th
Division, a new formation.

2. In September, 1915, elements of the 12th Reserve Division (battalion
of the 23d Reserve Infantry Regiment) were detached in Champagne (Main
de Massiges) to reinforce divisions engaged in fighting.


                                 1916.

1. At the end of February, when the Verdun offensive began, the 12th
Reserve Division still held the line in the region of Bois de Forges.


VERDUN.

2. On the 6th of March, 1916, the division went into action; it took the
village of Forges and, on March 10, the Corbeaux wood. It vainly
attacked the Mort Homme.

3. It was withdrawn from the Verdun front in the middle of May, after
suffering heavy losses (71 per cent of its infantry). It was first at
rest in the Thionville region, and then in reserve in the Cambrai
region, at the beginning of June.


SOMME.

4. On July 2 it took part in the battle of the Somme (sector of
Montauban-Hardecourt). It counterattacked near the Trônes wood and
suffered very heavy losses. It was relieved about July 14, completely
exhausted. (On the 10th of July not a single officer remained in the 2d
Battalion of the 38th Reserve Infantry Regiment (letter). From the 17th
of March to the 5th of July the 5th Company of the 23d Reserve Infantry
Regiment received no less than 326 men as replacements).

5. On July 15 it was sent to rest in the Manancourt region. Elements of
the division still remained in line, along the Somme near Guillemont,
until August 1.


FLANDERS.

6. From the beginning of August until September 26–27, the 12th Reserve
Division occupied a sector north of the Lys, near Armentières (Warneton-
Messines), where it once more suffered losses.


SOMME.

7. At the end of September the division was once more on the Somme front
(Barleux-Berny). It remained there until the beginning of November
without suffering any great losses.


ARTOIS.

8. Transferred to Artois, it went into line on Vimy Ridge (sector Vimy-
Roclincourt) at the beginning of December. It suffered fairly heavy
losses. At the present time, 17 per cent of the prisoners from the 51st
Reserve Infantry Regiment belong to the 1917 class.


                                 1917.

1. The 12th Reserve Division remained on the Vimy front until February
27, 1917.

2. It was resting in the Avesnes region during the month of March.

3. From April 9–12 to May 24 it held the lines between Itancourt and the
Oise.


ST. QUENTIN.

4. After a fortnight’s rest in the Guise region, it occupied (from the
beginning of June to Aug. 6–8), the St. Quentin sector (south of Fayet).


FLANDERS.

5. On August 7 the division entrained for Flanders, at Fresnoy le Grand.
Disembarking near Courtrai, it was first in reserve near Passchendaele.
A few of the elements of the division engaged in battle at Langemarck on
the 17th of August. It was in line in the St. Julien sector (northeast
of Ypres) on August 20, and relieved on August 24, after suffering heavy
losses.


ST. QUENTIN.

6. In rest at Origny, from August 29 to September 9, the division then
occupied the sector southwest of St. Quentin (Sept. 9 to Nov. 11–12).

It left at this latter date to occupy the front south of Passchendaele
until the middle of February, 1918, being relieved several times in the
interval.


                              RECRUITING.

Silesia, especially Upper Silesia. In 1916, following the losses
suffered at Verdun, a great number of the replacement troops consisted
of men from the 3d and 4th Corps Districts (Brandenburg and Prussian
Saxony) and of the 1916 class, and of returned convalescents of the 9th
and 10th Corps Districts (Schleswig-Holstein and Hanover). This measure
was not only dictated by necessity, but contributed to counterbalance
the original Polish element.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

At Ypres (August, 1917), a certain number of men of the 51st Reserve
Infantry Regiment refused to go into the trenches; according to
prisoners, desertions to the rear were frequent, especially among the
younger men.

The combat morale of the 12th Reserve Division may, however, have been
restored during its long stay in the relatively quiet sector of St.
Quentin (September to November, 1917).


                                 1918.


FLANDERS.

1. On February 4 the division relieved the 12th Reserve Division in the
Moorslede sector which it held until February 14.


LENS.

2. It was relieved by the 31st Division and moved south to relieve the
17th Division on night of February 17–18. It held this front until about
April 10, when it was relieved by the 9th Reserve Division.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

3. The division reinforced the battle front at Neuve Eglise on April 13
and fought until about April 25, suffering heavy losses. One company of
the 51st Reserve Regiment was reduced to 9 men.

4. Upon relief, the division returned to its former sector near Lens,
where it was identified near Avion on April 27. It remained here until
June 14, when it moved north and entered the line northeast of Hinges on
June 17–18. About August 6, the division was relieved by the 1st Guard
Reserve Division.


ARRAS.

5. It moved to Douai and rested until its return to line near Ecoust on
night of August 30–31 to resist the British attack. Before its
withdrawal on the 11th it had lost nearly 900 prisoners.


LENS.

6. The division rested at Cambrai during September and reentered the
Lens sector on October 2. During October it was engaged at Noyelles
(11th), Wattines (19th), and Rumignies (21st). It appears to have been
out of line for a few days, returning on the night of November 3–4 west
of Orsinval. It was at Wargnies le Petit (5th), St. Waast la Vallee
(6th), Bavai (7th), northeast of Taisnieres (9th), and Villers St.
Guislain (11th).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It appears to have been used
principally as a sector-holding division on moderately active fronts.




                        12th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │55 Ldw.       │87 Ldw. (1 and│55 Ldw.       │87 Ldw.
              │              │  4 Btns. 87  │              │
              │              │  Ldw. and 5  │              │
              │              │  Btn. 76 Ldw.│              │
              │              │  Rgt.).      │              │
              │              │99 Ldw. (4    │              │99 Ldw. (4th
              │              │  Btn.).      │              │  Btn.).
              │82 Ldw.       │40 Ldw.       │82 Ldw.       │40 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │56 Ldw.       │              │56 Ldw.
              │        Gd. Jag. Btn.        │        Gd. Jag. Btn.
              │       Gd. Rifle Btn.        │       Gd. Rifle Btn.
              │        14 Jag. Btn.         │         9 Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ers. Abt. 14 F. A. Rgt.    │30 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │1 Ers. Abt. 30 F. A. Rgt.    │1 Mountain A. Btry.
              │                             │
              │                             │9 Mountain A. Btry.
              │                             │11 Mountain A. Btry.
              │                             │18 Mountain A. Btry.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │(?) 2 Ldw. Pion. Co. (14 C.
   Liaisons.  │                             │  Dist.).
              │                             │312 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │55 Ldw.       │56 Ldw.       │87 Ldw.       │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │87 Ldw.       │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │435 Ldw.      │              │
              │              │  (include 4th│              │
              │              │  Btn. 99 Ldw.│              │
              │              │  Rgt.).      │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 7 Res. Dragoon Rgt.   │1 Sqn. 9 Res. Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │252 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 12 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.          │2 Bav. Ldw. Ft. A. Btn. (2d
              │                             │  Btry.).
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│412 Pion. Btn.:              │415 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 4 Pions.         │ 1 Ldw. Co. 4 C. Dist. Pions.
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 14 Pions.        │ Landst. Ers. Co. 8 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 16 Pions.        │ 75 Searchlight Section.
              │ 312 T. M. Co.               │478 Signal Command:
              │ 268 Searchlight Section.    │ 478 Tel. Detch.
              │ 512 Tel. Detch.             │ 140 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │564 Ambulance Co.            │564 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │568 Ambulance Co.            │
              │14 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │
              │15 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │58 Art. Survey Section.      │
              │5 Labor Btn.                 │
              │63 Labor Btn.                │
              │227, 228, and 251 Heavy M. G.│
              │  Detch.                     │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────




                                HISTORY.


  (56th Landwehr Regiment: 7th Corps District-Westphalia. 87th Landwehr
 Regiment: 18th Corps District-Hesse. 436th Landwehr Regiment: 15th Corps
                            District-Alsace.)


                                 1915.


ALSACE.

1. The 12th Landwehr Division was formed toward the end of April, 1915,
with the elements of the Landwehr, which were distributed along the
Alsatian front, between the Fecht and the district of Cernay, and which
were assigned to the Fuchs Division at the time of the attacks upon
Hartmannswillerkopf (March-April). The active brigade of the Fuchs
Division having left the Vosges for Champagne, the 12th Landwehr
Division grouped these elements of the Landwehr and occupied until May,
1917, the sectors included between the valley of Munster and Cernay. On
the 21st of December, 1915, the 14th Jager Battalion, attached to the
division, lost at Hartmannswillerkopf 840 killed, wounded, and missing
(official list of casualties), and was withdrawn to be reorganized in
Belgium.


                                 1916.


ALSACE.

1. Sector Guebwiller-Cernay.

At the end of September, 1916, the 40th Landwehr Regiment left the 12th
Landwehr Division to be assigned to the 33d Division. It was replaced by
the 436th Landwehr Regiment, which had been formed in May of the
preceding year.

In October the battalions of Jagers and of the riflemen of the guard and
the 9th Battalion of Jagers, attached to the 12th Landwehr Division,
were sent to Macedonia.


                                 1917.


ALSACE.

1. January-May, 1917. Sector Munster-Cernay.


GALICIA.

2. Relieved on the Alsatian front about the middle of May, the 12th
Landwehr Division was transferred to Galicia. Itinerary: Cernay-
Strassborg-Karlsruhe-Ludwigsburg-Munich, Salzburg-Vienna-Lemberg-
Zloczow.

3. It occupied the sector south of Brody and northwest of Zalosce until
the beginning of 1918. It took part in the attacks of July, 1917.

In the course of the final months of 1917 the 12th Landwehr Division had
numerous troops taken to fill up units on the Western Front or to be
sent to the 227th Division, 197th Division, or the 33d Reserve Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 12th Landwehr Division, which was on the Alsatian front until May,
1917 and then in Galicia, appears to be of mediocre quality.


                                 1918.

1. The history of the component elements of this division after their
arrival on the Western Front is uncertain. Between March and June the
56th Landwehr Regiment was in the 6th Army, the 436th Landwehr Regiment
was in the 2d Army, and the 87th Landwehr Regiment was in the 18th Army.
The men of these units were assigned to various kinds of police work,
guarding prisoners, etc. The staff of the division during this period
was believed to be in Finland. About July 15 the division had been
announced as dissolved by the French, British, and American general
headquarters.


ALSACE.

2. On August 7 the 87th Landwehr Regiment and the 436th Landwehr
Regiment were joined as infantry under the 21st Landwehr Brigade Staff,
Gen. Hoffman, of the 14th Landwehr Division. The 56th Landwehr Regiment
was also identified in this region and the division was regarded as
reconstituted in October.

3. Later identifications disclosed that the regiments were not forming a
division but were acting independently. The division was again classed
as dissolved about the middle of October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a third-class division.




                        12th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │22 Bav.  │26 Bav.  │22 Bav.  │26 Bav.  │22 Bav.  │26 Bav.
              │         │27 Bav.  │         │27 Bav.  │         │27 Bav.
              │         │28 Bav.  │         │28 Bav.  │         │28 Bav.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light│4 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light│1 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light
              │  Cav. Rgt.        │  Cav. Rgt.        │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │22 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │22 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │12 Bav. Art.
              │                   │                   │  Command:
              │                   │                   │ 22 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 8 Bav. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │                   │ 136 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 137 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 138 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│22 Bav. Pion. Co.  │(12 Bav.) Pion.    │12 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │  Btn.:            │
              │                   │ 22 Bav. Pion. Co. │ 22 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 26 Bav. Pion. Co. │ 26 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 12 Bav. T. M. Co. │ 12 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 12 Bav. Tel.      │ 16 Bav.
              │                   │  Detch.           │  Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │12 Bav. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command:
              │                   │                   │ 12 Bav. Tel.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 189 Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │12 Bav. Ambulance  │12 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │  Co.
              │                   │38 Bav. Field      │38 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │39 Bav. Field      │39 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │16 Bav. Vet.
              │                   │                   │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │M. T. Col.         │692 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                               (Bavaria.)


                                 1916.

It was formed about the middle of the summer of 1916. It was assembled
in July, 1916, at Grafenwoehr Camp (Bavaria), and remained until the end
of July in the Valley of the Fecht, and then entrained for the Roumanian
front in October.


ROUMANIA.

1. Composed of the 26th, 27th, and 28th Bavarian Regiments, the division
took part in the Roumanian campaign and fought in the region of
Campolung (October-November, 1916).

2. In December it took part in the operations north of the road Buzeu-
Rimnicu-Sarat.


                                 1917.


FOCSANI.

1. Beginning with January, 1917, the 12th Bavarian Division remained in
line north of Focsani.

2. In August it took part in the attacks launched against the Roumanians
north of Focsani (from Batinesci to the Sereth) and suffered very heavy
losses.


PANCIU.

3. Sent to rest after these engagements, it came back into line at the
end of September, south of Panciu (Marasesti District).

4. In December it was in reserve in the Focsani District.


                              RECRUITING.

The division is recruited from the whole of Bavaria.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

It was on the Roumanian front from October, 1916. Its combat value is
mediocre.


                                 1918.

1. The division entrained at Ploesci on April 30 and traveled via
Bucharest-Craiova-Budapest-Dresden-Frankfurt on the Main-Mainz-Mezieres
to a station between Mezieres and Rethel, where it detrained after a
journey of nine days. It rested near Vieil St. Remy (20 kilometers
southeast of Mezieres), until May 24, when it marched toward the Aisne
by Chateau Porcien, Asfeld, Avaux, and Neufchatel.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

2. The division crossed the old line near Berry au Bac on May 28 and
followed the advance through Roucy, Montigny sur Vesle and Lagery. It
was engaged on the 30th near Ville en Tardenois, with the Marne between
Damery and Cumieres as its final objective. In that sector it stayed
until July 13–14. Losses were heavy about the end of May and the 1st of
June.

3. It was in reserve in the same sector on the 15th behind the 22d
Division, on the 17th it attacked and until the end of July took part in
the struggle for Epernay, toward which the division got as far as the
Bois Courton.

4. Upon its relief on July 26 the division marched to the Ligny en
Cambresis area in stages. There it rested until August 29, when it
entrained at Solesmes and traveled via Valenciennes-Condes-Ath-Ghent to
Roubaix. After two days’ rest it reentrained and was railed via Courtrai
to Isegheim, relieving the 6th Cavalry Division east of Ypres on the
night of August 31-September 1.


FLANDERS.

5. In this sector the division sustained an attack by the British on
September 28. It was thrown back on Moorslede with a loss of 3,000
prisoners. The division was relieved on October 1.

6. The division rested at Roubaix until October 17, when it returned to
line southeast of Herseaux. It continued in this region until the
armistice. The last identification was at Cordes.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a third-class division. Its morale appears to
have been low in the summer and fall of 1918.




                             13th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │25.      │13.      │25.      │13.      │26.      │13.
              │         │158.     │         │158.     │         │15.
              │26.      │15.      │26.      │15.      │         │55.
              │         │55.      │         │55.      │         │
              │11 Jag. Btn. (Oct. │         │         │         │
              │ 1914-Mar. 1915).  │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │16 Uhlan Rgt. (3   │                   │16 Uhlans (2
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │13 Brig.:          │13 Brig.:          │13 Brig.:
              │ 22 F. A. Rgt.     │ 22 F. A. Rgt.     │ 22 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 58 F. A. Rgt.     │ 58 F. A. Rgt.     │ 58 F.A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 7:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 7:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 7 Pions.│ 1 Co. 7 Pions.
              │                   │ 13 Pont.-Engs.    │ 13 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 13 Tel. Detch.    │ 13 Pont.-Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 13 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │26.      │13.      │26.      │13.
              │         │15.      │         │15.
              │         │55.      │         │55.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 16 Uhlan    │3 Sqn. 16 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │13 Art. Command:   │13 Art. Command:
              │ 58 F. A. Rgt.     │ 58 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 151 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 856 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 859 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 861 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│124 Pion. Btn. (1  │7 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No.   │
              │  7):              │
              │ 1 Co. 7 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 7 Pions.
              │ 2 Co. 7 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 7 Pions.
              │ 13 T. M. Co.      │ 13 T. M. Co.
              │ 7 Searchlight     │13 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 13 Tel. Detch.    │ 13 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 5 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │17 Ambulance Co.   │17 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital No. │70 Field Hospital.
              │  73.              │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │73 Field Hospital.
              │                   │13 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │546 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │41 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Sect. M. G. S. S.│
              │  Detch. No. 75.   │
              │546 Supply Train.  │
              │265 A. Air. Sqn.   │
              │10 Air. Sqn.       │
              │37 Wireless Detch. │
              │87 Labor Btn.      │
              │2 Co. 11 Labor Btn.│
              │306 Wagon Train.   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. The 13th Division, forming with the 14th Division the 7th Army Corps,
was a part, at the outbreak of the war, of the 2d Army (Von Buelow). It
entrained in the vicinity of Eupen from the 9th to the 11th of August,
and the 25th Brigade took part in the final operations of the siege of
Liège. After the fall of this place the division reassembled, passed
through Wavre, Nivelles, Seneffe, crossed the Sambre below Thuin (battle
of Charleroi), entered France on August 25, and left the 26th Brigade in
front of Maubeuge, where it remained until the city was taken (Sept. 7).


CHAMPAGNE.

2. The 25th Brigade, going forward, fought east of St. Quentin on the
29th, and was at Montmirail on September 6, where it took part in the
battle of the Marne. After the 26th Brigade was released it reached Laon
on the 10th, and on the 12th the entire 13th Division went into position
north of Rheims, forming a part of the 7th Army (Von Heeringen). It
remained there until the end of the month.


ARTOIS.

3. At the beginning of October the 13th Division was transferred to
Artois, where it remained until the end of March, 1916. It fought in the
sector Angres-Souchez in October and November, in that of Fromelles-
Aubers in November and December.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

In March and in June, 1915, the division underwent two heavy attacks at
Neuve Chapelle and at Festubert. The battles from the 6th to the 29th of
March, 1915, cost the 13th Infantry Regiment 21 officers and 1,301
noncommissioned officers in killed, wounded, and missing. (Official list
of Prussian casualties.)

In March the division transferred the 158th Infantry Regiment to the
50th Division, a new formation.


                                 1916.


VERDUN (HILL 304).

1. Relieved at the end of March, 1916, the 13th Division was sent to
rest in the Cambrai area.

2. About the 5th of June the division entrained and was sent to the
Verdun area by way of Montmédy-Stenay. It went into line in the sector
of Hill 304, which it occupied until the month of September.


SOMME.

3. Transferred to the Somme, it took part in the battle on September 12
(south of Vouchavesnes-Cléry sur Somme). It suffered heavy losses there
which necessitated its being relieved on September 19.

4. It was quickly reorganized in the Dun area and put back in the sector
of Hill 304 (Oct. 10).


                                 1917.

1. The 13th Division remained in line at Hill 304 until the middle of
May, 1917. It was then relieved in this area and sent to the Aisne,
where it remained at rest for three weeks near Laon.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

2. On the 9th of June it began to take over the sector of Cerny. It
launched an important attack on July 31 upon the Deimling salient, but
was not able to retain the ground won. On August 2–3 it attacked again,
but without success. The 13th and 15th Infantry Regiments each lost 600
men.


ST. GOBAIN.

3. The 13th Division, very much exhausted, was relieved during the night
of August 3–4. It was transferred by railroad to the St. Gobain area
without having time to fill up its regiments, and went into line in the
Deuillet-Servais sector, which it held from August 10 to September 17.


LA MALMAISON.

4. It was at rest in the area of Crépy en Laonnois (Sept. 20 to Oct.
11). The division was filled up from the recruit depots of neighboring
divisions, although they were not Westphalians (5th Reserve Division,
29th Division, and 103d Division). About the 11th of October it again
went into line on the Chemin des Dames east of Laffaux mill. Beginning
with October 15, it suffered heavy losses from our artillery
preparation. On the 23d it underwent the French attack. (Losses: 47
officers and 1,548 men prisoners, including 2 regimental commanders, a
third being killed.) The division may be considered as exhausted at the
Mennejean Farm.

5. It was sent to the Sedan area and reorganized. About November 10 it
received 1,000 men from Russia as replacements (men at least 35 years of
age).


MEUSE.

6. About December 18 it occupied the sector of the Bois de Malancourt-
Haucourt (and was still there on Jan. 23, 1918).


                              RECRUITING.

The 13th Division is a Westphalian Division, in addition to contingents
from the two principalities of Lippe. These were even mentioned with
honor in the German communique of July 1, 1917, a thing which would
ordinarily be sufficient to identify the division.

It is manifest, however, that in 1917 the provincial character of the
division had been very much changed. The replacements of September (1918
class) were taken from the recruit depots nearby (5th Reserved Division,
29th Division, 103d Division), and introduced, especially in the 15th
Infantry Regiment, men from Brandenburg, Baden, and Thuringia. Some
Westphalians came in October, but they were mostly older men (classes
1892 to 1903 of the Landsturm), coming from Landsturm battalion of the
7th Corps District.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In the Somme battle (September, 1916) the 13th Division put up a
vigorous defense and did not yield any ground.

On the Aisne (June-July, 1916) its combat value was just as great; it
attacked vigorously and put up a stubborn resistance to our
counterattacks. Besides that, it is mentioned in the German communiques:
September, 1916, for its valor on the Somme, December 20, 1916, and
January 25, 1917 (Hill 304); January 29, 1917, the 15th and the 13th
Infantry Regiments are praised for their heroic resistance. It may be
considered as a good division.

It must be noticed, however, that on October 23, on the Chemin des
Dames, in spite of stringent orders to hold its position, the 13th
Division put up very little resistance; units surrendered en masse with
their officers.

The 55th Infantry Regiment is probably only of mediocre worth since its
reconstruction after the battle of Malmaison.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved from the Verdun front about February 6 and
went to rest in the vicinity of Arlon, and after February 15 at
Valenciennes and Mons. It marched to the Somme front in four nights, and
then rested at Clary for two days.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. On March 21 it was in reserve of the 18th Division, during the
advance toward Roisel. It was partially engaged on the 22d and 23d north
of Marquaix and Peronne. Two days later the entire division was engaged
north of the Somme, and on the 28th it passed to reserve near
Morlancourt until April 4, when it returned to the battle front for four
days, fighting at Dernancourt. Again the division retired to the second
line, and was relieved on the 11th. The losses of the division in this
offensive were about 40 per cent of its effectives.


AVRE.

3. After 10 days’ rest (near Maricourt-Carnoy until the 18th and Caix
until the 22d) during which it was reconstituted with returned wounded
and 1919 recruits, it returned to line on the Avre (Castel) on April 23.
The division executed attacks on Hill 82 and on Hailles on April 24.
Other local attacks occurred on May 2 and 14. It was relieved on May 18.
A further draft of 1,300 men was received on May 3.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. The division rested near Montdidier in June, probably at Moreuil. On
July 1 it relieved the 77th Reserve Division northeast of Villers-
Bretonneux. The British attack on the Somme threw the division back on
Mericourt with a loss of 2,769 prisoners. On August 12 it was withdrawn.

5. It was in reserve near Mericourt during the middle of August. On the
24th it was reengaged east of Albert (Bazentin). About the 30th it was
withdrawn. The total loss in prisoners was 3,400.


ALSACE.

6. The division was moved to Alsace for a rest. It entrained at
Schlestadt on September 29 and was moved by Strasbourg, Metz, and Sedan.


BATTLE OF THE ARGONNE.

7. It went into line at Monthois-Challerange on September 30, remaining
until October 3, when it went into support near Morel until the 8th,
when it fell back toward Bourcq.

8. It was in support between Landres-Saint George and Bantheville on the
15th. It was engaged on the American front on the 16th in the
Nantheville region. It was in line until the 30th, when it passed to
reserve, but returned to line on the 2d. It continued to hold a sector
until the armistice. An epidemic of Spanish fever greatly reduced the
number of effectives in all the regiments. The 13th Regiment had less
than 200 effectives at the end of October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a first-class division. Its performance was
excellent in the March offensive, but after that it took no special part
in any offensive. At the armistice the division had been used up through
losses and sickness.




                         13th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │25 Res.  │13 Res.  │25 Res.  │13 Res.  │28 Res.  │13 Res.
              │         │56 Res.  │         │56 Res.  │         │39 Res.
              │28 Res.  │39 Res.  │28 Res.  │39 Res.  │         │57 Res.
              │         │57 Res.  │         │57 Res.  │ 7 Res. Jag. Btn.
              │ 7 Res. Jag. Btn.  │ 7 Res. Jag. Btn.  │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Res. Hus. Rgt.   │5 Res. Hus. Rgt.   │5 Res. Hus. Rgt. (2
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │13 Res. F. A. Rgt. │13 Res. F. A. Rgt. │13 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │  (9 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │2 Pion. Btn. No. 7:│2 Pion. Btn. No. 7:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Res. Co. 7 Pions. │ 4 Co. 7 Pions.
              │                   │ 13 Res. Pont.     │ 213 T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Engs.            │
              │                   │ 13 Res. Tel.      │ 13 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │  Detch.           │
              │                   │                   │ 13 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │28 Res.  │13 Res.  │28 Res.  │13 Res.
              │         │39 Res.  │         │39 Res.
              │         │57 Res.  │         │57 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 5 Res. Hus. │3 Sqn. 5 Res. Hus.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │100 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 13 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 13 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 99 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 738 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 812 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(313) Pion. Btn.:  │313 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 7 Pions.    │ 4 Co. 7 Pions.
              │ 287 Pion. Co.     │ 287 Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 213 T. M. Co.     │ 213 T. M. Co.
              │                   │
              │ Tel. Detch.       │ 7 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │413 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 413 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 164 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │507 Ambulance Co.  │507 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │33 Res. Field      │33 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │145 Field Hospital.│34 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │413 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │712 M. T. Col.     │712 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │47 Art. Observation
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │73 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │216 Pigeon Loft.
              │                   │19 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │74 Antiaircraft
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │128 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │Elements attached
              │                   │  June, 1918.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1914.

At the beginning of the war the 13th Reserve Division and the 14th
Reserve Division formed the 7th Reserve Corps.


MAUBEUGE-AISNE.

1. Assigned to the 2d German Army, the 13th Reserve Division arrived at
Liège immediately after the city and the forts were taken (Aug. 14);
reached Namur on the 25th, and took part in the siege and taking of
Maubeuge. When it was released from this place it was quickly
transferred to the front north of the Aisne; fought in the neighborhood
of Pontavert-Craonne on September 15; fought near Cerny on the 16th, and
took its position on the front of Braye-Cerny en Laonnois at the end of
September.

2. On November 3 some elements of the division were engaged at Vailly.

3. The division occupied the sector of Braye en Laonnois until October,
1915.


                                 1915.

1. January-October, 1915, the division occupied the sector Braye en
Laonnois-Cerny.

2. At the end of October the 13th Reserve Division was relieved in the
Laon area and transferred to the north, between Charleroi and
Valenciennes. After a period of training in November and December, it
entrained, about December 25, for the Verdun front.


                                 1916.

1. At the beginning of January, 1916, the division was concentrated in
the neighborhood of Damvillers (right bank of the Meuse). In January and
February it was occupied in preparations for an attack.


VERDUN.

2. Beginning with February 21 some elements were engaged near Haumont,
near Haumont wood. It took part in battles, from February 23 until March
10, in the region of Samogneux (sector of Vacherauville-Haudremont and
Cote du Poivre). It lost 51 per cent of its infantry there.

3. From the middle of March to the 24th of October it occupied the same
sector of Haudremont (west of Douaumont), and only took part in a few
local engagements. It underwent the French attack on October 24 and
suffered heavily.

4. Until December it held the sector included between the road of
Louvemont-Bras and the Chaufour wood. It was relieved between December 8
and 12 and sent to rest in the Marville-Longuyon area.

5. Transferred to Champagne (Dec. 22–24), it went into line east of
Rheims (Nogent l’Abbesse) about the 29th.


                                 1917.

1. The division held the sector at Rheims (east of La Pomelle) until May
20, 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Concentrated, at this date, in the neighborhood of Epoye, it relieved
the exhausted 242d Division at Cornillet (south of Nauroy). It went into
action between Mont Cornillet and Mont Haut (about the end of May).

3. Between June 8 and 15 it returned into line in its former sector east
of Rheims (south of Cernay), where it made several surprise attacks.


VERDUN.

4. Relieved about the end of August from the Rheims front, it was sent,
after a few days of rest, to the right bank of the Meuse. On September
24 it attacked east of Beaumont, in the Bois le Chaume, and suffered
very heavy losses. It made another attack on October 10 in the same
sector, which it held until October 12–13.

5. It was sent to rest (Briey area) in the second half of October. In
November it appeared on the front east of Verdun, where it was speedily
relieved.


                              RECRUITING.

The division is recruited from Westphalia. In the course of 1917,
however, a great number of its replacements came from other districts
than Westphalia (9th, 10th, 11th Corps Districts).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 13th Reserve Division appears to be of mediocre quality.

It suffered heavy losses at Verdun. It showed very little brilliance
there. During the French attack of October 24, 1916, it offered little
resistance to the hostile troops.

On the Rheims front (January to May, 1917) it did not take part in any
operation. Quite a large number of men who were captured in the course
of raids in this sector surrendered with little resistance.

However, the 13th Reserve Division did not furnish a single prisoner or
deserter during its second stay southeast of Rheims (from June 15 to the
beginning of September), and on the Verdun front it showed itself quite
active (September to October).


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved in the Avrocourt wood sector by the
Bavarian Ersatz Division on the night of April 5–6 and went into rest
billets at Villers near Montmedy. On the 16th it entrained at a station
near Montmedy and traveled via Carignan-Sedan-Charleville-Givet-Dinant-
Namur-Charleroi-Ath-Melle-Ghent-Deyuze to Thielt, where it detrained at
1 a. m. on April 19. After 10 days’ rest at Coolscamp the division
marched to Getsberg, and was to have gone into line in the Dixmude
sector on April 22, but was suddenly entrained and moved via Roulers to
Beythem. From there it marched to the Ledeghem area and rested until
April 24, when it marched into line northwest of Wytschaete via Menin-
Wervecq and Comines.


YPRES.

2. The division was engaged in the attack on Voormezeele on April 25.
After three days’ heavy fighting it was relieved by the 49th Reserve
Division. After a few days in the second line the division came back and
relieved the 49th Reserve Division. It remained in line until May 11.
From the 11th to the 28th the division rested out of line. It was again
engaged on May 28 southwest of Merris. It was relieved about June 12.


MERRIS.

3. The division went to rest in the area east of Bruges and later
northwest of Ghent. It returned to its former sector west of Merris on
July 9, relieving the 4th Bavarian Division. It held the sector until
July 27 when its heavy losses at Meteren caused its relief by the 4th
Division. Between the 27th and August 18 the division rested in the
Douai area.


YPRES-BELGIUM.

4. In line the 18th–19th, it relieved the 35th Division in the sector
east of Merckem. Here the division continued until September 29, when it
was withdrawn from the line north of Staden after the loss of 1,500
prisoners and severe casualties. It rested two weeks, and on October 14
returned to the battle front at Cortemarck. It fought until the 20th,
when it retired for 10 days’ rest in rear of the line. On the 30th it
was reengaged near Deynze. The German communique of November 1 and 2
mentioned the 57th and 13th Reserve Regiments for their good work. The
division was in line until the armistice. It was last identified at
Nazareth on November 3.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 13th Reserve Division was rated as a first-class division. In 1918
it was almost wholly engaged in Belgium, taking a prominent part in the
Armentiers offensive in April, and in the defense in October.




                        13th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │61 Res.       │60 Res.       │61 Res.       │15 Ldw.
              │              │Cassel Landst.│              │82 Ldw.
              │              │  Btn. (XI/2).│              │
              │              │Mayence       │60 Mixed Ldw. │60 Ldw.
              │              │  Landst. Btn.│              │
              │              │  (XVIII/17). │              │
              │60 Ldw.       │60 Ldw.       │              │71 Ldw.
              │              │71 Ldw.       │         8 Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ers. Abt. 25 F. A. Regt.   │1 Ers. Abt. of the 25 and 84
              │                             │  F. A. Regt.
              │1 Ers. Abt. 81 F. A. Regt.   │2 Ers. Btry. (27 F. A.
              │                             │  Regt.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ldw. Pion. Co. (10 C.      │1 Ldw. Pion. Co. (10 and 15
   Liaisons.  │  Dist.).                    │  C. Dist.).
              │                             │ 313 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │115 Landst. Inf. Regt.       │44 Art. Survey Section.
              │                             │44 Labor Btn.
              │                             │12 C. Dist. Landst. Btn. No.
              │                             │  1.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │60 Ldw.       │15 Ldw.       │60 Ldw.       │15 Ldw.
              │              │60 Ldw.       │              │60 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │82 Ldw.       │              │82 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 6 Dragoon Regt.       │5 Sqn. 6 Dragoon Regt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │13 Ldw. F. A. Regt.
              │                             │
              │ 13 Ldw. F. A. Regt.         │1414 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│413 Pion. Btn.:              │413 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 10 Corps. Pions. │ 1 Ldw. Co. 10 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 15 Corps. Pions. │ 1 Ldw. Co. 15 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 313 T. M. Co.               │ 313 T. M. Co.
              │ 513 Tel. Detch.             │ 207 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │513 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 513 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 22 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │216 Ambulance Co.            │216 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │102 Res. Field Hospital.     │102 Res. Field Hospital.
              │16 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │513 Vet. Hospital.
              │513 Vet. Hospital.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │782 M. T. Col.               │782 M. T. Col.
              │809 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (15th Landwehr Regiment: 7th Corps District—Westphalia. 60th Landwehr
  Regiment: 21st Corps District—Lorraine. 82d Landwehr Regiment: 11th
                       Corps District—Thuringia.)


                                 1915.


LORRAINE.

1. The 13th Landwehr Division was formed in Lorraine about the middle of
May, 1915. It was made up at this time of the 61st Reserve Brigade (60th
Reserve Landsturm Battalions, Cassel and Mayence) and of the 60th
Landwehr Brigade (the 60th Landwehr Regiment, and the 61st Landwehr
Regiment). These elements were already in line on the Lorraine front
before the formation of the division. The 71st Landwehr Regiment had
been sent on August 10, 1914 (with the 82d Landwehr Regiment) to
Strassburg as a garrison. The 60th Landwehr Regiment, beginning on
August 11, was guarding the railroads of Lower Alsace. The 60th Infantry
Regiment had been engaged in August in the Vosges.

2. The 13th Landwehr Division occupied the sector between Abaucourt and
the Bezange woods from May, 1915, to February, 1917. Except for a few
raids, it remained on the defensive during this long period.

3. At the end of June, 1915, the 82d Landwehr Regiment replaced the 60th
Reserve Regiment.

In December the 15th Landwehr Regiment, which had formed the garrison of
Thionville at the outbreak of the war, and was in the Vosges after a
stay near Morhange, replaced the two battalions of Landsturm (which had
been formed into the 115th Landsturm Regiment in July) sent to Serbia.


                                 1916.


LORRAINE.

1. In 1916 the division held the sector Abaucourt-Bezange wood.

In August the 9th Jager Battalion entrained for Galicia.

2. On September 15, 1916, the staff of the 61st Reserve Brigade and the
71st Landwehr Regiment were transferred to the 215th Division, a new
formation. The 13th Landwehr Division then received its definite
organization: 15th Landwehr Regiment, 60th Landwehr Regiment, 82d
Landwehr Regiment (4 battalions each).


                                 1917.


LORRAINE.

1. Relieved on the Lorraine front in the beginning of February, 1917,
the 13th Landwehr Division was concentrated in the Chateau Salins front,
entrained about the middle of February and sent by way of Metz-Longuyon-
Montmedy-Sedan-Laon to the neighborhood of La Fère. It detrained at
Versigny. One battalion was taken from each of its regiments to form the
328th Landwehr Regiment, destined to be a part of the 25th Landwehr
Division.

2. Until March 18 the 13th Landwehr Division did work along the line
Moy-La Fère-Fresne, where the German withdrawal was stopped.


FORÊT DE ST. GOBAIN.

3. On March 19, placed on the east bank of the Ailette, it covered the
retreat of the 45th Reserve Division, and at the beginning of April
occupied the sector Fresnes-Prémontré, where it was relieved about the
1st of May.


OISE LA FÈRE.

4. After a fortnight’s rest in the forest of St. Gobain, it went back
into line on the front south of Alaincourt north of Deuillet (May 16).
It occupied the sector of the left bank of the Oise until the offensive
of March, 1918.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 13th Landwehr Division is apparently considered by the German High
Command as fit only to occupy a quiet sector (February, 1918).

Shock troops have been formed from its regiments, but the men appear to
have been trained for patrol work rather than for making genuine
assaults.


                                 1918.


PICARDY.

1. The division was relieved about March 24. It passed the night at
Versigny, and on the 25th reached Laon, passing by Crepy and Aulnois.


LAON.

2. On the 26th the division came into line south of Laon, relieving the
75th Reserve Division. It was engaged about Chevregny, Chavignon, and
Urcil until May 27.

3. It did not advance in the Aisne offensive. The attacking divisions
passed through, and it was withdrawn and transported to Lorraine at the
beginning of June.


BATTLE OF ST. MIHIEL.

It entered the line in the Woevre in the Combres Les Eparges sector
about the 1st of June and continued to hold the front until the
armistice. In the American attack on the St. Mihiel salient the division
lost about 800 men, principally prisoners. It was pushed back to
Champlon and Marcheville, which sector it held until November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a fourth-class division. It was an inferior
sector-holding unit of mediocre morale.




                             14th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │27.      │16.      │27.      │16.      │79.      │16.
              │         │53.      │         │53.      │         │56.
              │79.      │56.      │79.      │56.      │         │57.
              │         │57.      │         │57.      │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │16 Uhlan Rgt. (3   │                   │4 Sqn. 16 Uhlan
              │  Sqns.)           │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │14 Brig.:          │14 Brig.:          │14 Brig.:
              │ 7 F. A. Rgt.      │ 7 F. A. Rgt.      │ 7 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 43 F. A. Rgt.     │ 43 F. A. Rgt.     │ 43 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 8 Trench Gun
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 7:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 7:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 7 Pions.│ 2 Co. 7 Pions.
              │                   │ 14 Pont. Engrs.   │ 1 Co. 7 Pions.
              │                   │ 14 Tel. Detch.    │ 14 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 14 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 14 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │68 M. G. S. S.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │79.      │16.      │79.      │16.
              │         │56.      │         │56.
              │         │57.      │         │57.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 16 Uhlan    │5 Sqn. 16 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │14 Art. Command:   │14 Art. Command:
              │ 43 F. A. Rgt.     │ 43 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 21 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (1 and 3
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 1216 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1218 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1222 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│122 Pion. Btn.:    │124 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 7 Pions.    │ 3 Co. 7 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 7 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 7 Pions.
              │ 14 T. M. Co.      │ 14 T. M. Co.
              │ 295 Searchlight   │ 218 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 14 Tel. Detch.    │14 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 14 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 14 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │18 Ambulance Co.   │18 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │66 Field Hospital. │66 Field Hospital.
              │71 Field Hospital. │71 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │14 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │547 M. T. Col.     │547 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1914.


FRANCE.

1. The 14th Division was mobilized at the outbreak of the war with two
of its three peace-time brigades (27th and 79th Brigades) and sent its
28th Brigade to the 7th Reserve Corps (14th Reserve Division). The 27th
Brigade (Cologne) was immediately sent against Liége, where it attacked
with the five other brigades of five different army corps. On August 13
the entire division was before Liége, where the other division of the
7th Army Corps was on the 14th. With this latter division it formed part
of the 2d Army (Von Buelow), of which it formed the right wing. It
entered Belgium by way of Wavre and Nievelles, was engaged west of
Charleroi, entered France by the valley of the Oise and took part in the
battle of the Marne, at Petit Morin, southeast of Montmirail.

2. At the end of the retirement it stopped at the Chemin des Dames; was
sent a short time afterwards to the area north of Rheims, from which
place it was transferred, at the time of the race to the sea, to Lille,
with the entire 7th Army Corps (at the beginning of October).


ARTOIS.

3. Beginning with November, 1914, it occupied different sectors around
Lille, La Bassée, and Lens until the spring of 1916.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. The losses of the 14th Division were not very important during the
first two years of the war. However, in March, 1915, and in June, 1915,
it underwent two strong British attacks at Neuve Chapelle and Festubert,
which inflicted heavy losses upon it, following which it had to be
reenforced. From March 7 to March 12 the 3d Battalion of the 16th
Infantry Regiment had no less than 589 casualties, 16 of whom were
officers (official list of casualties).


                                 1916.

1. The 14th Division was relieved at the end of 1916 from the Artois
sector and, after a long period of rest near Tournai, was transferred to
the Verdun area.


VERDUN.

2. In June and July it occupied the Mort Homme sector.

3. At the end of July it crossed over to the right bank of the Meuse and
held the sector of Thiaumont until August 25, where it suffered heavily.

4. It then returned to the left bank of the Meuse (Cumieres) after a
short rest. It was again sent to the rear area about the middle of
October.

5. When the French attack of October 24 broke out the 14th Division went
into action north of Douaumont on the 27th.

6. On December 16 it suffered the shock of the French offensive and had
to be retired at the end of the month, very much weakened (65 per cent
casualties).


                                 1917.

1. After a month behind the Verdun front the 14th Division once more
took over its former sector at the beginning of February, 1917, on the
left bank of the Meuse, north of Chattancourt (Cumieres, Mort Homme).

2. Relieved between April 14 and 20, it entrained between the 21st and
the 25th at Sivry sur Meuse and Vilosnes and was transferred to the
Aisne.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

3. After a few days of rest in the Marchais area, at Sissonne Camp, it
was brought back to the front, and on May 5 reenforced the sector
between Ailles and Hurtebise, which was being held by guard divisions
very much weakened by our attacks.

4. From May 7 to 12 it replaced the 1st Guard Division in line (west of
Hurtebise) and then was sent to rest east of Laon. It remained in
reserve, not taking part in any action as an entire division.

5. After a rest in the area northwest of Liesse, it came back into line
in the sector Ailles-Hurtebise (June 20, 21) and there, on the 25th,
underwent the French attack. It lost the Cave of the Dragon; the 57th
Infantry Regiment lost 191 prisoners.

6. On July 26 the 14th Division attacked between Hurtebise and La
Bovelle. Its efforts to regain the positions lost were futile. On Aug. 1
the 1st Battalion of the 56th Infantry Regiment was commanded by a first
lieutenant (document).

7. At the end of July, very much weakened by its losses, it was sent to
rest in the Vervins area and reconstituted (principally by men of the
1918 class from the Bevelloo Camp). Between December 21, 1916, and
August, 1917, no less than 326 men came as replacements to the 9th
Company of the 56th Infantry Regiment.

8. On September 17 the 14th Division came back into line in the Laffaux
area, underwent our attacks on October 23, suffered heavy losses from
our preparation fire, and left to the French the greater part of its
artillery and numerous prisoners (1,763 men and 43 officers).

9. An eye witness reckons the number of infantrymen left after the
battle at not more than 1,400 (letter). It was filled up with returned
wounded, men borrowed from Landsturm battalions of the 11th Corps
District and men coming from the Russian front.

10. After being thus reorganized, in the Vervins area, the division was
sent to Haye in the Flirey sector, where it was engaged from the 5th of
November on. It was relieved January 13, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 14th Division is recruited principally from the Rhine districts of
the 7th Corps District, and it is for this reason that it is called
“Troops from the Lower Rhine” in the German communiques of July 27,
1917.

This region, very populous, suffices for its own recruiting. It is to be
noticed, however, that in the course of the year 1917, in spite of the
growing tendency to emphasize the sectional character of the large
units, the 14th Division received replacement troops from other
districts besides the seventh; in May, men from the 6th Corps District
trained in the fourth (class of 1918); in August, men from the third,
fourth, and eighth (class of 1918); in October, Pomeranians from the 22d
Landwehr Division. The seventh district hardly counts except in the
replacements of October, with convalescents and men from the Westphalian
Landsturm battalions. The heavy losses suffered since December, 1916
would explain, to a certain extent, this falling off in numbers. It may
also be that the morale of an industrial region such as Westphalia had
been sufficiently shattered to make a mixture advisable.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

During the French offensive of December 15, 1916, the 14th Division
behaved very well.

South of Ailles (at the end of June, 1917) it attempted to regain lost
ground with great tenacity.

It put up a strong resistance to the attacks of October 23.

“The 14th Division is a good division. It has just been withdrawn from a
quiet sector to take part in a war of movement. It is a division
destined to attack.” (Jan. 18, 1918—note from the 1st French Army.)


                                 1918.

1. The 14th Division was relieved in the Flirey sector (east of St.
Mihiel) by the 78th Reserve Division during the night of January 13–14.


PICARDY.

2. After having gone through some maneuvers in the region of Mars la
Tour the division entrained at that place (also Chambley) on March 27
and detrained at St. Quentin on the 29th. It remained in support for a
few days and then reenforced the battle front west of Moreuil (northwest
of Montdidier) on April 4. The same day attacked Rouvrel, but could make
no progress. It suffered severely, and was withdrawn on the 11th, very
much exhausted, to rest in the region of Bohain, where it was
reconstituted, and went into intensive training for open warfare.


AISNE.

3. On May 27 the division entrained at Bohain, and detrained to the west
of Laon, where it assembled in the forest of Coucy, and followed the
offensive of the Aisne in the second line. It crossed the Aisne on May
30, and marched via Crécy au Mont to Hautebraye. Its objective was Vic
sur Aisne, but it was completely checked with heavy losses. It was
withdrawn about June 11.

4. On June 14 it relieved the 51st Reserve Division near St. Bandry
(southwest of Soissons). It was badly shattered in the fighting that
followed and was withdrawn about July 2.

5. On July 16 the division reinforced the front near Osly-Courtil (north
of the Aisne—west of Soissons); it was withdrawn about the 26th of
August.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. During the night of September 18–19 the division relieved the 3d
Guard Division southeast of Auberive; it was withdrawn about October 12
and went to rest in the area north of Rethel.


SOLESMES.

7. The division marched by easy stages, and entered line near
Englefontaine (east of Solesmes) during the night of October 25–26. It
was still in line at the time of the signing of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 14th Division is rated as being in the second of four classes.
Despite its two training periods (March and May), it did not distinguish
itself on the offensive, being decidedly checked at Moreuil and
Hautebraye. On the defensive, however, it fought tenaciously; it
suffered heavy losses, the regiments being reduced to three companies.
There is evidence supporting the view that there were not more than
1,800 rifles in the division the end of October.




                         14th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │27 Res.  │16 Res.  │27 Res.  │16 Res.  │27 Res.  │16 Res.
              │         │53 Res.  │         │53 Res.  │         │53 Res.
              │28.      │39 Fus.  │28.      │39 Fus.  │         │159.
              │         │159.     │         │159.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Res. Hus. Rgt. (3│8 Res. Hus. Rgt.   │5 Res. Hus. Rgt. (?
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │14 Res. F. A. Rgt. │14 Res. F. A. Rgt. │14 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │  (8 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No. 7.│  Pion. Btn. No. 7.│  Pion. Btn. No. 7.
              │                   │14 Res. Pont. Engs.│ 282 Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │14 Res. Tel. Detch.│ 214 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 14 Res. Pont.
              │                   │                   │  Engrs.
              │                   │                   │ 14 Res. Tel.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │Electric Power
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │27 Res.  │16 Res.  │27 Res.  │159.
              │         │53 Res.  │         │16 Res.
              │         │159.     │         │53 Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. Res. Uhlan  │1 Sqn. 5 Res. Hus.
              │  Rgt. (?).        │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │102 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 14 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 14 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 16 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Btn. (1, 3, and 4
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 1169 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1170 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1193 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│314 Pion. Btn.:    │314 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 7      │ 1 Res. Co. 7
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 7      │ 2 Res. Co. 7
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 214 T. M. Co.     │ 214 T. M. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 414 Tel. Detch.   │ 66 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │414 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 414 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 150 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │521 Ambulance Co.  │521 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │34 Res. Field      │35 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │35 Res. Field      │36 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │(?) 414 Vet.       │414 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │713 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │6 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │410 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │2 Res. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │19 Res. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │74 Art. Observation
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │23 Sound Ranging
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │49 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │265 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │(Elements attached,
              │                   │  July, 1918; from
              │                   │  German
              │                   │  document.).
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (7TH CORPS DISTRICT—WESTPHALIA.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. The 14th Reserve Division belongs, like the 13th Reserve Division, to
the 7th Reserve Corps. It was formed from the Reserve Brigade at the
Senne Camp and from one brigade, surplus, of the 14th active division
(28th Brigade). One regiment of this brigade, the 39th Fusiliers, from
Dusseldorf, appeared in front of Liege on August 8, while the rest of
the division was being assembled at Dueren.


MAUBEUGE.

2. Entering into Belgium by way of Verviers, on August 16, the 14th
Reserve Division then formed a part of the 2d German Army. It was in
front of Namur on August 21, with the reserve corps of the Guard and the
11th Corps. After Namur was taken it went to invest Maubeuge with the
13th Division.


AISNE.

3. Set free on September 7 by the fall of this place, it left on the
10th to strengthen the Aisne front. About the 13th of September it
occupied the heights around Cerny-en-Laonnois.


                                 1915.


AISNE.

1. The division held the sector between Cerny and Craonne (north of
Paissy) until the beginning of November, 1915. In March it gave the 39th
Fusiliers to the 50th Division, a new formation.

2. About November 2 it was transferred to the Charleroi area where it
rested and had further training.

3. At the end of December it was sent north of Verdun, near Romagne sous
les Cotes.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. In January and until February 20, 1916, it was employed in works
preparatory to the attack (Damvillers area).

2. On February 23 it was in line on the right bank of the Meuse. It took
part, from the very beginning, in the German offensive against Verdun,
attacked Samogneux, Poivre Hill, and the Hill of Talou and
Vacherauville. (On the 3d of April, the 11th Company of the 16th Reserve
Infantry Regiment had already received more than 118 men as
replacements. On May 14, at least 153 had been sent to the 8th Company
of the 53d Infantry Reserve Regiment.)

3. Until the end of December the 14th Reserve Division occupied this
sector (of the Meuse (Champneuville) at Poivre Hill). On December 15, it
underwent the French counteroffensive, to the west of Douaumont, which
caused it to suffer very heavy losses. Then it took over the sector of
Hill 344 for one week.

4. The division was relieved from December 22–25, concentrated in the
Damvillers area and transferred to Champagne where it was reorganized.


                                 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. On January 1, 1917, it went into line north of Prunay and remained in
this sector (quiet) until October 22–25.

2. In May the division sent some of its elements as reenforcements to
units attacked at Cornillet and at Monthaut.


FORET DE COUCY.

3. It entrained on October 26 at Chatelet and was transferred to the
area of Cerny-en-Laonnois. On the 28th it was interpolated between two
divisions (the 10th Division and the 27th Division) on the front
Bassoles-Fresnes, in the upper Coucy wood, which it occupied until the
middle of February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 14th Reserve Division is recruited from Westphalia. As it suffered
very little in 1917, the division probably did not receive in the course
of that year the heterogeneous replacements which were sent—perhaps
intentionally—to the other Westphalian divisions.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 14th Reserve Division did not participate in any important action in
the course of the year 1917. It was thoroughly reorganized during its
long stay in Champagne. It is composed for the most part of young men
(20 to 30 years of age) and has suffered but few losses (a slight
proportion of the 1918 class).

Its valor has not been put to any serious test since Verdun. It appears
capable of serious effort.


                                 1918.


LAON.

1. The division was withdrawn from line in the St. Gobain region and
went to rest in the neighborhood of Laon. It was trained in open warfare
during the weeks that followed.

2. On March 16 some equipment belonging to the 53d Reserve Regiment was
found west of Laon, near Champs, but it is unlikely that the division
was in line there; it was not identified in any other way. It was
identified in line in that region, however, on the 6th of April. It was
withdrawn on May 29.


AISNE.

3. The division went immediately to the Aisne battle front, where it was
identified by prisoners in the Vierzy sector (south of Soissons) on May
31. It was withdrawn about the 10th of June and rested for a month in
the region of Fere en Tardenois.

4. On July 8 it relieved the 47th Reserve Division near Chavigny (south
of Soissons). The 47th Reserve Division relieved part of the 14th
Reserve Division on the 12th, and the 14th Reserve seems to have come
back in its entirety on the 16th. During this fighting, the division
lost more than 1,500 prisoners. It was withdrawn on July 20, and went to
rest and refit in the neighborhood of Mulhouse.


NESLE.

5. The division entrained on the 22d of August at Birnsweiler and
traveled via Saarbruecken-Trier-Herbesthal-Liége-Namur-Charleroi-Condé,
detraining at Tincourt the night of August 23–24. On the 26th it
reinforced the front near Thilloy (southwest of Nesle). It was withdrawn
on September 9, after losing some 1,300 prisoners, and went to rest in
Alsace in the neighborhood of Oltingen.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. On October 9, it reinforced the front near Orfeuil (southwest of
Vouziers).

7. On October 28, the division was moved eastward to Boult, so as to
help to hinder the American advance. It was still in line on November
11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

After the division’s participation in the battle of the Aisne, Lieut.
Gen. Loeb, its commander, was awarded the order Pour le Mérite. Again,
the German communiqué of September 2 spoke highly of the fighting of the
56th Reserve Regiment. A captured regimental order mentions the fact
that there had been many cases of the grippe. The division suffered such
severe losses that most of the men from the 47th Reserve Division,
dissolved in July, were sent to it. Nevertheless, the battalions were
reduced to three companies in August. Despite its subsequent heavy
losses (the 159th Regiment was reduced to 600 men, and the other
regiment to about the same size), the division is still considered as
being first class.




                        14th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │21 Ldw.       │10 Ldw.       │21 Ldw.       │10 Ldw.
              │              │38 Ldw.       │              │38 Ldw.
              │              │101 Ldw.      │46 Ldw.       │101 Ldw.
              │              │103 Ldw.      │              │103 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │93 Cav. Regt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │82 F. A. Rgt. (1 Ers. Abt.). │217 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │908 F. A. Btry.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │1 Ers. Co. 23 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │314 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │155 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │10 Landst. Inf. Rgt.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │21 Ldw.       │10 Ldw.       │              │337 (2 Btn.).
              │              │38 Ldw.       │              │
              │              │346.          │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 6 Cuirassier Rgt.     │1 Sqn. 17 Uhlan Rgt.
              │2 Sqn. 93 Cav. Rgt.          │2 Sqn. 17 Uhlan Rgt.
              │1 Body Hus. Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │253 Ldw. F. A. Rgt. (3d Btry.
              │                             │  1st Abt.)
              │ 217 F. A. Rgt.              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(414) Pion. Btn.:            │272 Searchlight Section.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 3 C. Dist. Pions.│514 Tel. Detch.
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 23 Pions.        │
              │ 314 T. M. Co.               │
              │ 338 Searchlight Section.    │
              │ 514 Tel. Detch.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │218 Ambulance Co.            │257 Field Hospital.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │143 Field Hospital.          │167 Field Hospital.
              │257 Field Hospital.          │
              │170 Vet. Hospital.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │473 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │155 Cyclist Co.              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (346th Infantry Regiment: 5th Corps District—Posen. 10th and 38th
            Landwehr Regiments: 6th Corps District—Silesia.)


                                 1915.


RUSSIA-POLAND.

1. The 14th Landwehr Division appeared in Poland about the middle of
July, 1915, in the Sierpec area.

It appeared to be made up at this time of the 21st Mixed Brigade of
Landwehr (10th and 38th Landwehr Regiments, taken from the Breslau
Corps), elements of the Graudenz Corps, the 46th Landwehr Brigade (Pfeil
Brigade—101st and 103d Landwehr Regiments). At all events, the 14th
Landwehr Division does not appear to have received its complete
coherence until the stabilization of the front which followed the summer
offensive against the Russians.


SMORGONI.

2. The division then took position in the Smorgoni sector (September).
It remained there until February, 1918.


                                 1916.

1. In 1916 the division remained in the Smorgoni sector.


                                 1917.

1. In 1917 the division remained in the Smorgoni sector.

2. About the month of April, 1917, the 101st and 103d Landwehr Regiments
(Saxon) were taken from the 14th Landwehr Division and assigned to the
46th Landwehr Division, a new formation on the Eastern Front. They were
replaced in the 14th Landwehr Division by the 346th Regiment, which
formerly belonged to the 87th Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division is of mediocre value.


                                 1918.


MINSK.

1. At the beginning of 1918 the 14th Landwehr Division was still on the
Smorgoni front, which it left about the middle of February to march
farther toward the east. “We are advancing right into Russia,” wrote a
man of the 38th Landwehr Regiment on March 7. About the middle of March
the division went into cantonment in the vicinity of Orcha and Kochanovo
on the Minsk-Smolensk Railroad. It was still there at the end of April.

2. Sent to France during May, the 14th Landwehr Division arrived in
Alsace with only two regiments, the 10th and 38th Landwehr Regiments.
The division seems to have been dissolved soon afterwards, the 10th
Landwehr seeming to be attached to the 301st Division and the 38th
Landwehr to the 4th Cavalry Division.

3. The latter part of June the division was reconstituted on the Russian
front after the departure of these two regiments for the West, with the
following units: 103d Landwehr (from the 46th Landwehr Division), 343d
Ersatz (from the 87th Division), and the 3d Landsturm (14th Landwehr
Division). On the 30th of July the division was identified in the Orcha
region. Late in September the division was identified in the same
region.


                                 VALUE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                        14th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[11]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │8 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │8 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │8 Bav.   │4 Bav.
              │         │8 Bav.   │         │8 Bav.   │         │8 Bav.
              │         │29 Bav.  │         │25 Bav.  │         │25 Bav.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Sqn. 8 Bav. Light│4 Sqn. 8 Bav. Light
              │                   │  Cav. Rgt.        │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │23 Bav. F. A. Rgt. │14 Bav. Art.       │14 Bav. Art.
              │                   │  Command:         │  Command:
              │                   │ 23 Bav. F. A. Rgt.│ 23 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (10 Btries.).    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │14 Bav. Pion. Btn.:│14 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 10 Bav. Res. Pion.│ 10 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │                   │  Co.              │  Co.
              │                   │ 11 Bav. Res. Pion.│ 11 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │                   │  Co.              │  Co.
              │                   │ 14 Bav. T. M. Co. │ 101 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 101 Searchlight   │ 14 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Section.         │
              │                   │ 14 Bav. Tel.      │ 14 Bav. Tel.
              │                   │  Detch.           │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │14 Bav. Ambulance  │14 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │  Co.
              │                   │1 Bav. Field       │1 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │47 Bav. Field      │47 Bav. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │694 M. T. Col.     │694 Bav. M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 11:

  Composition at time of dissolution, Sept. 1, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (4th and 8th Bavarian Infantry Regiments: Second Bavarian District. 25th
             Bavarian Infantry Regiment: Bavarian District.)


                                 1916.

The 14th Bavarian Division was formed, at the beginning of August, 1916,
with the 8th Bavarian Brigade (4th and 8th Bavarian Infantry Regiments),
withdrawn from the 33d Reserve Division, and with the 29th Bavarian
Infantry Regiment, formed at this time.


VERDUN.

1. The 14th Bavarian Division, going into line at the end of August,
1916, in the Vaux Chapitre wood, launched a violent attack on September
3 to the southwest of the fort of Vaux and continued to hold this sector
until October 10.

At the end of October, the 29th Bavarian Infantry Regiment, whose losses
in the Vaux sector were considerable, was dissolved and replaced by the
25th Bavarian Infantry Regiment, taken from the 192d Division, and
raised from two to three battalions.

2. Having thus received its present composition, the 14th Bavarian
Division went back into line on the Haute de Meuse (Calonne trench) on
October 22.


SOMME-ANCRE.

3. Relieved at the beginning of November and sent to rest, it was then
sent to the Somme, where, about November 26, it took over the sector
north of the Ancre.


                                 1917.

1. The 14th Bavarian Division left the Ancre front at the end of
January, 1917, passed the month of February at rest in the Denain area,
and came back into line on the Somme, northeast of Gueudecourt, on
February 26. It was withdrawn on March 20 at the time of the German
retirement.


ARTOIS.

2. At the beginning of April it went into action against the British
offensive in the Roclincourt (north of Arras) and suffered heavily
(about 2,800 prisoners on Apr. 9).


RUSSIA-RIGA.

3. Sent to rest in Belgium, it remained for several days in the Ghent
area, and then entrained for the Eastern Front (Apr. 26–28). About May
14 it went into line near Lipsk (south of Baranovitchi); in June it took
over the sector of Tsirin, where it remained until the end of the
August. It was then transferred to the Riga front (Sept. 1) and went
into action on September 14 in the neighborhood of Uxkuell. It left
there on September 18.

4. About September 20 it went into line west of Jakobstadt and took part
in the action of the 21st.

5. At the end of October the 14th Bavarian Division was sent to Galicia.
It was identified in the neighborhood of Tarnopol on November 1 and, for
the last time, on December 14 (fraternizing).


FRANCE.

6. The division left the Tarnopol area on December 19 for the Western
Front. Itinerary: Posen-Leipzig-Frankfort-Kreuznach-Thionville. It
detrained at Wasigny and Saulces-Monclin (near Rethel) on December 23.


                              RECRUITING.

The 14th Bavarian Division is recruited from the 2d and 3d Bavarian
Corps Districts.


                                 VALUE.

The 8th Bavarian Brigade (4th and 8th Bavarian Infantry Regiments),
which helped form the 14th Bavarian Division, is a strong body
belonging, in peace times, to the garrison at Metz.

It distinguished itself at the battle of Eparges (March-April, 1915), at
the attack of September 3, 1916 (Vaux-Chapitre wood).

The morale of the 14th Bavarian Division appears to be high. No deserter
has been found since the arrival of the division on the Western Front
(December, 1917). The 14th Bavarian Division has always been a good
division (January, 1918).


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 14th Bavarian Division embarked at Tarnopol on December 19 and
traveled via Kalicz-Posen-Leipsic-Frankfort-Kreusnach-Thionville-
Wassigny (north of Rethel), where it detrained on the 23d. On January 12
it relieved the 7th Reserve Division in the Mont Haut sector. It was
relieved by the 80th Reserve Division on April 22.


PICARDY.

2. On the 26th the division entrained at Neuflize, detraining on the
following day near Mericourt (northeast of St. Quentin). From there it
marched via Bellenglise-Vermand-Mons en Chaussee-Brie-Foucaucourt to
Framerville. On May 3 it relieved the 208th Division in the Hangard
sector (southeast of Amiens). It was relieved on the 21st by the 225th
Division.

3. The division remained in close support, and relieved the 15th
Division one sector to the south on the 23d. It was withdrawn during the
night of June 20–21, and rested in rear of the front for over a month.

4. About July 23, it relieved the 21st Division in the Castel sector
(north of Hangard). In the fighting that followed the division suffered
heavy losses, especially in the British attack of August 8. It was
withdrawn about the 13th in a badly shattered condition, it having lost
some 2,500 prisoners.

5. It was in line again on the 29th northwest of Villers-Carbonnel
(southwest of Peronne), and was withdrawn about the 2d of September.
Soon thereafter, the 14th Bavarian Division was disbanded—the 4th
Bavarian went to the 4th Bavarian Division to replace the 5th Bavarian
Reserves (dissolved); the 8th Bavarian went to the 16th Bavarian
Division to replace the 21st Bavarian Reserves (dissolved); the 25th
Bavarian went to the 6th Bavarian Reserves Division to replace the 17th
Bavarian Reserves (dissolved). The commanding general and his staff were
identified at Malineson October 24, but there is nothing to show what
they were doing there, or where they went.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Previous to 1918 the 14th Bavarian was always considered a first-class
division. Since then, however, it seems to have fallen off somewhat; it
was not used in any of the German offensives, and it is significant that
a battalion of the 2d Bavarian Division was used in its sector (south of
Hailles) when it was desired to make a raid, and also that two of the
divisions receiving regiments when the 14th Bavarian was disbanded were
second class. The division lost over 2,000 prisoners, including all
three regiment staffs and the staffs of several of the battalions.




                             15th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Infantry.    │29.      │25.      │29.      │25.      │Jan. to Aug., 1916.
              │         │161.     │         │161.     │29.      │25.
              │80.      │65.      │80.      │65.      │         │161.
              │         │160.     │         │160.     │80.      │65.
              │         │         │         │         │         │160.
              │         │         │         │         │Aug. to Nov., 1916.
              │         │         │         │         │         │186.
              │         │         │         │         │         │160.
              │         │         │         │         │         │389.
              │         │         │         │         │    After Nov.
              │         │         │         │         │         │69.
              │         │         │         │         │         │160.
              │         │         │         │         │         │389.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │7 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │15 Brig.:          │15 Brig.:          │15 Brig.:
              │ 59 F. A. Rgt.     │ 59 F. A. Rgt.     │ 59 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 83 F. A. Rgt.     │ 83 F. A. Rgt.     │ 83 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 8:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 8:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 8 Pions.│ 1 Co. 8 Pions.
              │                   │ 15 Tel. Detch.    │ 5 Co. 8 Pions.
              │                   │ 15 Pont. Engs.    │ 15 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 15 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 15 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │69 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │80.      │69.      │80.      │69.
              │         │160.     │         │137.
              │         │389.     │         │160.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 7 Hus. Rgt. │2 Sqn. 7 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │15 Art. Command:   │15 Art. Command:
              │ 59 F. A. Rgt.     │ 59 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 135 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 707 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 744 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1295 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│125 Pion. Btn. (1  │125 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No.   │
              │  8):              │
              │ 1 Co. 8 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 8 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 8 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 8 Pions.
              │ 15 T. M. Co.      │ 15 T. M. Co.
              │ 15 Tel. Detch.    │ 108 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 41 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │15 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 15 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 113 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │19 Ambulance Co.   │19 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │82 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │83 Field Hospital.
              │                   │15 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col. No. 800.│548 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1914.

1. Upon mobilization, the 15th Division (Aix la Chapelle, Cologne, Bonn,
etc.) formed with the 16th Division an organic part of the 8th Army
Corps and was in the 4th Army (Duke of Wuerttemberg).

2. Temporarily detaching the 25th Infantry Regiment (Aix la Chapelle)
from the corps at the siege at Liege, the 15th Division entered, on
August 6, into Luxemburg, where it had been preceded by the 16th
Division (Treves). It entered into Belgian Luxemburg on the 19th and
20th of August. Went into action on the 22d and 23d—Porcheresse, Graid,
Bièvre—and entered France on the 26th. While the 29th Brigade was
crossing the Meuse at Sedan the 80th entered at Mezieres. Again uniting
on the 30th, the 15th Division went through Champagne by way of Somme Py
and Suippes and took part in the battle of the Marne at Vitry le
Francois. It then withdrew to Souain and Perthes, where it remained as a
whole until November.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. At this time the 29th Brigade was taken to the Ypres front until the
end of December, at which date it went to the south of Alsace, making a
part of the combined division of Fuchs. The separation of the two
brigades lasted until May, 1915. The 29th Brigade lost heavily in
Alsace, where the 25th Infantry Regiment was reduced to 600 men on March
26, 1915 (soldier’s notebook).


                                 1915.

1. The 15th Division, in which the 29th Brigade was temporarily replaced
by the 1st Bavarian Landwehr Brigade, remained in Champagne until the
beginning of April, 1915. At that date it went to reenforce the 3d
Bavarian Corps near St. Mihiel in the Ailly wood.


ARTOIS.

2. At the end of May the 15th Division again had both its brigades (29th
and 80th) and went into action at Artois until the middle of June. It
suffered heavy losses. The 161st Infantry Regiment lost 31 officers and
1,653 men (official list of casualties).


AISNE.

3. From June, 1915, until June, 1916, the 15th Division occupied various
sectors of the Aisne: Vailly-Pommiers (end of July), Nouvron
(September), Ste. Marguerite-Bucy le Long (October).


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. July, 1916, the 15th Division was transferred to the Somme. It took
part in the battle and participated in the attack at Biaches, where it
suffered heavy losses.

2. At the end of August it again took over its sector, St. Marguerite-
Bucy le Long. Its composition was modified by the temporary loss of the
160th Infantry Regiment, sent to the combined division of Dumrath
(August), by the definite transfer of the 65th Infantry Regiment and the
161st Infantry Regiment to the 185th Division, and of the 25th Infantry
Regiment to the 208th Division.

3. At the beginning of October it had received in exchange for the
regiments transferred the 186th Infantry Regiment (temporarily) and the
389th Infantry Regiment, a new formation (men taken from various Rhine
regiments), and received the 160th Infantry Regiment again (the Dumrath
Division having been dissolved). It reappeared on the Somme front
(Sailly-Saillisel), where it again suffered heavy losses.


AISNE.

4. At the end of October it returned to the Aisne and occupied the
sectors of Nuvron-Moulin sous Touvent. It was reorganized finally in
November and received its definitive composition.


RUSSIA.

5. About the middle of November the 15th Division was withdrawn from the
front, entrained after a few days’ rest, and transferred to the Eastern
Front. It went into line north of Kisselin.


                                 1917.

1. In February, 1917, the division was in Transylvania (upper valley of
the Olta).

2. In April it was in reserve at Vladimir-Volynski.


FRANCE.

3. Transferred to the French front (entrained at Kovel, detrained at
Vigneulles, at the end of April), the division occupied the sector of
Vaux les Palameix (Meuse).


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

4. At the end of May it was relieved and sent (night of May 29–30) to
the Vauclerc Plateau and the Californie Plateau. On June 2 and 3 it took
part in the violent attack upon these plateaus. It renewed these attacks
upon July 3 and again suffered heavy losses.


LORRAINE.

5. The division was relieved on the night of July 8–9 and then sent to
the Lys area, from which it was transferred into the zone Richecourt-
Avricourt. It was put in line (July 15) near Blamont.


FLANDERS.

6. It was relieved about September 4, sent to rest in the Verdun area,
and transferred to Belgium on October 7, where it was in action and
suffered heavily on the Ypres front (north of the Ypres-Menin road)
until November 13.

7. The division was then sent to the rear (area of Bruges-Knocke).

8. It again went into line east of Ypres about December 18 (east of
Passchendaele). In the middle of January, 1918, it was withdrawn from
this sector and sent to the Bruges area.


                              RECRUITING.

The 15th Division is easily recruited from the populous districts of the
Rhine Provinces. In case of heavy losses and urgent necessity for
reenforcements, the need has been felt for having recourse to the rest
of the Rhine country in the widest sense of the word, that is to say,
Rhenish Hessia and the Grand Duchy of Baden, in return for
reenforcements sent elsewhere. The frequence of the relation and the
community of interests which unites these regions assures the 15th
Division, under all circumstances, the advantages of regional
homogeneity.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 15th Division, in spite of the lack of success of its efforts, has
given the impression of being a good division.

On June 2 and 3, 1917, the 69th Infantry Regiment and the 389th Infantry
Regiment, attacked vigorously upon the casemates and Californie
Plateaus. The 389th Infantry Regiment, especially, showed a great deal
of dash in the course of these actions (July, 1917).

The division is composed, for the most part, of young and well trained
elements; it has the experience gained from a very active sector
(September, 1917).


                                 1918.


BELGIUM.

1. The division relieved the 25th Division east of Passchendaele on
February 10 and occupied the sector until February 20–25 when it moved
south and took over the Zonnebeke sector from the 31st Division. About
March 21, it was relieved by the 39th Division. It entrained at
Muelebeke on the 23d and detrained at Mons en Pevele (north of Douai).
From there it went by marches to Cambrai (31st), Sailly Saillisel, Bray
sur Somme and Suzanne, and Caix (Apr. 7–12).


PICARDY.

2. On April 12 it was engaged in the Bois Senecat, northwest of Moreuil.
During the French attack of the 18th the division lost 700 prisoners. It
was relieved about April 22.

3. It rested until mid-May near Busigny. The 389th Regiment is known to
have received 600 men as a draft at this time. On May 18, the division
returned to line near Castel, and was engaged until May 22.

4. It rested in the Somme area (at Rosieres en Santerse June 1, and
Peronne on the 9th), until June 17 when it came into line before
Moreuil. It suffered heavy losses during the French attack of the 17th
but continued in line until the 26th. It rested east of Roye in June and
from the 3d to the 5th of July was in reserve south of Blerancourt.


BATTLE OF THE OISE-AISNE.

5. The division was engaged in the Nampcel-Autreches sector from July 5
until August 22. It was pushed back to Caisnes (Aug. 18) and as a result
of the French attack lost 1,880 prisoners.

6. The division was moved to rest at Damvillers north of Verdun in early
September. On the 26th it left that place and marched to Flabas, east of
the Meuse.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

7. On September 26 the division was in line in the Bois des Caures. It
continued to hold a sector in the region until the armistice. The last
identification was northwest of Ornes on November 10.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. Its heavy losses at Moreuil in
June and the ravages of the grippe in the summer lowered the morale. On
the other hand, a document of October 4 indicated that the division had
been congratulated by the Kaiser for its “heroic conduct.”




                         15th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │25 Res.  │29 Res.  │25 Res.  │29 Res.  │25 Res.
              │         │69 Res.  │         │69 Res.  │         │69 Res.
              │         │17 Res.  │80 Res.  │17 Res.  │80 Res.  │17 Res.
              │         │30 Res.  │         │30 Res.  │         │30 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │5 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │5 Res. Uhlan Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │15 Res. F. A. Rgt. │15 Res. F. A. Rgt. │15 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │  (after Mar.,     │  (8 Btries.).
              │                   │1915, 8 Btries.).  │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co., 2     │4 Field Co., 2     │4 Field Co., 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No. 8.│  Pion. Btn. No. 8.│  Pion. Btn. No. 8.
              │                   │15 Res. Pont. Engs.│2 Co. 31 Pion. Rgt.
              │                   │15 Res. Tel. Detch.│5 Co. 31 Pion. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │215 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │15 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │15 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │                   │78 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  section.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │30 Res.  │17 Res.  │30 Res.  │17 Res.
              │         │25 Res.  │         │25 Res.
              │         │69 Res.  │         │69 Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │2 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier
              │  (? 3d Sqn.)      │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │104 Art. Command:  │104 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 15 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 15 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 125 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │  (Staff, 1, 2, and
              │                   │  3d Btries.).
              │                   │ 1064 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1066 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1067 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│315 Pion Btn.:     │315 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 8 Pion.     │ 4 Co. 8 Pion.
              │ 6 Co. 8 Pion.     │ 6 Co. 8 Pion.
              │ 215 T. M. Co.     │ 53 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 257 Searchlight   │ 215 T. M. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 415 Tel. Detch.   │415 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 415 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 37 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │508 Ambulance Co.  │508 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │37 Res. Field      │37 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │38 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │415 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │714 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │504 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (Staff, 2 and 3
              │                   │  Abt.).
              │                   │3 Abt. 4 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │708 Transport Park.
              │                   │30 Ammunition Col.
              │                   │133 and 18 Bav.
              │                   │  Supply Trains.
              │                   │238 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │119 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │136 Labor Btn.
              │                   │92 Art. Observation
              │                   │  Section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
 (Elements attached Oct. 12, 1918, from German document.)


                                HISTORY.

  (25th Reserve Infantry Regiment, 69th Reserve Infantry Regiment: 8th
  Corps District—Rhine Province. 17th Reserve Infantry Regiment: 21st
                       Corps District—Lorraine.)


                                 1914.

1. In August, 1914, the 15th Reserve Division which was a part of the
8th Reserve Corps (with the 16th Reserve Division) and of the 4th Army,
was concentrated on the Luxemburg frontier, which it crossed on the
19th. Entering Belgium on the 21st, it fought on the 22d at Maissin and
Paliseul, and between the 25th and 27th it crossed the Meuse near Sedan,
losing heavily. On August 28, the 2d Battalion of the 69th Reserve
Infantry Regiment was reduced to 140 men (soldier’s notebook).


CHAMPAGNE.

2. From this place, by way of le Chesne, Vouziers, Tahure, the division
advanced as far as Marne Canal to the Rhine, at Vitry le Francois
(Brusson Dompremy, Sept. 6), where it took part in the battle of the
Marne.

3. The division retired between September 9 and September 16 by way of
Suippes to Servon, Binarville, Massiges (Sept. 18 to 27), and
established itself north of Massiges.


                                 1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 15th Reserve Division occupied the front north of Massiges and of
Mesnil les Hurlus in the Souain area. In the course of various small
actions, especially in May, it suffered heavily, so much so that by June
30, the losses suffered since the beginning of the campaign amounted to
2,316 men for the 2d Battalion of the 17th Reserve Infantry Regiment
(official list of casualties).

2. In September, 1915, the elements of the 15th Reserve Division divided
between the Liebert Division (17th and 69th Reserve Infantry Regiments)
and the Ditfurth Division (25th and 30th Reserve Infantry Regiments)
took part in the battle of Champagne near Tahure, east of Somme Py (from
Sept. 25 to the beginning of October). They suffered considerable
losses.


AISNE.

3. Toward the end of October the 15th Reserve Division was relieved from
the Tahure sector and reorganized. At the beginning of November it went
into line between Vailly and the Oise-Aisne Canal.


                                 1916.

1. The division occupied the sector Chavonne-Soupir south of Braye en
Laonnois until the end of June, 1916.


SOMME.

2. At the beginning of July, as soon as the Franco-British offensive
began, the 15th Reserve Division detached some of its elements to
reenforce divisions engaged along the Somme, especially at Flaucourt
(July 2 and 3), Hem wood, and the Vermandovillers area (August).


AISNE.

3. Some of these elements returned to the Aisne and were reassigned to
the Liebert (new 15th Reserve Division) and the Dumrath Division.


SOMME.

4. The 17th and 30th Reserve Infantry Regiments remained in the Somme
area. Separated at first, at the end of August they formed the 32d
Brigade reattached to the 35th Division which held the front in the area
of Estrees-Ablaincourt (September).

5. At the beginning of October the 15th Reserve Division once more
reorganized its original elements, and occupied the lines between
Fouquescourt and the north of Andechy.

6. The division was relieved from the Somme front about December 15.


                                 1917.


SOMME.

1. Once more in line in the Fouquescourt sector, the division took part
in the German withdrawal by way of Ercheu, Moyencourt (Mar. 17), Ham
(Mar. 19).

2. It was sent to rest in the Maubeuge area (?) (end of March and
April).


ARTOIS.

3. About May 2 it went into line in the Fresnoy sector (north of Arras),
where it went into action about May 3.

4. It was withdrawn from the Artois front on May 10 and transferred to
the Eastern Front (May 21 to May 28).


GALICIA.

5. Sent to Galicia, it occupied the sector south of Brzezany, where it
underwent the Russian attack of July 1. Then it took part in the
offensive against the Russians at the end of July, and suffered heavy
losses near Husiatin, where it remained until August 24. Sent to the
rear of Zbrucz it held this sector from September 15 to December 7.


FRANCE.

6. Relieved at this date, it remained in the Jablona area until December
19, and entrained on the 30th for the Western Front. Itinerary: Brest
Litowsk-Warsaw-Karlish-Halle-Frankfort on the Main-Mayence-
Sarrebruecken-Thionville-Sedan. It detrained on January 7, in the Dun
area, where it went to rest.

The 15th Reserve Division suffered very heavy losses in Galicia (July
and Aug., 1917).

At the end of February, 1918, these losses, according to the statements
of deserters, had not yet been made good by sufficient replacements.

In Russia there was no exchange of the older men of the division for men
of the 1919 class.


                              RECRUITING.

The 15th Reserve Division is recruited from the Rhine districts in
general. The elements from the 9th Corps District, introduced by the
assignment of one battalion of the 76th Landwehr Regiment to the 69th
Reserve Infantry Regiment, have almost disappeared with the arrival of
successive replacements.


                                 1918.

1. During its occupancy of the Verdun sector the division underwent
intensive training which was to fit it for operations on the Western
Front. It was relieved about April 15. The division commenced entraining
at Stenay about April 23 and traveled via Givet-Dinant-Namur-Charleroi-
Braine le Comte-Ath-Tournai, and detrained between Tournai and Lille.
One regiment marched to Haubourdin (12 miles), where it rested several
days.


HINGE.

2. On the night of May 1–2 the division came into line east of St.
Venant. It held this sector for 10 months. Toward the end of June it was
relieved by the 23d Reserve Division.


ARRAS.

3. On July 11 the division entered the line southwest of Oppy. It was
engaged at Gavrelle, Oppy, and Arleux until October 9 when the 187th
Division relieved it.

4. The division returned to line on the 12th to reinforce the front east
of Bohain and fought until the end of October in the region east of
Wassigny. There was some talk in the division of the dissolution, as no
drafts of importance were received during September or October.

5. On November 6 the division was again in line. In the closing days of
the war it was engaged north of Beaurepaire, southeast of Limont-
Fontaine, southwest of Aites and Obrechies (10th).


                                 VALUE.

The division was rated as third class. During 1918 the division was
almost constantly in line holding defensive sectors, which it did with
fair success.




                        15th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │10 Ldw.       │12 Ldw.       │10 Ldw.       │12 Ldw.
              │              │52 Ldw.       │              │52 Ldw.
              │27 Ldw.       │53 Ldw.       │27 Ldw.       │53 Ldw.
              │              │55 Ldw.       │              │55 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Ldw. Sqn. 3 C. Dist.       │
              │2 Ldw. Sqn. 7 C. Dist.       │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 and 2 Landst. 3 C. Dist. F.│15 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │  A. Btries.                 │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │Landst. F. A. Btry. 7 C.     │
              │  Dist.                      │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │246 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │247 Pion. Co.
              │                             │315 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │42 Art. Survey Section.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[12]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │10 Ldw.       │12 Ldw.       │              │53 Ldw.
              │              │52 Ldw.       │              │
              │              │53 Ldw.       │              │
              │              │55 Ldw.       │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 5 Hus. Rgt.           │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │15 Ldw. F. A. Rgt. (Regt.
              │                             │  Staff, 2 Abt. Staff, and 4
              │                             │  and 6 Btries., 3 Abt.
              │                             │  Staff, 7 and 9 Btries. not
              │                             │  included).
              │ 15 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.          │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│415 Pion. Btn.               │109 Wireless Detch.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 246 Pion Co.                │
              │ 247 Pion. Co.               │
              │ 315 T. M. Co.               │
              │ 247 Searchlight Section.    │
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │552 Ambulance Co.            │7 Ldw. Field Hospital.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │3 Ldw. Field Hospital.       │515 Vet. Hospital.
              │7 Ldw. Field Hospital.       │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 12:

  The elements below are those grouped under the 797 Postal sector.
  Other elements belonging to the 15th Landwehr Division, but operating
  under other division staffs, are listed as attached to such division.


                                HISTORY.

  (12th Landwehr Regiment: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg. 53d and 55th
          Landwehr Regiments: 7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1915.


OISE.

1. The 15th Landwehr Division (Sack Division) was formed about the month
of March, 1915, from two independent Landwehr brigades (the 10th and
27th) which had been holding, since September, 1914, the sectors of the
Oise south of Noyon.

2. The 10th Brigade, entering Belgium on August 19, was at Tirlemont on
September 1 and had been sent rapidly to the Oise at the beginning of
the retreat from the Marne. It had gone into action at Blerancourt,
Bellefontaine, Cuts, on September 15 and 16. The 27th Brigade, coming
from Aix la Chapelle August 17, had advanced by way of Louvain, Douai,
Cambrai, Bepaume, and Amiens and had likewise been in action on
September 15 and 16 at Rivecourt and Nampcel.

3. After its formation the 15th Landwehr Division continued to occupy
the Oise sector of Thiescourt (Ribecourt) until 1917.


                                 1916.

1. The division held the Oise sector of Thiescourt (southwest of Noyon).


                                 1917.

1. The Oise sector of Thiescourt was held by the division until 1917.

In the middle of March, 1917, the 15th Landwehr Division took part in
the withdrawal of the German troops and retired southeast of St. Quentin
by way of Salency, Chauny, and La Fere.


GALICIA.

2. Relieved at the end of March, it was transferred to the Eastern
Front. Itinerary: Charleroi-Luxemburg-Treves * * * Breslau-Cracow-
Lemberg. (Some elements of the division had already left before the
withdrawal to the Hindenburg line and had entrained at Noyon.)

3. In Galicia the 15th Landwehr Division occupied the sector west of
Brody until the beginning of 1918.

Almost immediately after its arrival the 52d Landwehr Regiment was
withdrawn from the division (April, 1917).

Like the other Landwehr divisions on the Eastern Front, the 15th
Landwehr Division at the end of 1917 had given its best elements to
divisions operating in France (especially to the 111th Division).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division is purely a sector division.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. Early in March the 15th Landwehr Division marched toward Rovno; from
there it was transported to Kiev.

2. On May 11 the division was south of Ekaterinoslav; the 12th Landwehr
Regiment at Sebastopol and the 53d Landwehr Regiment likewise being in
the Crimea.


CAUCASUS.

3. Toward the end of May elements of the division were identified in the
Kertch region, the 12th Landwehr Regiment, however, being on the Vardar
front. The division was still here the latter part of September. During
this time all of the younger men were sent to the Western Front.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                        15th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │23 Bav.      │30 Bav.      │23 Bav.      │30 Bav.
              │             │31 Bav.      │             │31 Bav.
              │             │32 Bav.      │             │32 Bav.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light Cav.   │3 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light Cav.
              │  Rgt.                     │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │7 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 7 Bav. F. A. Rgt.         │23 Bav. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                           │148 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                           │152 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                           │155 Bav. Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│15 Bav. Pion. Btn.:        │15 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 24 Bav. Pion. Co.         │ 24 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 25 Bav. Pion. Co.         │ 25 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │ 15 Bav. T. M. Co.         │ 15 Bav. T. M. Co.
              │ 15 Bav. Tel. Detch.       │ 15 Bav. Searchlight
              │                           │  Section.
              │                           │15 Bav. Signal Command:
              │                           │ 15 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 170 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │25 Bav. Ambulance Co.      │25 Bav. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │64 Bav. Field Hospital.    │64 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │65 Bav. Field Hospital.    │65 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │15 Bav. Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │696 M. T. Col.             │696 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (30th Bavarian Infantry Regiment: 1st Bavarian Corps District. 31st
  Bavarian Infantry Regiment: 2d Bavarian Corps District. 32d Bavarian
            Infantry Regiment: 3d Bavarian Corps District.)


                                 1917.

The 15th Bavarian Division was formed in December, 1916, and January,
1917, at Nuremburg, of elements coming from the three Bavarian corps
districts in the manner of the divisions 231–242; that is to say, a very
large proportion of the men of the 1918 class, together with returned
wounded and sick and men taken from units at the front.

1. From February 1 to March 1, 1917, the three regiments of the division
received instruction for mountain troops in Upper Bavaria, near the
Austrian frontier.

2. On March 1 the 15th Bavarian Division was transferred to the
Charleroi area, where it remained one month; there it received training
in the war of movement.


LORRAINE.

3. At the end of March it was transferred to Lorraine; it occupied the
Leintrey sector (Parroy wood) until the beginning of May.


AISNE.

4. From Lorraine it went to the Laonnois area (Sissonne, La Selve, May
12); went into line southwest of Juvincourt on May 19–20; launched an
attack on June 28–29 southeast of Corbeny, and left the front at the end
of July.

5. After a rest in the Sedan area the division entrained on August 20
for the Verdun front.


MEUSE (HILL 304).

6. Detraining at Stenay and Dun (Aug. 22–24), it went into line north of
Hill 304 (Forges Stream). The French attack on the 24th occasioned
serious losses.


MEUSE (RIGHT BANK).

7. The 15th Bavarian Division was relieved from Hill 304 about October
16; went from there to the right bank of the Meuse, and then into line
at Beaumont (Oct. 24).


                              RECRUITING.

The 15th Bavarian Division is recruited from all of Bavaria.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In September, 1917, the 15th Bavarian Division appeared strong.

In the 31st Bavarian Infantry Regiment two-thirds of the men were
recruits belonging to the 1918 class.

The division suffered few losses on the Verdun front after November,
1917.


                                 1918.

1. During the spring the division made use of the quiet Bezouvaux sector
to train the men in machine gun and assault tactics. It was relieved on
July 23 and rested south of Longwy (Villers la Montagne) until July 4.
It was moved to Sault St. Remy, by Carignan, Sedan, Rethel (July 4–5).
Until the 11th it rested in a camp, when it marched by night toward the
front.


BATTLE OF RHEIMS.

2. On the 15th it was engaged in the offensive east of Prunay. It
advanced to north of Thuizy, suffering very heavy losses, estimated to
have been 30 to 40 per cent. It remained in line until mid-August. After
10 weeks’ rest the division was again engaged about September 1 north of
Prosnes until September 29.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

3. The division was placed in line farther to the east, near Somme Py,
where it remained until about September 29, at which time it was put in
reserve north of Bouillon. In the fighting all three regiments were
exhausted, but the losses of the 31st Bavarian Regiment were
particularly heavy. Six hundred prisoners were taken from the division
at this time.

4. The division rested from October 5 to 10. At this time the 18th
Bavarian Reserve Regiment, from the disbanded Bavarian Ersatz Division,
was divided among the three regiments of the division.

5. It came into line on October 13 east of Grandpre and was engaged on
the United States front until November 11. It did not offer a vigorous
resistance to the American attacks at first, but in late October and
early November it did all in its power to check the American advance.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a third-class. The heavy losses in Champagne
in September and October, the prevalent sickness, political discontent,
and dissatisfaction with Prussia continued to give the division a low
morale.




                             16th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │30.      │28.      │30.      │28.      │30.      │28.
              │         │68.      │         │68.      │         │68.
              │31.      │29.      │31.      │29.      │31.      │29.
              │         │69.      │         │69.      │         │69.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Cuirassier Rgt.  │                   │8 Cuirassier Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (3 and 4 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │16 Brig.:          │16 Brig.:          │16 Brig.:
              │ 23 F. A. Rgt.     │ 23 F. A. Rgt.     │ 23 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 44 F. A. Rgt.     │ 44 F. A. Rgt.     │ 44 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 and 3 Field Cos. │1 Pion. Btn. No. 8:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 8:
   Liaisons.  │  1 Pion. Btn. No. │                   │
              │  8.               │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Field Co. 8     │ 2 Co. 8 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 3 Field Co. 8     │ 3 Co. 8 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 16 Pont. Engs.    │ 16 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 16 Tel. Detch.    │ 16 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 16 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │113 Labor Btn.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │30.      │28.      │30.      │28.
              │         │29.      │         │29.
              │         │68.      │         │68.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 7 Hus. Rgt. │1 Sqn. 7 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │16 Art. Command:   │16 Art. Command:
              │ 23 F. A. Rgt.     │ 23 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 32 Ft. A. Btn. (3
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 1252 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1253 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1307 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│125 Pion Btn. (1   │8 Pion. Btn:
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No.   │
              │  8):              │
              │ 2 Co. 8 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 8 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 8 Pions.    │ 3 Co. 8 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 169 T. M. Co.     │ 169 T. M. Co.
              │ 293 Searchlight   │ 44 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 16 Tel. Detch.    │16 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 16 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 120 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │20 Ambulance Co.   │20 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │80 Field Hospital. │76 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │80 Field Hospital.
              │                   │16 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │549 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │188 and 417 Pigeon
              │                   │  Lofts.
              │                   │208 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │7 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │57 Art. Observation
              │                   │  Section (Flash-
              │                   │  spotters).
              │                   │10 Co. 97 Labor
              │                   │  Btn.
              │                   │38 Div. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │1294 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │(Elements attached
              │                   │  July 17, 1918;
              │                   │  from German
              │                   │  documents.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1914.


ARDENNES-MARNE.

1. In August, 1914, the 16th Division (belonging to the 8th Army Corps,
together with 16th Division) was a part of the 4th German Army (Duke of
Wurttemberg). It entered Luxemburg at the beginning of August (28th
Infantry Regiment), there received the rest of its reservists on the
7th, entered Belgian Luxemburg on the 20th, and went into action on the
23d at Bièvre and Gédinne. From there, by way of Sedan and Donchery
(Aug. 26), forming the extreme right of the 4th Army, it went through
Champagne, reached Suippes on September 3, and crossed the Marne near
Vitry le François, where it came into contact with the French forces. It
retired, having suffered heavily, by way of Somme-Yèvre—Herpont-St. Mard
sur Auve-Somme Bionne, and stopped near Perthes les Hurlus, where it
made a stand.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. The 16th Division occupied the sector Souain-Perthes during the
winter of 1914 and 1915; it there withstood strong attacks.


BELGIUM.

3. In November and December, 1914, the division detached certain of its
elements (31st Brigade, 29th and 69th Infantry Regiments) in Belgium, in
the Langemarck area.


ALSACE.

4. In the middle of December the 31st Brigade was sent to Alsace for
work near Mulhouse. It formed a part of the Fuchs Division, was in line
north of Thann and rejoined the 30th Brigade opposite Perthes at the end
of December.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. Withdrawn from the Champagne front about April 18–19, 1915, the 16th
Division was sent to rest in the Briey area, then transferred, about May
15, north of Arras.

2. It lost very heavily at Souchez and Neuville-St. Vaast, withstanding
the offensive of May. The 69th Infantry Regiment lost 42 officers and
1,609 men. (Official List of Casualties.)


AISNE.

3. The division left Artois in the middle of June and, after a few days
of rest near St. Quentin, went into line in the middle of July, east of
Soissons (Chavonne-Soupir sector).


NOUVRON.

4. At the end of October it took over the sector of Nouvron, west of
Soissons.


                                 1916.

1. The 16th Division remained on the Aisne front until the end of July,
1916.


SOMME.

2. Entraining at Folembray, it was transferred to Ham and Nesle. After a
short stay in the Maucourt sector (northwest of Roye) at the beginning
of August, it took part in the battle of the Somme near Pozières-
Thiepval, where it suffered very heavy losses (Aug. 10–24); the 3d
Company of the 29th Infantry Regiment lost 131 men at Pozières (letter).


BERRY AU BAC.

3. In September the reorganized 16th Division (especially with men of
the 1917 class) occupied a quiet sector west of Berry au Bac. In October
the 69th Infantry Regiment was withdrawn from the 16th Division, which
now has three regiments (30th Brigade).


SOMME.

4. Relieved about the 3d of October from the sector west of Berry au
Bac, the division entrained at Laon and was transferred to the Somme. It
went into line (Lesboeufs-Sailly-Saillisel) on October 9 and suffered
heavy losses.


RUSSIA.

5. On October 26 the division left the Somme, returned for a few days
(Nov. 5–16) to the front northwest of Soissons and entrained for Russia
on November 20. Itinerary: Liege-Aix la Chapelle-Dusseldorf-Hanover-
Magdeburg-Berlin-Skernewitzy-Warsaw-Brest- Litowsk-Kovel-Turisk. It
detrained on November 25.


                                 1916.


GALICIA.

1. On the Russian front the 16th Division occupied the Kiselin sector,
south of Kovel (until the beginning of May, 1917).


FRANCE.

2. On May 17, entraining near Kieslin, the division returned to France
via Vladimir Volynski-Kovel-Brest Litowsk-Warsaw-Kalich-Cottbus-Leipzig-
Cassel-Coblentz-Gerolstein-Sedan-Attigny, where it detrained on May 21.


FLANDERS.

3. After a rest at Ecordal, on June 4 the division was sent to Flanders.
Detraining at Orchies, it marched to Wambrechies; it there remained for
12 days. On June 26 it went into line at Warneton, where the British
attack of July 31 did not cause it any serious losses.

4. About the 23d of September the 16th Division was sent to rest in the
Bruges area.


YPRES.

At the beginning of October it was sent to the Ypres front.

Some elements were engaged on October 3 and 4 against the British
attacks east of Zonnebeke. On October 6 the division went to the
southeast of Poelcappelle and supported the local offensives, against
the British troops (Oct. 9–12).

The 16th Division remained behind the front from October 12 to November
24.

At this date it took over the sector north of Becelaere and a short time
afterwards that of Passchendaele (east), where it was relieved about the
middle of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 16th Division is recruited almost exclusively from the Rhine
Provinces.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Before being engaged on the Somme the 16th Division had gained a
wonderful reputation. It was known as the “Iron Division.” In the battle
of the Somme it did not, however, distinguish itself in any way.

At Warneton and at Ypres (June and October, 1917) it fought stubbornly
in spite of its heavy losses.


                                 1918.


YPRES.

1. The division was at rest in Belgium (Meulebeke area) until about
March 1, when it was engaged east of Passchendaele until March 23.

2. It entrained at Pitthem and moved to reserve at Tourcoing until April
4. Later it was at Lille until April 10.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

3. The division was engaged on April 4 north of Neuve Chapelle and south
of Merville on the 12th. On the 17th the 68th Regiment was to attack but
was unable to do so through weakness and lack of food. Two regimental
commanders were included in the heavy casualties. It was relieved east
of St. Venant on May 1.


MERVILLE.

4. The division rested in Belgium (Braine, south of Brussels) for about
two weeks. On the 19th it was in line southwest of Merville. It was
relieved by the 25th Division on the night of July 6–7. After 10 days’
rest the division returned to its former sector and continued in line
until August 18.

5. After leaving the line on August 18 it rested near Haubourdin until
the 26th, when it entrained for Raches (north of Douai). It marched
toward the front east of Arras by Douai and Vitry, entering the line
near Vis en Artois on August 30.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

6. The division fought near Dury and Hendecourt until mid-September,
losing more than 1,500 prisoners. It rested at Bruges until its return
to line north of Lens on September 26. It was driven back toward Pont a
Vendin and Courrieres, northwest of Orchies, Hollain, and Antoing. The
division was withdrawn about November 6 from the Antoing area.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a second-class division. During 1918 it fought
entirely on the British front, chiefly on the defensive.




                         16th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │29 Res.  │28 Res.  │29 Res.  │28 Res.  │29 Res.  │28 Res.
              │         │68 Res.  │         │68 Res.  │         │68 Res.
              │31 Res.  │29 Res.  │31 Res.  │29 Res.  │31 Res.  │29 Res.
              │         │65 Res.  │         │65 Res.  │         │65 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │   Feb. to July.
              │         │         │         │         │         │28 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │         │68 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │         │25 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │   Aug. to Sept.
              │         │         │         │         │         │190.
              │         │         │         │         │68 Res.  │
              │         │         │         │         │         │Hippe
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Rgt.
              │         │         │         │         │   Sept. to Dec.
              │         │         │         │         │         │190.
              │         │         │         │         │         │29 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │         │390.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Heavy Res. Cav.  │2 Heavy Res. Cav.  │2 Heavy Res. Cav.
              │  Rgt. (3 Sqns.).  │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │16 Res. F. A. Rgt. │16 Res. F. A. Rgt. │16 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │  (8 Btries.).     │  (9 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No. 8.│  Pion. Btn. No. 8.│  Pion. Btn. No. 8.
              │                   │16 Res. Pont. Engs.│10 Co. 28 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │16 Res. Tel. Detch.│216 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │16 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │16 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │31 Res.  │29 Res.  │31 Res.  │29 Res.
              │         │30 Res.  │         │30 Res.
              │         │68 Res.  │         │68 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 (?) Heavy Res.   │4 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier
              │  Cav. Rgt.        │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │106 Art. Command:  │106 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 16 Res. F. A.     │ 16 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Regt. (9         │
              │  Btries.).        │
              │                   │ 127 Ft. Art. Btn.
              │                   │ 724 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 810 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1352 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(316) Pion. Btn.:  │316 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 8      │ 1 Res. Co. 8
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 8      │ 2 Res. Co. 8
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 216 T. M. Co.     │ 8 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 416 Tel. Detch.   │ 216 T. M. Co.
              │                   │416 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 416 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 130 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │512 Ambulance Co.  │512 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │39 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │416 Vet. Hospital. │40 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │416 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │715 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │16 and 134 Art.
              │                   │  Observation
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │16 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │213 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │2.208 Pigeon Loft.
              │                   │(Elements attached
              │                   │  Sept. 30, 1918;
              │                   │  from German
              │                   │  documents.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1914.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 16th Reserve Division with the 15th
Reserve Division was a part of the 8th Reserve Corps and belonged to the
4th Army (Duke of Wurttemberg).


CHAMPAGNE.

2. On August 14, 1914, it entered Luxemburg; on the 21st, Belgium. It
went into action at St. Hubert on the 22d; at Matton on the 24th;
crossed the Meuse at Sedan with heavy losses August 26–28. Entering
Champagne by way of Vouziers, it took part in the battle of the Marne,
along the canal from the Marne to the Rhine (Heiltz le Maurupt-
Bignicourt-Le Buisson).

3. On September 9 it began its retreat, and retired by way of Suippes
(Sept. 14) to Cernay en Dormois. About September 20 it stopped in the
area of Minaucourt-Massiges and took up its position there.

4. The 16th Reserve Division occupied this sector of Champagne (north of
Massiges) until the month of October, 1915. (On the 30th of January,
1915, the 29th Reserve Infantry Regiment had had a total of 79 officers
and 3,090 men casualties.)


                                 1915.

1. At the time of the French offensive in Champagne the 16th Reserve
Division went into battle east of the road from Tahure to Perthes les
Hurlus (Sept. 25). It was then a part of a new group under the orders of
Gen. Ditfurth.

2. Having suffered heavily from these attacks, the 16th Reserve Division
was relieved about October 15 and sent to the rest in the Chesne area.
Between October 8 and 14 no less than 223 men came to the 5th Company of
the 68th Reserve Infantry Regiment as replacements (in this number,
recruits of the 1915 class who had had four months’ instruction).


AISNE.

3. At the end of October the 16th Reserve Division was sent north of the
Aisne, where it took over the sector between Soissons and Vailly.


                                 1916.

1. The 16th Reserve Division remained in line east of Soissons until
February 16, 1916.


AISNE.

2. In the middle of February it went to the west of Soissons, in the
sector of Moulin sous Touvent-Autreches, which it occupied until the
month of October.

3. In February the 16th Reserve Division lost two of its regiments, the
65th and 29th Reserve Infantry Regiments, which were replaced by a
single regiment, the 35th Reserve Infantry Regiment. It was then
composed of the 25th, 28th, and 68th Reserve Infantry Regiments.

4. At the beginning of the battle of the Somme, July 2, the 25th Reserve
Infantry Regiment (2 battalions) was sent by itself as a reinforcement
in the Barelaux area. The 28th Reserve Infantry Regiment left the 16th
Reserve Division at the end of July to be attached to the 185th
Division, likewise on the Somme.

5. The 16th Reserve Division, composed of the 68th Reserve Infantry
Regiment and of two other regiments, the 190th Infantry Regiment and the
Provisional Hippe Regiment, continued to occupy the sector of Moulin
sous Touvent (August).

6. The 68th Reserve Infantry Regiment in its turn was sent to the Somme.
It went into action near Deniécourt (September-October). One may
calculate its losses by the fact that the 5th Company received at least
55 men as replacements between October 2 and 6.

7. The 16th Reserve Division then comprised the 29th Reserve Infantry
Regiment, once more attached to the division, the 190th Infantry
Regiment, and the 390th Infantry Regiment, which replaced the Hippe
Regiment above mentioned. Thus constituted, it was retained in the area
Moulin sous Touvent-Autreches until the month of October.


SOMME.

8. Relieved on October 15, it entrained at Tergnier and was transferred
to the Somme. It took part in the St. Pierre-Vaast wood in local
operations, in the course of which it suffered heavily (Nov. 4 to 28).

9. About December 12 the 16th Reserve Division was sent north of the
Aisne. It went into line in the Cerny en Laonnois area.

At this time the division was once more reorganized. It again received
the 68th Reserve Infantry Regiment, which came back from the Somme. The
190th Infantry Regiment was transferred to the 47th Division, and the
390th Infantry Regiment, which was assigned to the 211th Division, was
replaced by the 30th Reserve Infantry Regiment.


                                 1917.

1. With this composition (29th, 68th, and 30th Reserve Infantry
Regiments) the 16th Reserve Division occupied the sector of Cerny en
Laonnois from January to April, 1917.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

2. It underwent the French offensive of April 16 between Chivy and the
Cerny sugar refinery, where it suffered very heavily (1,100 prisoners).

3. Relieved on the Aisne front about April 20, the division was sent to
the Sissonne Camp, where it was reorganized (beginning of May).


LORRAINE.

4. About May 10 it went into line between the Sanon and Gondrexon, in
Lorraine.


ALSACE.

5. The division was sent to Alsace about June 20 and remained in the
Ferette area, where its training was vigorously carried out.


GALICIA.

6. On July 7, 1917, the 16th Reserve Division entrained for the Eastern
Front.

7. Detraining on the 12th in the area of Rohatyn-Bourchtyn (Galicia), it
went into action on the 15th near Halucz, along the Dneister, and
reached Khotin, where the Russian retreat halted.

8. At the end of August it occupied a new sector north of Bojan, east of
Czernowitz (taking of Bojan, Aug. 27).


FRANCE.

9. The 16th Reserve Division was withdrawn from the front about November
15 and entrained for France near Czernowitz (Nov. 20). Itinerary:
Kolomea-Stanislau-Lemberg-Przeymsl-Cracow-Oppeln-Breslau-Dresden-
Chemnitz-Nuremberg-Karlsruhe-Haguenau-Saareguemines-Thionville-Sedan-
Bucy les Pierrepont, where it detrained on November 29.


CAMBRAI.

10. Going into action southwest of Cambrai (Marcoing) on December 6, it
was still in this sector at the beginning of March, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 16th Reserve Division is recruited from the Rhine Province and all
the Rhine districts. Thus, in October, 1916, it received men from the
mining district of Westphalia, and also in March, 1917.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 16th Reserve Division was a good division. It was very much
exhausted on April 16 and 17, 1917, in the Cerny sector. During this
action the 30th Reserve Infantry Regiment was remarkable for its
desperate resistance and had only 50 prisoners taken.

During its stay in Lorraine (May and June, 1917) the 16th Reserve
Division maintained a purely defensive attitude. The losses suffered on
the Aisne and the nature of the replacements received appear to have
sensibly diminished the combat value of the 30th Reserve Infantry
Regiment.

In October, 1917, on the Galician front, the 16th Reserve Division was
considered incapable of participating in active operations because of
the large proportion of older men and the weakness of its effectives
(according to prisoners’ statements).


                                 1918.


PICARDY.

1. The division attacked on March 21 south of Marcoing. It was taken out
on the 3d day of the offensive and sent to rest in the Ancre area. About
April 10 the division relieved the 107th Division on the Ancre and held
a sector until the 107th Division returned and relieved on April 27.


BATTLE OF THE SCARPE-SOMME.

2. The division rested near Puisieux until May 15, when it entered the
line northwest of Beaumont Hamel and remained until about June 15. It
rested in the neighborhood of Haplincourt until about July 4, when it
returned to the Beaumont-Hamel sector. The British attack in August
forced the division to retire through Muraumont (23d), Grandcourt
(24th), Le Barque (25th), and Flers (27th). It was withdrawn on August
28, after suffering heavy losses.

3. The division again came into line on September 5 north of Equancourt.
In five days’ fighting it lost 600 prisoners. On September 10 it went to
rest in the Bruges area, where it was until October 1.


BELGIUM.

4. On October 1 the division relieved the 16th Bavarian Division on the
Ypres battle front, southeast of Staden. Throughout October it was
engaged at Hooglede, Staden, and near Wynghene. It was withdrawn on
October 28 and remained out of line in the Ghent area until the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was engaged as a sector-
holding unit in active fronts during 1918.




                        16th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │2 Ldw.        │3 Ldw.        │2 Ldw.        │3 Ldw.
              │              │374 (Jacobi   │              │374.
              │              │  Rgt.).      │              │
              │              │379 Ldw.      │              │379 Ldw.
              │              │  (Tietz      │              │
              │              │  Rgt.).      │              │
              │              │378 (3 C.     │              │
              │              │  Dist.).     │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │94 Cav. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │101 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │2 Ers. Co. 18 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │157 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │2 Ldw.        │3 Ldw.        │2 Ldw.        │3 Ldw.
              │              │374.          │              │374.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │379 Ldw.      │              │379 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier Rgt.     │1 Sqn. 6 Cuirassier Rgt.
              │5 Sqn. 94 Cav. Rgt. (?)      │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │101 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 101 F. A. Rgt.              │791 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │794 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1046 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(416) Pion Btn.:             │3 Ers. Co. 18 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Co. 34 Res. Pions.        │1 Landst. Co. 8 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 3 Ers. Co. 18 Pions.        │83 Searchlight Section.
              │ 316 T. M. Co.               │516 Signal Command:
              │ 2 Light Fort Searchlight    │ 516 Tel. Detch.
              │  Section.                   │
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │71 Ambulance Co.             │71 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │21 Field Hospital.           │21 Field Hospital.
              │142 Field Hospital.          │216 Vet. Hospital.
              │151 Field Hospital.          │
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │996 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │1 C. Dist. Landst. Inf. Btn. │
              │  No. 22.                    │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

      (374th Infantry Regiment and 3d Landwehr Regiment: 1st Corps
        District—East Prussia. 379th Landwehr Regiment: 3d Corps
                         District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1915.


POLAND.

1. The 16th Landwehr Division (Landwehr Division of Koenigsberg, Sommer
Division), providing the war garrison of Koenigsberg, took part in the
battles on the East Prussian frontier in October, 1914, with a few of
its future elements (1st Ersatz Battalion of the 12th Landwehr
Regiment).

It was in the region of Mariampol from April until the end of August,
1915. It was identified in the Lipsk sector on August 30.


RUSSIA.

2. After the summer offensive it was sent to the sector between Krevo
and Smorgoni (September).


                                 1916.

1. The division was in the Krevo-Smorgoni sector during 1916.


                                 1917.

1. Krevo-Smorgoni sector.

On July 22 and 23, 1917, the 16th Landwehr Division suffered very heavy
losses withstanding Russian attacks in this area.

During the months which followed it gave its best elements to troops on
the Western Front or to those assigned to the Western Front. At the end
of November 70 per cent of the men of the 379th Landwehr Regiment were
between the ages of 40 and 47 years (Russian interrogatory).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 16th Landwehr Division has always been on the Russian front. Its
combat value appears mediocre.


                                 1918.

1. The 16th Landwehr Division was still in line near Krevno in January.
Moving then toward the east, it was near Orcha in April, and near
Kharkov early in May. The 346th Infantry Regiment, which had remained in
Russia after the departure for France of the two other regiments of the
14th Landwehr Division seems to have been attached to the 16th Landwehr
Division.


SEA OF AZOV.

2. Early in September the division was identified in the Taganrog
region.


ROUMANIA.

3. The division left the Don region and went to Constantinople. It did
not remain here however, but left immediately for Roumania, being
identified at Constanza on October 28.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                        16th Bavarian Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │9 Bav.       │11 Bav.      │9 Bav.       │8 Bav.
              │             │14 Bav.      │             │11 Bav.
              │             │21 Bav.      │             │14 Bav.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light Cav.   │4 Sqn. 7 Bav. Light Cav.
              │  Rgt.                     │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │8 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 3 Bav. F. A. Rgt.         │1 Abt. 5 Bav. Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                           │709 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │130 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                           │144 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                           │161 Bav. Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(16 Bav.) Pion. Btn.:      │16 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 14 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.    │ 14 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 15 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.    │ 15 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 16 Bav. T. M. Co.         │16 Bav. Signal Command:
              │ 16 Bav. Tel. Detch.       │ 16 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 104 Bav. Wireless Detch.
              │                           │ 16 Bav. T. M. Co.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │8 Bav. Ambulance Co.       │8 Bav. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │29 Bav. Field Hospital.    │29 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │52 Bav. Field Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │Mt. Col.                   │697 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (3d Bavarian Corps District.)


                                 1917.

The 16th Bavarian Division was formed at the end of January, 1917, by
taking three infantry regiments from existing Bavarian divisions—the 6th
Bavarian Division furnished the 11th Bavarian Infantry Regiment; the 5th
Bavarian Division the 14th Bavarian Infantry Regiment; the 6th Bavarian
Reserve Division the 21st Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment. The 3d
Field Artillery Regiment came from the 6th Bavarian Division.


ARTOIS.

1. On February 12, 1917, the 16th Bavarian Division replaced the 6th
Bavarian Reserve Division south of Lens, opposite Souchez. It suffered
serious losses there in February and March (raids by Canadian troops).
After a period of rest, in March, in the Douai area, the division
returned opposite Souchez and suffered in the British attack of April 9,
which forced it back beyond Vimy Ridge. It was relieved on April 11,
very much exhausted.


FLANDERS-MESSINES.

2. Toward the end of April the 16th Bavarian Division took over the calm
sector of Armentieres (East), south of the Lys (Deulemont-Frelinghien).
At the beginning of June, on account of the menace of the British attack
on the Messines front, the division was transferred north of the Lys.
During the battle which started on June 9 it was not engaged as a whole;
it sent some of its elements southeast of Messines to reenforce the 4th
Bavarian Division.

3. The 16th Bavarian Division left the Lys sector, beginning of
September, to go into reserve near Dadizeele, east of Ypres.

4. On September 20 it came up to replace the Bavarian Ersatz Division,
which was very much exhausted by the British attack. It counterattacked
north of the Lys. Its losses were such that it was relieved the next
day.

5. After a period of rest at Bruges, the 16th Bavarian Division occupied
the coast sector (Lombartzyde) from October 25 to November 22.


CAMBRESIS.

6. Transferred to the Cambrai front, it went into line on December 3
(Bullecourt-Queant) and launched a local attack on the 12th.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 16th Bavarian Division appears to be of good combat value. It may be
compared with the best Bavarian Divisions. It was very much exhausted at
Ypres in 1917, but in general its morale remained high.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division did not participate in the initial attack of March 21,
but remained in reserve of the front at Rumancourt. On the 23d it
marched toward the front through Vaulx Vraucourt. The division was
engaged at Sapignies on March 25, and on the 27th advanced on
Gomiecourt, Courcelles, and Moyenneville. The division was relieved on
April 7 and rested until the 26th.


YPRES.

2. It was reengaged south of the Scarpe, south of Feuchy, until May 19,
when it moved north and took over a sector at Dranoutre. The route
followed was through Cambrai-Tourcoing-Bousbecque. On June 20 it went
out to rest in the Lille area until the beginning of July. It returned
to its former sector on July 4 and remained there until the end of July.


BATTLE OF THE SCARPE-SOMME.

3. It rested in the Lille area until August 20, when it moved south and
was engaged west of Bapaume (Grevillers) in a German counterattack. It
was thrown back on Avesnes les Bapaume (26th), Bancourt (30th), Villers
au Flos (1st), until its relief on September 5. Losses of the division
were heavy in this fighting.

4. The division went into reserve in Belgium at Iseghem until the 28th.
At this time the 8th Bavarian Regiment, coming from the 14th Bavarian
Division, replaced the 21st Bavarian Reserve, which was disbanded.


BATTLE OF DIXMUDE.

5. It was engaged north of Ypres and west of Roulers (Westroosebeke)
from September 28 to October 5, with very heavy losses. The division was
out of line for 10 days and then came back on the 15th southwest of
Thourout. The Belgium advance forced it back southeast of Bruges (Oct.
18–19). On the 28th the division was relieved, but was obliged to return
to line on November 3 and fought until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was engaged largely in
holding defensive but active sectors on the British front in 1918.




                             17th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │33.      │75.      │33.      │75.      │34.      │75.
              │         │76.      │         │76.      │         │89 Gren.
              │34.      │89 Gren. │34.      │89 Gren. │         │90 Fus.
              │         │90 Fus.  │         │90 Fus.  │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │16 Dragoon Rgt. (3 │                   │16 Dragoon Rgt. (3
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │17 Brig.:          │17 Brig.:          │17 Brig.:
              │ 24 F. A. Rgt.     │ 24 F. A. Rgt.     │ 24 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 60 F. A. Rgt.     │ 60 F. A. Rgt.     │ 60 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 9:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 9:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 9 Pions.│ 1 Co. 9 Pions.
              │                   │ 17 Tel. Detch.    │ 17 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 17 Pont. Engs.    │ 17 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 17 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │13 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Sections.
              │                   │                   │33 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │39 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │34.      │75.      │34.      │75.
              │         │89 Gren. │         │89.
              │         │90 Fus.  │         │90.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 16 Dragoon  │4 Sqn. 16 Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │17 Art. Command:   │17 Art. Command:
              │ 60 F. A. Rgt.     │ 60 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 24 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (2, 3, and 4
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 940 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1329 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1270 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│126 Pion. Btn.:    │126 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 9 Pions.    │ 1 Co. 9 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 9 Pions.    │ 5 Co. 9 Pions.
              │ 17 T. M. Co.      │ 17 T. M. Co.
              │ 17 Tel. Detch.    │ 62 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │17 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 17 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 138 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │22 Ambulance Co.   │22 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │84 Field Hospital. │84 Field Hospital.
              │89 Field Hospital. │89 Field Hospital.
              │17 Vet. Hospital.  │17 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │550 M. T. Col.     │550 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │52 M. G. S. S.     │
              │  Detch.           │
              │13 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Section.         │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

         (9th Corps District—Hanseatic cities and Mecklenburg.)


                                 1914.

Upon mobilization, the 17th Division with the 18th Division formed the
9th Army Corps (Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklemburg). It gave its 81st
Brigade to the 17th Reserve Division (9th Reserve Corps) (new
organization).


BELGIUM.

1. August, 1914, the 17th Division formed a part of the 1st German Army
(Von Kluck). On the 3d of August it sent one of its brigades, the 34th
(Mecklenburg), to Liege, where it was rejoined by its reservists and by
the other brigade, the 33d (Hanseatic), (Aug. 9–13). On August 20 the
division was with the 9th Corps of Louvain. It went into action against
the British troops on the 24th. It went around Maubeuge on the 25th and
passed through Nesle, Roye, Vezaponin (north bank of the Aisne)
September 1.


MARNE.

2. The division took part in the battle of the Marne at Chatillon sur
Morin (Sept. 6), Esternay-Courgivaux (Sept. 7 and 8). It withdrew by way
of Betz, Crépy en Valois Pierrefonds, crossed the Aisne at Rethondes
(Sept. 11), and stopped in the area Carlepont, Nampcel, Audignicourt
(Sept. 13). It went into action on the front Tracy le Mont east of
Moulin sous Touvent (Sept. 16–21).


OISE.

3. In October it took up the position near Bailly (from the Oise to east
of St. Mard) and remained there until the middle of November, 1915. Some
of its elements occupied the right bank of the Oise near Connectancourt
(Oct. 5 to Dec. 25).

4. November 17 it attacked Tracy le Val.


                                 1915.

From January to October, 1915, it held the sector on the left bank of
the Oise, east edge of the St. Mard wood. At the end of March the 76th
Infantry Regiment was withdrawn and transferred to the 111th Division.

1. June 14 to 16 certain elements of the division counterattacked at
Quennevieres.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Withdrawn from the sector of the Oise (about Oct. 15), the division
was transferred to Champagne. It occupied the front between the road
Souain, Somme Py, and St. Hilaire, St. Souplet. It launched an attack on
December 7.


                                 1916.

1. The division was retained on the Champagne front northwest of Souain
until June, 1916.

2. Relieved in the middle of June, it was sent to rest in the area
southwest of Charleville (second half of June).


SOMME.

It entrained for the Somme between July 2 and 4. Certain elements of the
17th Division appeared in the sector of Biaches la Maisonnette, on July
9 and 10. The entire division was in line between Barleux and Belloy
(July 10 to 25) and suffered heavy losses.

3. The division was withdrawn from the front and reorganized (end of
July to Aug. 15).

4. From August 16 to August 20 to the middle of September it again
occupied the sector of Barleux-Belloy.


ARTOIS.

5. At the beginning of October the division was sent to Artois. It held
the line opposite Arras, between Roclincourt and Bailly, until December
24.


                                 1917.


SOMME.

1. About January 9, 1917, the 17th Division occupied the sector of Py,
south of the Ancre. Local combats in the neighborhood of Grandcourt and
Miraumont (in January and February) caused it serious losses.

2. The division was withdrawn from the Somme front about March 20, at
the time of the German retirement. It rested southwest of Douai (end of
March and beginning of April).


ARTOIS.

3. On April 10 it was sent as a reenforcement to Arras to oppose the
British offensive. It held the sector of Oppy-Gavrelle and suffered a
great deal in the course of counterattacks. It was relieved on April 25.
From March 27 to April 24 the 7th Company of 90th Fusiliers lost 115
men. (British Summary of Information.)

4. After a rest in the Tournai area until May 9 the 17th Division went
into line in the sector of Boursies, Demicourt (west of Cambrai).

5. Relieved from this calm sector on May 28, it was sent to rest in the
Cambrai area until June 9.


FLANDERS.

6. On this date it was transferred to Roulers by way of Valenciennes-
Mons and put on the Ypres front north of Hooge. It was withdrawn three
days before the British attack, on July 27, but suffered heavy losses
from the bombardment.

7. For five weeks, until September 23, the division occupied the calm
sector of Havrincourt (south of the road Bapaume-Cambrai).

8. On September 23 it again entrained for Flanders. Sent by way of
Cambrai to Ledeghem, it went into action in the Polygon wood sector
(northeast of Ypres). On September 26 it counterattacked without success
and with great losses. It only remained in line for two days. In these
engagements the 75th Infantry Regiment lost 30 officers and 1,000 men
(British Summary of Information.)

9. Relieved on September 28 from the Flanders front, the 17th Division
was sent south of Lens on October 17. It was still there on February,
1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 17th Division is recruited from the Hanseatic towns and the Duchies
of Mecklenburg. The sectional character was accentuated in June 1917,
when the 89th Grenadiers took from the regiments of the 18th Division
all the inhabitants of Mecklenburg who were in them. (Summary of
Information, June 28.)

However, one must take into account a certain proportion of Poles from
the 6th Corps District, received in the replacements of 1917.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

On July 11, 1916, the following appreciation was written of the 9th Army
Corps:

“The 9th Army Corps gives the impression of a very good corps which
would be a formidable adversary. The intellectual level of officers and
men is appreciably higher than that ordinarily encountered in the German
Army. This fact is due to the recruiting which, in most cases, is done
in Hamburg, Bremen, and Luebeck.”

After the last combats of Flanders (July and September, 1917), the 17th
Division was considered as having its combative force perceptibly
diminished on account of its losses.

In a general manner, the division has given a good account of itself in
the course of its battles.

The Danes, who are numerous in its ranks, fight well and do not appear
to occasion any weakness. (October, 1917.)


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was relieved on the Acheville sector on February 17–18
by the 12th Reserve Division and went to rest near Douai until mid-
March. On March 21 it was engaged near Lagnicourt and Moreuil (southeast
of Arras), north of Vaulx-Vraucourt (22d), at Beliagnies and Lapigines
(24th). The division was relieved on the 25th, after losing 50 per cent
of its effectives. It rested until April 1, when it was reengaged near
Bucquoy until the 10th.

2. The division was relieved by the 5th Bavarian Division, retired to
the Favreuil-Sapignies-Beugnatre area on the 10th, and the next day went
into billets near Cambrai. Later it moved to the Valenciennes area. On
May 24 it left Bouchain and traveled via Marquion to Bapaume, where it
came into line on that evening. While resting the division had undergone
no special training. It is known to have received 1,300 men as a draft
during this period.

3. It was reengaged in the Bucquoy sector from May 24 to June 23, when
it returned to rest near Bouchain until July 17. The division was moved
to Laon on July 24–25 and from there marched to the Vesle front by
stage.


VESLE.

4. About August 1 the division went into line between Bazoches and Mont
Notre Dame. It fell back on the Aisne toward Bourg et Comin from
September 3–4, where it was relieved on September 15–16. The German
communique of August 28 mentioned the 89th Grenadier Regiment for its
conduct against the Americans at Bazoches.


AISNE-AILETTE.

5. The division was again in line on September 18 at Jouy-Aizy sector
(north of Vailly). It retired to the Ailette on the 30th and shifted by
rail to Semide.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. On October 4 it was engaged southeast of Machault (Somme Py road).
The French attack forced it back to east of Attigny, where it was
relieved on the 19th.

7. The division rested five days near Mouzon. It entrained on October 26
and moved to Rozoy, reaching there on the 27–28th.


ARDENNES.

8. It was put into line northwest of Chateau Porcien on the St. Fergeux-
Recouvrance Road on October 28–29th. For its fighting east of Banonge on
the 29th, the 90th Regiment was complimented by the German communique of
the 30th. (558 prisoners were lost by the division on the 29th.) In
November the division was driven back through Seraincourt, Remaucourt,
Chaumont Porcien, Rocquigny, St. Jean aux Bois.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. It was one of the best German
divisions. Its conduct in the March offensive won the Kaiser’s praise.
Until August it was relatively fresh, but after that was engaged almost
constantly in efforts to check the Allied offensive in Champagne. At the
end the division was so reduced in numbers that it could muster but one
or two battalions.

Its morale was excellent until late in the fall, when it was lowered
noticeably. A mutiny and other acts of indiscipline were reported.




                         17th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │81.      │162.     │81.      │162.     │81.      │162.
              │         │163.     │         │163.     │         │163.
              │33 Res.  │75 Res.  │33 Res.  │75 Res.  │33 Res.  │75 Res.
              │         │76 Res.  │         │76 Res.  │         │76 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Res. Hus. Rgt. (3│6 Res. Hus. Rgt.   │6 Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │17 Res. F. A. Rgt. │17 Res. F. A. Rgt. │17 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │  (8 Btries.).     │  (10 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  Btn. No. 9.      │  Btn. No. 9.      │  Btn. No. 9.
              │                   │17 Res. Pont. Engs.│340 Pion. Co.
              │                   │17 Res. Tel. Detch.│217 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │17 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │17 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │81.      │16.      │81.      │162.
              │         │162.     │         │163.
              │         │76 Res.  │         │76 Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 6 Res. Hus. │1 Sqn. 16 Res. Hus.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │110 Art. Command:  │110 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 17 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 17 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (10 Btries.)     │
              │  (Nov. 4).        │
              │                   │ 3 Abt. 26 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (7 and 9
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 703 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1245 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1299 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(317) Pion. Btn.:  │317 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 9 Pions.    │4 Co. 9 Pions.
              │ 340 Pion. Co.     │340 Pion. Co.
              │ 217 T. M. Co.     │42 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 255 Searchlight   │417 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 417 Tel. Detch.   │417 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │111 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │509 Ambulance Co.  │509 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │501 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │41 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │417 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │716 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (9th Corps District.—Schleswig—Holstein and the Hanseatic cities.)


                                 1914.

1. The 17th Reserve Division formed with the 18th Reserve Division, the
9th Reserve Corps. One of its brigades is a surplus brigade of the 9th
Army Corps (the 81st).

2. During the first part of the month of August, 1914, the 17th Reserve
Division was used to guard the coast of Schleswig-Holstein.


BELGIUM.

3. Entraining on August 23 for Belgium, it was at Louvain on the 25th,
at Brussels on the 30th (until Sept. 3). It reached Termonde on
September 4, and remained outside of Antwerp.


OISE.

4. On September 9, it was transferred in haste to the Valenciennes area
and then sent to the Oise. It detrained on the 13th at Chauny and went
into action on the right bank of the Oise, south of Noyon (Sept. 15 to
20).

5. About October 7 the 17th Reserve Division was sent to the vicinity of
Roye, where it lost heavily.

6. About the middle of November the division occupied the front between
the Avre and Roye. On December 20 it was in line between Ribecourt and
Thiescourt.


                                 1915.

On January 4, 1915, the 75th Reserve Infantry Regiment entrained at
Noyon for Upper Alsace (Hartmannswillerkopf), and did not return to the
division until May.


ROYE (SOMME).

1. On February 6 the division left the banks of the Oise to go back to
the area south of the Avre, between Lassigny and Roye. It remained in
this sector until the month of October.

2. Toward the end of September elements of the division formed a part of
the Hartz Division in Artois (Sick and Balthasar Regiments).


ARTOIS.

3. In October the 17th Reserve Division was withdrawn from the front
south of Roye and sent to Artois, near Lens (Liévin-Givenchy).


                                 1916.

1. The 17th Reserve Division remained in Artois until the battle of the
Somme. In February it launched several attacks.


SOMME.

2. About the beginning of July the 163d Infantry Regiment was sent,
temporarily, to reinforce the 185th Division, engaged along the Somme
near Cantalmaison.

3. The 17th Reserve Division was in line as a whole north of the Somme
about July 25 (Bazentin-Pozières). It remained there until August 9–14.

4. It was sent to rest and to be reorganized near Valenciennes.

5. At the end of August it occupied the sector of Loos-Hulluch (north of
Lens). In September the 75th Reserve Infantry Regiment was sent to the
211th Division.

6. About September 21 the division returned to the Somme (Le Transloy-
Combles), where it lost heavily (losses, 51 per cent).

7. Relieved about October 10 it was transferred to Belgium.

8. From October 23–25 to the end of January, 1917, it was in line
between Het Sas and the Ypres-Roulers railroad.


                                 1917.

1. At the end of January, 1917, the 17th Reserve Division was sent for a
month’s rest near Bruges, and again took over its sector.


ARTOIS.

2. It left the Ypres salient at the end of March and went into line
southeast of Arras. On April 9 it suffered very heavy losses from the
British offensives (2,100 prisoners).

3. On April 12–13 the division was relieved and sent to rest and to be
reorganized.


CAMBRESIS.

4. On April 27 it took over the sector of Havrincourt (southwest of
Cambrai) and occupied it until June 1.


ARTOIS.

5. Transferred to the Arras front, the 17th Reserve Division went back
into line in the sector Guémappe-Monchy le Preux, where it launched
several violent battles during the month of June. At the end of July it
extended its sector toward the north (south of the Scarpe).

6. Relieved at the end of August it went back into line at the beginning
of September southeast of Arras (Vis en Artois). It lost especially
heavy during the gas attacks. (It received, on Oct. 23, 40 men per
company, coming from Hamburg and Beverloo, slightly trained, and on Nov.
10 men taken from the Russian front.) (Summary of Information, Dec. 2.)

7. The 17th Reserve Division left Artois in the middle of November.


FLANDERS.

8. Sent to Flanders the division took over the sector at Becelaere about
November 18. The division was engaged against the British attack of
December 3 and suffered heavy losses. It underwent violent attacks and
left the front in the beginning of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The division is recruited in Schleswig-Holstein, the Hanseatic cities,
and adjacent parts of Hanover. Some replacement troops were from
Westphalia, and in September, 1916, men from Brandenburg of the 1917
class.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

During the year 1917 the 17th Reserve Division launched a great number
of terrible attacks on the Arras front and in Flanders.

At Becelaere (Dec., 1917) it gave proof of great stubbornness. The 162d
Infantry Regiment carried out a successful attack in this sector on
December 14. However, a few months before, on June 18, the 163d Infantry
Regiment is said to have refused to advance. (Summary of Information,
June 19.)

Although this division is not one of the best in the German Army and its
morale is mediocre it is capable of offering serious resistance.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The northern sector was a fairly quiet front in the winter months and
the division remained in line here until just before the German
offensive on the Lys of April 9. Prior to this attack all of the
division but one battalion of the 76th Reserve Regiment was withdrawn
and sent hurriedly to the vicinity of Messines. It attacked there with
other German divisions on the morning of April 9 under orders to take
Messines by the evening of the 10th and to push ahead as far as
possible. It gained considerable ground at heavy cost. Elements of the
7th Division relieved part of the 17th Reserve Division a few days
later, but the bulk of the division remained in line until about April
22, when it was relieved by the 13th Reserve Division and the 19th
Reserve Division.

2. On April 24 the division arrived in the Maldeghem area for a long
rest. While there the divisional and the brigade commanders were
decorated for their part in the Lys offensive. Death notices published
in the German newspapers disclosed the death of two battalion and many
company commanders on the Lys. While at rest the division went through
courses of training. On June 4 it entrained at Eecloo and moved via Mons
and Marle to Tergnier. At this time the Noyon offensive (June 9) was
being organized. The division marched at night to Boulogne la Grasse
(10th) and went into line on the evening of the 11th near Mery,
relieving the 227th Division.


OISE.

3. The division was in heavy fighting immediately and suffered severely
in the successful French counteroffensive of June 16.


BATTLE OF THE MATZ.

4. The French attack in August threw the division back on Canny sur Matz
and later north of Fresnieres. It passed to second line about August 31,
but was reengaged on September 5 at Esmery-Hallon. It suffered heavy
losses and was taken out on September 9.

5. The division was moved to Lorraine, where it rested a month and
returned to Le Cateau on October 10.

6. The division was engaged at Le Cateau on October 11 and resisted the
British attack until November 3. It fought near Le Cateau (Oct. 18),
Bazuel (21st), Forest (23d), Landrecies (24th), and Bois L’Eveque (Oct.
27). The division received the men of the 265th Reserve Regiment (108th
Division) as a draft in October.

7. The division was out of line from November 3 to the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. Its effectives were generally
young; 31 per cent belong to the 1919 class and 18 per cent to the 1918
class on October 1. It took a prominent part in the Lys and Noyon
offensives, winning a reputation for its vigorous attacks. Its defensive
work in October around Le Cateau was of a high order.




                        17th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │182 Ldw.      │380           │182 Ldw.      │380.
              │              │  (Kurhatowski│              │
              │              │  Rgt.).      │              │
              │              │381 (Nussbaum │              │381.
              │              │  Rgt.).      │              │
              │              │23 Landst.    │              │23 Landst.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │1 Landst. Sqn. (1 C. Dist.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │235 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │2d Cyclist Co. 1 Jag. Btn.   │2 Cyclist Co. 1 Jag. Btn.
              │                             │16 Cav. Brig. (7 and 8 Horse
              │                             │  Jag. and 5 Res. Drag.
              │                             │  Rgts.).
              │                             │9 C. Dist. Landst. Inf. Btn.
              │                             │  No. 13.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[13]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │182 Ldw.      │380.          │182 Ldw.      │330.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │381.          │              │380.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │23 Landst.    │              │23 Landst.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Landst. Sqn. (1 C. Dist.). │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │
              │ 235 F. A. Rgt.              │
              │ 828 F. A. Btry.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(417) Pion. Btn.:            │87 Searchlight Section.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Ers. Co. 23 Pion.         │517 Signal Command:
              │ 317 T. M. Co.               │517 Tel. Detch.
              │ 182 Tel. Detch.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │206 Ambulance Co.            │206 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │152 Field Hospital.          │171 Field Hospital.
              │206 Field Hospital.          │
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │2 Cyclist Co. 1 Jag. Btn.    │
              │158 Cyclist Co. 91 Cav. Rgt. │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │7 C. Dist. Landst. Inf. Btn. │
              │  No. 50.                    │
              │9 C. Dist. Landst. Inf. Btn. │
              │  No. 13.                    │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 13:

  The elements below are those listed under the 700th Postal Sector.
  Other elements belonging to the 17th Landwehr Division, but in other
  sectors, are listed as attached to whatever divisions may hold those
  sectors.


                                HISTORY.

 (380th Infantry Regiment: 1st and 17th Corps Districts. 381st Infantry
                Regiment: 12th and 5th Corps Districts.)


                                 1915.

1. The 17th Landwehr Division, formed on the Eastern Front in the Niémen
Army, with the elements of the former Esebeck Brigade, appeared about
the month of December, 1915.


RUSSIA.

2. Before forming a part of the 17th Landwehr Division the Esebeck
Brigade took part in the offensive against the Russians north of Kovno
(July-August, 1915), was east of Vilna about the end of September, and
took up its position west of Kosiany (northwest of Postavy) in October.


POSTAVY.

3. The 17th Landwehr Division, being formed in this sector by the
addition of the 23d Landsturm Regiment to the Esebeck Brigade, remained
in line in the area of Vidzy-Postavy (Tveretch), from the end of 1915 to
the beginning of 1918.


                                 1916.

1. The Division remained in the Tveretch sector.


                                 1917.

1. The Division remained in the Tveretch sector.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division is of mediocre value.


                                 1918.

1. The 17th Landwehr Division was identified in the Tveretch region
toward the end of January.

2. About the middle of March it advanced into Russia and was identified
in the Polotsk-Vitebsk region in March, April, and June.

3. The division was identified on the Don on September 26.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             18th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │35.      │84.      │35.      │84.      │36.      │31.
              │         │86 Fus.  │         │86 Fus.  │         │85.
              │36.      │31.      │36.      │31.      │         │86 Fus.
              │         │85.      │         │85.      │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │16 Dragoon Rgt. (3 │                   │16 Dragoon Rgt. (3
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │18 Brig.:          │18 Brig.:          │18 Brig.:
              │ 9 F. A. Rgt.      │ 9 F. A. Rgt.      │ 9 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 45 F. A. Rgt.     │ 45 F. A. Rgt.     │ 45 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No. 9:│1 Pion. Btn. No. 9:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 9 Pions.│ 2 Co. 9 Pions.
              │                   │ 18 Pont. Engs.    │ 18 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 18 Tel. Detch.    │ 18 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 18 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │57 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │36.      │31.      │36       │31.
              │         │85.      │         │85.
              │         │86 Fus.  │         │86.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 16 Drag.    │2 Sqn. 16 Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │18 Art. Command:   │18 Art. Command:
              │ 45 F. A. Rgt.     │ 45 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 28 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (4 and 5
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 749 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 753 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1,362 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Pion. Btn. No. 9:│9 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Co. 9 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 9 Pions.
              │ 3 Co. 9 Pions.    │ 3 Co. 9 Pions.
              │ 18 T. M. Co.      │ 18 T. M. Co.
              │ 18 Tel. Detch.    │ 101 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │18 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 18 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 54 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │23 Ambulance Co.   │23 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │90 Field Hospital. │90 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │92 Field Hospital.
              │                   │18 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │551 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │47 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Section.         │
              │505 Anti-Aircraft  │
              │  Btry.            │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                (9th Corps District—Schleswig—Holstein.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM-MARNE.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 18th Division (of the 9th Army Corps,
with the 17th Division) formed a part of the 1st Army (Von Kluck).
Entraining at Aix la Chapelle August 8–10, it was before Liege on the
13th, went into action at Tirlemont on the 18th, at Mons on the 23d,
entered France on the 25th, crossed the Marne at Chateau Thierry on
September 3, and took part in the battle of the Marne on September 6 and
7, at Esternay and Courgivaux.


AISNE.

2. After the retreat it took up its position north of the Aisne, where
it remained for more than a year in various parts of the sector.


                                 1915.

In March, 1915, the 84th Infantry Regiment was taken from the 18th
Division to help in the formation of the 54th Division.


AISNE.

1. Until October, 1915, the 18th Division occupied the sectors of the
Aisne. On June 3 the 86th Fusiliers attacked at Quennevieres, suffering
enormous losses. (Between June 18 and July 3 its 5th Company received at
least 115 men as replacements; the 8th Company, 120.)


CHAMPAGNE.

2. From October, 1915, until June, 1916, the 18th Division was in
Champagne (Souain area).


                                 1916.

1. On February 25, 1916, the 31st Infantry Regiment suffered heavy
losses south of St. Marie a Py; its 11th Company was entirely destroyed
or captured.


SOMME.

2. From July to September, 1916, the 18th Division was in action along
the Somme (south of the Somme). At Belloy, on September 4, the 4th
Company of the 86th Fusiliers was destroyed with the exception of 23
men.


ARTOIS.

3. From October until the beginning of December the division was in the
Arras area (east).

4. It left Artois about December 12 to take over a sector along the
Somme (Grandcourt).


                                 1917.


SOMME.

1. About February 18, 1917, the 18th Division was withdrawn from the
front, then sent back into line at the beginning of March, at Puisieux-
Gommecourt (Somme).


ARTOIS.

2. At the end of March it was transferred to Artois, north of the
Scarpe, and went into action at Roeux and Fampoux, from April 10 to
April 23.

3. Relieved at the end of April, it went back into line about May 8, in
the area south of Arras, and from that date until the end of August
occupied sectors in the vicinity of Cambrai (Villers-Plouich,
Havrincourt, Marcoing).


FLANDERS.

4. On August 27 the 18th Division was relieved from the Cambrai front
(Ribecourt-Marcoing sector) and entrained for Flanders, where it was
made an army reserve in the Ruddervoorde (northeast of Thourout). It was
there reorganized with replacements coming from troops of the 9th Corps
District stationed in Russia (taken from the 426th Infantry Regiment,
the 31st Landwehr Regiment, and the 3d Ersatz Reserve Regiment).

5. It went into the sector Mangelaere about September 16 and underwent
the Franco-British attack of October 9, which caused it rather serious
losses.


RUSSIA.

6. The 18th Division was relieved about October 14 and transferred to
Russia, where it made a rather short stay in the Vilna area.


ALSACE.

7. It was back in Upper Alsace about the end of November, in the region
of Mulhouse, at the beginning of February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 18th Division is recruited from Schleswig-Holstein (Prussians and
Danes). A certain proportion of Poles from Silesia appeared in the
replacements of 1917 (especially in the 31st Infantry Regiment).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 18th Division has always passed as being a good division. However,
in the course of the Franco-British attack of October 9, 1917, none of
its elements carried out the counterattacks described by their leaders;
however, in order to form a correct judgment of this, one must take
account of the intensity of the bombardment, the state of the terrain,
and the weakness of the effectives in line at that moment.


                                 1918.


CAMBRAI.

1. The 18th Division left Alsace, entraining at Mulhouse, about the 12th
of February, and traveled via Thionville and Sedan to Bertry, where it
detrained after a journey of 2½ days. It relieved the 107th Division
near Gonnelieu (south of Cambrai) the 16th. It was withdrawn the
beginning of March, and had a few days’ training near Ligny en
Cambresis.

2. It left here on the 17th and marched to Malincourt, where it stayed
three days.


ST. QUENTIN.

3. It reenforced the battle front near Hargicourt (north of St. Quentin)
on March 21. The next day the division commander was killed. The
division was withdrawn about the 26th.


SOMME.

4. During the night of March 29–30 the division relieved the 1st
Division near Sailly le Sec (south of Albert). Here again heavy losses
were suffered. The division received a draft of 500 men, mostly returned
wounded. It is not clear just what happened during this period and as
late as about the 18th of May, when the division was withdrawn, but it
seems as though its regiments and the regiments of the 50th Reserve
Division and the 199th Division inter-relieved each other.


TOURNAI.

5. The division went to the Tournai region, where it rested, was
completely reconstituted, and trained.


SOISSONS.

6. On August 1 it reenforced the battle front near Launoy (southwest of
Soissons), after having left Tournai July 21 and having detrained at La
Fere the following day. Toward the end of its tour in line (it was
withdrawn during the night of Oct. 12–13), it retreated along the line
Froidmont-Eppes.


OISE.

7. The division was transported by truck and relieved the 22d Reserve
Division near Bernoville (northeast of St. Quentin) on October 15. On
the 17th it withdrew to Grougis, and then to the Sambre Canal. During
these operations it lost more than 500 prisoners. It was withdrawn about
the 28th.

8. On November 4 the division reenforced the front near Hannapes (north
of Guise) and withdrew, with the remainder of the line, through Iron,
the Nouvion region, Boulogne sur Helpe, and Etroeung. It was still in
line on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 18th Division is rated as being first class. Since the spring,
however, it has not been used to any great extent where heavy fighting
was in progress, and it may well be it has deteriorated. It is known
that part of the 6th Company of the 86th Regiment refused to go into
line on October 25 until it was threatened with being shot.




                         18th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │53 Res.  │84 Res.  │35 Res.  │84 Res.  │35 Res.  │31 Res.
              │         │86 Res.  │         │86 Res.  │         │84 Res.
              │36 Res.  │31 Res.  │36 Res.  │31 Res.  │         │86 Res.
              │         │90 Res.  │         │90 Res.  │         │
              │ 9 Res. Jag. Btn.  │ 9 Res. Jag. Btn.  │ 9 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │7 Res. Hus. Rgt. (3│7 Res. Hus. Rgt.   │7 Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │18 Res. F. A. Rgt. │18 Res. F. A. Rgt. │18 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │  (8 Btries.).     │  (10 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No. 9.│  Pion. Btn. No. 9.│  Pion. Btn. No. 9.
              │                   │18 Res. Pont. Engs.│218 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │18 Res. Tel. Detch.│18 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │18 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │95 Labor Btn. Anti-
              │                   │                   │  Aircraft Section.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │35 Res.  │31 Res.  │35 Res.  │31 Res.
              │         │84 Res.  │         │84 Res.
              │         │86 Res.  │         │86 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 6 Res. Hus. │2 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │112 Art. Command:  │112 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 18 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 18 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 126 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 757 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1250 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1304 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(318) Pion. Btn.:  │318 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 9      │ 1 Co. 9 Res.
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 9      │ 2 Co. 9 Res.
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 218 T. M. Co.     │ 218 T. M. Co.
              │ 9 Res. Searchlight│ 48 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 418 Tel. Detch.   │418 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 418 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 115 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │513 Ambulance Co.  │513 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │400 Field Hospital.│400 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │44 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │418 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │717 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

        (9th Corps District—Schleswig—Holstein and Mecklenburg.)


                                 1914.

1. The 18th Reserve Division formed the 9th Reserve Corps, with the 17th
Reserve Division.


BELGIUM.

2. From the outbreak of the war until August 22, 1914, the 18th Reserve
Division was guarding the coast of Schleswig-Holstein. Entraining about
this time, it went into Belgium, where it advanced rapidly. After taking
and sacking Louvain (Aug. 25) it occupied Hamme (Sept. 1), Termonde
(Sept. 4).


OISE.

3. On the 9th it was hastily transferred by way of Tournai and
Valenciennes to the Oise area. Entraining on the 13th at Chauny, it
reenforced the front south of Noyon and went into action between
Carlepont and Lassigny (Sept. 15–21).

4. At the beginning of October the 18th Reserve Division was taken to
the valley of the Avre. It fought in the vicinity of Roye (Laucourt,
Oct. 2–3). At the beginning of November the division front extended
between the Avre and Beuvraignes.


LASSIGNY.

5. On November 15 it bore to the south and held the region of the Loges-
Lassigny wood.


                                 1915.

In March, 1915, it gave the 90th Reserve Infantry Regiment to the 54th
Division, a new formation.

1. The 18th Reserve Division occupied the Lassigny area until October,
1915, without any serious engagements. In October it took over elements
of the Hartz Division (6th Army), among others the 3d Battalion of the
31st Infantry Regiment which contained four battalions from May, 1915,
to September, 1916.


ARTOIS.

2. About October 23 the division was sent to Artois (Givenchy), where it
launched several local attacks.


                                 1916.

1. The 18th Reserve Division remained in the Liévin-Givenchy sector
until July, 1916.


SOMME.

2. After a few days at rest, July 13 to July 28, it took part in the
battle of the Somme, north of Pozieres, in several serious attacks.

3. It was reorganized in the Valenciennes area during the second half of
August.

4. At the end of August, it was sent northeast of Lens (Pont a Vendin).

5. At the beginning of October the 18th Reserve Division again went into
action along the Somme, north of Combles, (Morval, Sailly Saillisel). It
suffered heavily in a series of local attacks.


FLANDERS.

6. Withdrawn from the front about October 12–16, the division was
transferred to Belgium. On October 23–25 it went into line north of
Ypres.


                                 1917.

1. The 18th Reserve Division occupied the Ypres salient (Pilkem) until
the end of March, 1917.


ARTOIS.

2. After a short rest at Roulers, the division was concentrated at Vitry
en Artois (Apr. 1). Going into action southeast of Arras (Heninel), it
underwent the British attack (Apr. 9), which caused it heavy losses (500
prisoners).

3. The division left the Artois front about April 15, and after a few
days at rest took over the sector of Cherisy-Guemappe (southeast of
Arras in May).

4. At the beginning of June the 18th Reserve Division was relieved and
sent to rest.


FLANDERS.

5. Transferred to Flanders about June 16, it first remained in reserve
behind the Messines front. On July 3 the division was in action west of
Houthem and suffered severe losses in consequence of local actions and
bombardments.

6. Relieved about August 8, it was at rest in the Cambrai area until
August 16. It then occupied the quiet sector of Queant (west of Cambrai)
until the middle of October.

7. It was sent to Flanders again on October 20, and went into line near
the Ypres-Menin railroad (Oct. 28–29).


                              RECRUITING.

The 18th Reserve Division is recruited in Schleswig-Holstein.

The Mecklenburgers, according to an order in 1917, had to return to
their national regiment, the 90th Infantry Reserve Regiment, which no
longer belonged to the division. A limited number of men from the 7th
and 10th Corps districts (Westphalia and Hanover) is found.


                          VALUE 1917—ESTIMATE.

The 18th Reserve Division has the same value as the 17th Reserve
Division. At the end of 1917 it is difficult to form an opinion as to
its combat value. It has not been in any serious action since the battle
of Arras, having arrived in Flanders when the autumn operations were
about at an end. The morale of the division may be considered as
passable. (British Summary of Information, February, 1918.)


                                 1918.

1. The 18th Reserve Division was relieved by the 214th Division in the
Gheluvelt sector on January 6. It went to rest in the vicinity of Menin
and while there was intensively trained in open warfare.


YPRES.

2. On February 18 the division relieved the 214th Division in its former
sector north of Gheluvelt (east of Ypres). It was relieved by the 7th
Reserve Division about March 31.


LA BASSEE.

3. It reinforced the battle front near Locon (northwest of La Bassee) on
April 9, and was withdrawn about the 18th, going to rest in the Sainghin
area (southeast of Lille).

4. On May 14 it relieved the 25th Division west of Locon, and was
relieved by the extension of fronts of the neighboring divisions about
the 18th of June, when it went to rest in the region of Gondecourt (east
of La Bassee).

5. About the 14th of July it relieved the 1st Guard Reserve Division
near Givenchy (north of the La Bassee Canal—west of La Bassee); relieved
September 3, it went to rest in the region north of Denain.


CAMBRAI.

6. On the 29th of September the division reentered the line near
Proville and Rumilly (south of Cambrai), and was still in line when the
armistice was signed. It was thought that it had been withdrawn October
8, again on the 18th, and on the 4th of November, but considering the
speed with which the German withdrawal was executed, the confusion
necessarily incident thereto, and the fact that the division always
turned up a day or two later in the same relative position it had
previously occupied, it seems best to assume that it was continuously in
line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 18th Reserve is considered a second-class division. It did not
distinguish itself in the Lys offensive, and it is reported that
thereafter it was to be used only as a holding division. At any rate, it
engaged in no other German offensives, and, indeed, no other heavy
fighting, until the beginning of October or sometime after practically
the whole front had become active on account of the combined allied
push.




                        18th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │           1914–15           │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │19 Ldw.       │19 Ldw.       │20 Ldw.       │19 Ldw.
              │              │47 Ldw.       │              │47 Ldw.
              │              │72 Ldw.       │28 Ldw.       │133 Ldw.
              │              │133 Ldw.      │              │57 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │72 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │Ers. Sqn. 1 Horse Jag. Rgt.
              │                             │Ers. Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │5 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │835 F. A. Btry.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │2 Res. Co. 1 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │344 Pion. Co.
              │                             │166 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │43 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │19 Ldw.       │47 Ldw.       │19 Ldw.       │47 Ldw.
              │              │57 Ldw.       │              │57 Ldw.
              │              │72 Ldw.       │              │72 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │Ers. Sqn. 12 Drag. Rgt.      │4 Sqn. 4 Drag. Rgt.
              │Ers. Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │5 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 5 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│43 Pion. Btn.:               │2 Landst. Co. 3 C. Dist.
   Liaisons.  │                             │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 1 Pions.         │117 Searchlight Section.
              │ 344 Pion. Co.               │518 Signal Command:
              │ 166 T. M. Co.               │ 518 Tel. Detch.
              │ 218 Searchlight Section.    │
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │258 Ambulance Co.            │258 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │296 Field Hospital.          │305 Field Hospital.
              │305 Field Hospital.          │18 Ldw. Field Hospital.
              │18 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │130 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │534 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │60 Cyclist Co.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │43 Labor Btn.                │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (47th Landwehr Regiment: 5th Corps district.—Posen.) (57th Landwehr
 Regiment: 7th Corps district.—Westphalia.) (72d Landwehr Regiment: 4th
                   Corps district.—Prussian Saxony.)


                                1914–15.


RUSSIA.

1. The 18th Landwehr Division is the former Bredow Division.


POLAND.

2. After being engaged in September, 1914, in the battle of the Mazurian
Lakes, the Bredow Division fought in the Polish campaign: Battle of
Warsaw (Oct. 9–19, 1914); battles on the Rawka (Oct. 22–28); near
Czenstochow (Nov. 10-Dec. 15); between Pilica and Nidi, in the
mountainous region of Kielce (December, 1914, to July, 1915).

3. In the middle of July, 1915, the division was in action near Sienno
and before Ivangorod (breaking of the Russian front), crossed the
Vistula (end of July), was in action between the Vistula and the Bug
(Aug. 8–18), and advanced in action as far as Slonim and the Upper
Chtchara (September). The front becoming stabilized in this area, the
Bredow Division took up its position southeast of Novo-Grudok (near
Goroditche in October and November). At the end of November it went into
the sector southeast of Liakhovitchi (south of Baranovitchi). The number
18 appears to be given to the Bredow Division in December.


                                 1916.


BARANOVITCHI.

1. The 18th Landwehr Division remained on the front south of
Baranovitchi (Liakhovitchi) for more than two years (November, 1915, to
the beginning of 1918). From July 2 to July 9, 1916, it withstood the
Russian attacks in this area.

2. In June, 1916, two regiments of the division, the 57th Landwehr and
the 133d Landwehr, were transferred to Volhynia (north of Lutsk),
assigned to the Rusche Division and were in action against the offensive
of Broussilov. The 57th Landwehr Regiment rejoined the 18th Landwehr
Division near Baranovitchi in August. The 133d Landwehr Regiment was
provisionally a part of the 92d Division.


                                 1917.

1. The division held the sector Baranovitchi-Liakhovitchi.

2. In October 900 men from the 18th Landwehr Division, chosen from among
the youngest, were entrained for the western front. In April a number
had been taken from the 72d Landwehr Regiment for the 5th Reserve
Division. In November the 47th Landwehr Regiment furnished men to the
15th Division. As the 18th Landwehr Division had received no
replacements since the end of July, the trench strength of the 72d
Landwehr Regiment had fallen, at the end of October, to 50–60 men per
company (Russian interrogation).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division has been on the Russian front since the beginning of the
war. Combat value appears to be mediocre.


                                 1918.

1. In February, 1918, the 18th Landwehr Division advanced into the
interior of Russia. The 72d Landwehr Regiment was identified between
Mohilev and Gomel on February 2. In May the 57th Landwehr Regiment held
the very long front from north of Kopys to south of Chklov.

2. In the middle of June the division was in the Orcha region. It was
again identified in the region of Mohilev on the 22d of September.

3. There were rumors during October that the division had come to the
Woevre, but since the division was never actually identified it is not
believed that it left Russia.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             19th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │37.      │78.      │37.      │78.      │37.      │74.
              │         │91.      │         │91.      │         │78.
              │38.      │73 Fus.  │38.      │73 Fus.  │         │91.
              │         │74.      │         │74.      │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │17 Hus. Rgt. (3    │17 Hus. Rgt. (3    │17 Hus. Rgt. (2
              │  Sqns.).          │  Sqns.).          │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │19 Brig.:          │19 Brig.:          │19 Brig.:
              │ 26 F. A. Rgt.     │ 26 F. A. Rgt.     │ 26 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 62 F. A. Rgt.     │ 62 F. A. Rgt.     │ 62 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  10:              │  10:
              │                   │ Field Co. 10      │ 1 Co. 10 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 19 Pont. Engs.    │ 19 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 19 Tel. Detch.    │ 19 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 19 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │37.      │74.      │37.      │74.
              │         │78.      │         │78.
              │         │91.      │         │91.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.│3 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │19 Art. Command:   │19 Art. Command:
              │ 26 F. A. Rgt.     │ 26 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 93 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 740 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 905 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1156 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/10 or 127) Pion.│127 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 1 Co. 10 Pions.   │ 1 Co. 10 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 5 Co. 10 Pions.   │ 5 Co. 10 Pions.
              │ 19 T. M. Co.      │ 19 T. M. Co.
              │ 296 Searchlight   │ 50 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 19 Tel. Detch.    │19 Signal Command:
              │ 19 Pont. Engs.    │ 19 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 4 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │25 Ambulance Co.   │25 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │6 Field Hospital.  │95 Field Hospital.
              │95 Field Hospital. │97 Field Hospital.
              │97 Field Hospital. │19 Vet. Hospital.
              │19 Vet. Hospital.  │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │552 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (10th Corps District—Hanover and the Grand Duchy of Oldenburg.)


                                 1914.

1. The 19th Division constituted, at the outbreak of the war, with the
20th Division, the 10th Army Corps (Hanover), which was a part of the 2d
Army (Von Buelow).


BELGIUM-MARNE.

2. On August 3 one of its brigades, the 38th, was at Malmedy for the
attack upon Liége, where it went into action on the 5th. After the fall
of Liége the 19th Division, going around Namur on the north, fought at
Charleroi on the 23d, entered France on the 25th, and went into action
at Guise, at St. Quentin. It took part in the battle of the Marne on the
right of the 20th Division, and then withdrew with that division to the
northwest of Reims.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. In October it was in the same sector attached to the 7th Army (Von
Heeringen) and remained during the winter of 1914–15.


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. In March, 1915, the 73d Fusiliers left the division to become a part
of the 111th Division (a new formation).

2. In April the 19th Division was sent (with the 20th) to Galicia, where
it took part in the offensive of Mackensen’s army. This campaign caused
heavy losses; in the 91st Infantry Regiment, between May and September,
the casualties totaled 127 officers and 4,291 men. (Official List of
casualties.)

3. Entraining at Warsaw on September 17 the 19th Division, together with
the 20th, was taken to Antwerp, then, by way of Namur and Givet, to
Champagne. There it remained behind the front to reinforce the 3d Army
at the time of our attack on the Champagne front (September).


FRANCE.

4. It was relieved about October 17. After a few days rest in the area
of Grandlup, Missy les Pierrepont, it occupied the Hurtebise-Vauclerc
line at the end of October.


AISNE.

5. About December 19 it was withdrawn to the rear (Parfondru area). It
remained in reserve of the army and received training.


                                 1916.

1. The division again went into line at the beginning of January, 1916
(Hurtebise-Vauclerc sector) and remained there until the middle of May.
Then it was sent to Sissonne and received training until June 7.


RUSSIA.

2. About June 8 it left Sissonne and entrained for the Eastern Front.
Itinerary: Laon-Sedan-Trèves-Coblentz-Limberg-Marburg-Cassel-Leipzig-
Breslau-Bautzen-Iwagorod-Kovel (June 12).

3. The division was retrained on the Russian front from June until
November. It underwent the Broussilov offensive, and in November formed
a part of the 4th Austrian Army in action on the Volhynia front.


FRANCE.

4. About November 8 it entrained and left Russia to return to the
Western Front. Itinerary: Kovel-Brest-Litowsk-Warsaw-Thorn-Berlin-
Hanover-Aix la Chapelle-Liége-Namur-Givet-Hirson.

5. After a few days of rest, the 19th Division entrained for Rethel. It
was billeted in the vicinity until the end of December.


                                 1917.

1. After a stay in Alsace (January, 1917) the 19th Division came into
reserve in Champagne in February.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. On February 24 it occupied the sector Ripont, Cernay en Dormois.

3. On March 6 it was transferred to the Rheims front (Brimont, Cavaliers
de Coucy in April and May). Only its right wing was engaged in the
French offensive.

4. Relieved on the 10th of June and sent to rest, it was in action
shortly afterwards southwest of Moronvilliers, then on the Cornillet-
Monc St. Blond front, where it underwent the French attacks of July 14
and suffered heavy losses.

5. On July 20, it left this area and in two days marched to the sector
north of Ville sur Tourbe.


MEUSE.

6. About September 7 it was sent to the Verdun area (Beaumont-
Samogneux). It there launched several attacks.

7. Relieved from the Beaumont sector at the end of December, the 19th
Division occupied the Forges sector (left bank of the Meuse) about
January 6, 1918. There it was relieved by the 84th Division beginning of
February.


                              RECRUITING.

The 19th Division is recruited from Hanover. The 91st Infantry Regiment
is recruited in the Grand Duchy of Oldenburg. There were very few
replacements from other corps districts.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 19th Division must be considered a good division (September, 1917).


                                 1918.

1. The division rested at Stenay until March 6, when it entrained and
traveled via Sedan-Charleville-Anor to Landrecies, going into billets at
Hecq. On the 17th it marched to Croix and in the evening proceeded via
Le Cateau to Honnechy. On the night of March 19–20 it marched to
Brancourt, and on the 21st followed up the attack as far as Maissemy.
The 91st Regiment crossed the Somme at Brie on the 25th and by the 28th
had reached Harbonnieres.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was in support until the 31st, when it was engaged near
Marcelcaves. In the fighting in this locality between the 30th and April
6, the division lost 50 per cent of its effectives. The heaviest losses
were incurred on March 31 at Brie where a battalion commander, ordered
to attack, was unable to do so because of his losses.

3. The division rested until April 16 in the neighborhood of Proyart and
Framerville. About 1,000 men were received as reinforcements at this
time.


SOMME.

4. It was engaged on April 18, north of Hangard, until the 20th. Two
days of rest at Harbonnieres followed, and it returned to line on the
24th. The French attack of the 26th caused the division severe losses
and it withdrew on April 28. It was reengaged on the same sector on May
6 and in line until May 29. While in line the division received drafts
of 1,200 men.

5. The division rested until the 1st of June in the vicinity of Cambrai.
It marched toward the Lassigny front by night, passing through Ham (June
2), Esmery-Hallon, Tilloloy (June 7–8).


NOYON.

6. It was engaged on June 9 in the Lataule wood and was in line until
the 14th. It entrained on the 21st and moved to Lorraine, where it
relieved the 3d Guard Division at Bezanges on June 25. It rested on this
quiet front until July 29, when the 81st Reserve Division from Flanders
relieved it.


VESLE.

7. The division rested near Fort Brimont until mid-August, when it moved
by stages to the Vesle front. It entered the line northeast of Fismes on
September 1 and remained during the month. The division withstood the
French attack of the 31st, losing about 700 prisoners. It was forced to
retire on Ventelay and Chaudardes (Oct. 1), and later on Pontavert,
Craonne, toward Sissonne (Oct. 11–12). It was in second line about the
13th to 18th.


LAON.

8. On October 19 it was again in line near Sissonne. In the retreat it
retired by Boucourt, la Ville aux Bois, Montcornet. After November 4 it
was identified near Renneval, Iviers, and Aubenton (Nov. 8).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. It was regarded as one of the
best German divisions. It resisted with great obstinacy the French
counterattack at Hangard, April 26. Its morale remained good until the
end of October.




                         19th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │37 Res.  │73 Res.  │37 Res.  │73 Res.  │37 Res.  │73 Res.
              │         │78 Res.  │         │78 Res.  │         │78 Res.
              │39 Res.  │74 Res.  │39 Res.  │74 Res.  │         │79 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │         │  (2
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Btns.)
              │         │92 Res.  │         │92 Res.  │39 Res.  │74 Res.
              │         │79 Res.  │         │79 Res.  │         │92 Res.
              │         │  (2     │         │  (2     │         │
              │         │  Btns.) │         │  Btns.) │         │
              │ 10 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 10 Res. Jag. Btn. │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Res. Dragoon Rgt.│6 Res. Drag. Rgt.  │6 Res. Drag. Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │19 Res. F. A. Rgt. │19 Res. F. A. Rgt. │19 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │  (8 Btries.).     │  2 Mountain Btry.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No.   │  Pion. Btn. No.   │  Pion. Btn. No.
              │  10.              │  10.              │  10.
              │                   │19 Res. Tel. Detch.│6 Field Co. 1 Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Btn. No. 10.
              │                   │19 Res. Pont. Engs.│219 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │19 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │19 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │39 Res.  │73 Res.  │39 Res.  │73 Res.
              │         │78 Res.  │         │78 Res.
              │         │92 Res.  │         │92 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 6 Res. Drag.│3 Sqn. 6 Res. Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │19 Res. F. A. Rgt. │19 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │2 Abt. 3 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (Staff, and
              │                   │  5, 7, and 9
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │741 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │742 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │745 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│319 Pion. Btn.     │319 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 10     │ 1 Res. Co. 10
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 219 T. M. Co.     │ 2 Res. Co. 10
              │                   │  Pions.
              │ 290 Searchlight   │ 54 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 419 Tel. Detch.   │419 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 419 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 32 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │510 Ambulance Co.  │510 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │46 Res. Field      │46 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │47 Res. Field      │48 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │48 Res. Field      │200 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │718 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (10th Corps District.—Hanover; Grand Duchy of Oldenburg; Duchy of
                              Brunswick.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM-MARNE.

1. The 19th Reserve Division, constituting at the outbreak of the war,
with the 2d Reserve Guard Division, the 10th Reserve Corps, was a part
of the 2d Army (Von Buelow). It entrained near Cologne August 10–12, was
concentrated at the Elsenhorn Camp and entered Belgium on the 15th by
way of Spa. Going down the left bank of the Meuse near Liége, it crossed
the Sambre west of Charleroi on the 22d; went into action on the 23d at
Nalinnes; entered France on the 26th at Avesnes, and fought on the 29th
and 30th between St. Quentin and Ribemont. Continuing on its way through
Braine, it crossed the Marne at Dormans and took part in the battle of
the Marne between Vauchamps and Montmirail (Sept. 6 to 7).

2. It retired on the 7th by way of Orbais, Vertus, Epernay, Rilly la
Montagne (Sept. 10), Rheims (Sept. 12).


CHAMPAGNE.

3. It fought, in the middle of September, north of Rheims and
established itself on the front Brimont-Courcy-Bétheny (October-
December).


                                 1915.

1. The division occupied the sector north of Rheims until the beginning
of February, 1915.


PERTHES.

2. About February 2, elements of the division were transferred to the
Somme Py and went into action in the Perthes les Hurlus area, where they
took part in serious battles.

3. The division remained in Champagne (Souain-Perthes) until the month
of April.


ALSACE.

4. About the end of April it was sent to Alsace (valley of the Fecht).
At this time, the 10th Reserve Corps was broken up because of the
employment of its two divisions on two separate fronts (19th Reserve
Division, Vosges, 2d Reserve Guard Division, in the north). These two
divisions are now independent. The 19th Reserve Division suffered very
heavily in Alsace (valley of the Fecht) and lost 154 officers and 5,033
men (Official List of Casualties), of whom 60 officers and 1,964 men
belong to the 74th Reserve Infantry Regiment.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. On September 30 the 37th Reserve Brigade entrained to reenforce the
units engaged in the Tahure sector (Champagne), where it went into
action on October 8.


ALSACE.

6. The 37th Reserve Brigade rejoined the 39th Reserve Brigade in Alsace
at the beginning of November. At this time the entire division was
concentrated in the vicinity of Mulhouse.

7. In December elements of the 19th Reserve Division took part in the
struggle for the possession of Hartmannswillerkopf (Dec. 21–29).


                                 1916.

1. The 19th Reserve Division remained in the Meuse area until March,
1916.


VERDUN.

2. About March 15 the division entrained and was transferred to Verdun.
It went into action in the sector Douaumont-Haudremont-Thiaumont (Apr.
17 to June 21). Its regiments made successive attacks and suffered
heavily (attacks of Apr. 17, 24, May 7, and June 21). At the end of
April and during the month of May, elements of the division were sent to
rest in the vicinity of Montmédy.


ARGONNE.

3. At the beginning of July the 19th Reserve Division was withdrawn from
the Verdun front and went into the Argonne (La Harazee). It had lost 79
per cent of its infantry at Verdun. From April 25 to July 19 the 4th
Company of the 74th Infantry Regiment had received no less than 195 men
as replacements; the 9th Company of the 73d Infantry Regiment, 211 men.


SOMME.

4. On October 10 it was transferred to the Somme (sector of Gueudecourt
les Boeufs) and took part in limited actions which caused serious
losses.


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

5. Relieved on October 26–28, it went into line on the Côtes de Meuse
(Les Éparges) on October 31.


                                 1917.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

1. On February 18, 1917, the 19th Reserve Division left the Éparges
sector for the front south of Laon. Concentrated in the region of
Arrancy-Ste. Croix, it went into line about March 1, on the crest of the
Chemin des Dames (Ailles-Hurtebise). It underwent the French attack of
April 16, which caused it to suffer severely (900 prisoners).

On April 20 elements of the Division launched a counterattack (Poteau
d’Ailles). The 19th Reserves Division remained in line until April 21.


RUSSIA.

2. After two weeks’ rest in the vicinity of Sissonne, the division was
transferred to Russia. It entrained at La Capelle on May 7. Itinerary:
Charleroi-Namur-Liége-Aix le Chapelle-Dusseldorf-Hanover-Berlin-
Bromberg-Koenigsberg-Shavli-Mitau; detraining at Gross-Ekkau on May 11,
it was called on July 23 to help the exhausted 226th Division between
Smorgoni and Krevo.


RIGA.

3. At the end of August or the beginning of September the division took
part in the operations which began at the taking of Riga and of
Duenamuende (September).


FRANCE.

4. On September 11 the division entrained near Uxkull for the Western
Front. Itinerary: Mitau-Shavli-Koenigsberg-Posen-Cottbus-Leipzig-Gotha-
Mayence-Kreuznach-Luxemburg-Sedan-Hirson. It detrained at Vervins on
September 17.


FLANDERS.

5. Transferred to Flanders (Sept. 20–24) it occupied the Polygon wood
sector east of Ypres (Sept. 28). It underwent the British attack of
October 4, when it lost very heavily. It was relieved immediately. (On
Sept. 29 the 12th Company of the 92d Reserve Infantry Regiment had only
3 officers and 86 men.)


MEUSE.

6. After a rest near Sedan, in the course of which it was reorganized
with mixed replacements from Beverloo and the recruit depot of the 228th
Division, the division went northwest of Verdun in October (Malancourt
sector).

7. Sent to rest in the Stenay area on December 22, the 19th Reserve
Division occupied the Chaume wood sector on January 15, 1918. It was
still there at the beginning of March.


                              RECRUITING.

The 19th Reserve Division is recruited from the 10th Corps District
(Hanover, Oldenburg, Brunswick). There are few elements foreign to the
district.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

During the French offensive on the Chemin des Dames on April 16 the 19th
Reserve Division gave the impression of having energetic and intelligent
leadership. The attitude of the men was generally good.

The division suffered enormous losses on the Aisne.

The quality of the replacements received and its stay on the Russian
front have diminished the value of this division, which was a good
combat unit.

The presence of a certain number of Poles and Alsatians must be noted
who are inclined to desertion (67 deserters from the 73d Reserve
Infantry Regiment on Sept. 28, 1917). (November, 1917.)


                                 1918.

1. About April 6 the division was relieved and moved to Belgium,
entering line at Dixmude on April 17.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

2. On the 25th the division moved south and reenforced the battle front
at Vierstraat. It fought in the Ypres area until May 1, when it was
relieved, after losing about 40 per cent of its effectives.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. The division appeared in Champagne on May 10, taking over the sector
west of the Suippe from the 232d Division. About June 1 a battalion of
the 78th Reserve Regiment was detached and took part in the attack on
Rheims. Afterwards it returned and the complete division was in its
sector on June 15. The division was withdrawn from Champagne just before
the July offensive.

4. It was reengaged in Champagne on July 27 south of Le Mont sans Nom.
It continued in this sector until the 1st of September.

5. The division moved directly from line in Champagne to line south of
Concy le Chateau, where it was engaged until October 14. Withdrawn from
the Selle front, elements of the division were immediately engaged on
the Oise at Mont d’Origny (Oct. 17), but the bulk of the division was
not identified until October 24, south of Catillon. Until the armistice
the division fought in the vicinity of Catillon (Nov. 4), Fesmy (5th),
Prisches (6th), Lemont Fontaine (8th).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. In 1918, except for the Lys
offensive in April, the division was engaged only on the defensive.




                         19th. Ersatz Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │Ers.     │45 Mixed │23 Ers.  │45 Mixed │23 Ers.
              │         │  Btns.: │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │
              │45 Mixed │45 and   │         │32 Ers.  │         │32 Ers.
              │  Ers.   │  46.    │         │         │         │
              │         │63 and   │47 Mixed │47 and 48│47 Mixed │24 Ers.
              │         │  64.    │  Ers.   │  (Brig. │  Ers.   │
              │         │         │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │         │         │  Btns.).│         │
              │47 Mixed │47 and   │         │         │         │40 Ers.
              │  Ers.   │  48.    │         │         │         │
              │         │88 and   │         │88 and 89│         │
              │         │  89.    │         │  (Brig. │         │
              │         │         │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │         │         │  Btns.).│         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │4 and 5 Sqns. 19
              │                   │                   │  Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ers. Abtls. of   │1 Ers. Abtls. of 28│45 Ers. F. A. Rgt.
              │  the 28 and 48 F. │  and 48 F. A.     │
              │  A. Rgts.         │  Rgts.            │
              │1 Ers. Abtls. of 32│1 Ers. Abtls. of 32│47 Ers. F. A. Rgt.
              │  and 77 F. A.     │  and 77 F. A.     │
              │                   │  Rgts.            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ers. Co. 12      │1 Ers. Co. 12      │1 Ers. Co. 12
    Liaisons. │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │1 Ers. Co. 22      │1 Ers. Co. 22      │1 Ers. Co. 22
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │                   │254 Pion. Co.      │254 Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │88 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │164 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │5 Bav. Ldw. Brig.  │5 Bav. Ldw. Brig.  │21 Labor Btn.
              │  (4 Bav. Ldw. and │  (4 Bav. Ldw., 5  │
              │  5 Bav. Ldw.      │  Bav. Ldw., and 60│
              │  Rgts.)           │  Res. Rgts.).     │
              │                   │100 Ldw. Inf. Rgt. │85 Labor Btn.
              │                   │9 Jag. Btn.        │4 Btn. 15 Ldw. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (Until April.)
              │                   │                   │60 Res. Inf. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │100 Ldw. Inf. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ (Until October.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │45 Ers.  │23 Ers.  │45 Ers.  │23 Ers.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │24 Ers.  │         │24 Ers.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │32 Ers.  │         │32 Ers.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.│5 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │1 Ers. Sqn. 12 C.  │
              │  List.            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │47 Ers. F. A. Rgt. │47 Ers. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│519 Pion. Btn.:    │519 Pion. Btn.:
    Liaisons. │                   │
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 12     │ 1 Ers. Co. 12
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 22     │ 1 Ers. Co. 22
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 254 Pion. Co.     │ 164 T. M. Co.
              │ 164 T. M. Co.     │ 1 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 253 Searchlight   │569 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 569 Tel. Detch.   │ 569 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 47 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │272 Ambulance Co.  │272 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │506 Field Hospital.│506 Field Hospital.
              │507 Field Hospital.│518 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │766 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                (12th and 19th Corps Districts—Saxony.)


                                 1914.


VOSGES.

1. The 19th Ersatz Division (Saxon) detrained on August 18, 1914, before
Strassburg. In action in the Vosges on the 20th, it went up the valley
of the Bruche and fought on the Meurthe below St. Die, at St. Michel,
and advanced to La Salle (Sept. 6).


LORRAINE.

2. Having suffered in these engagements, the division was withdrawn. On
September 19 it was in the Blamont area, where it was reenforced by the
5th Bavarian Landwehr Brigade. It occupied the sector of Blamont-Ember-
Menil-Parroy.


                                 1915.


LORRAINE.

1. In 1915, and until October, 1916, it guarded the same front in
Lorraine (from the canal of the Marne to the Rhine as far as the Cirey
area).

2. About the month of April the 100th Landwehr was reattached to the
division, the battalions of which were grouped in July into 4 Ersatz
Regiments (Nos. 23, 32, 24, 40).


                                 1916.


LORRAINE.

1. During its stay in Lorraine the 19th Ersatz Division was not engaged
in any serious fighting. The 23d Ersatz alone took part in the affair of
Thiaville, February 28, 1916.


COTES DE MEUSE.

2. Relieved in the area of Badonviller-Leintrey, at the beginning of
October, 1916, the 19th Ersatz Division was reduced to three regiments
(23d, 32d, 24th Ersatz) and sent to the Briey area (Oct. 8) and from
there to Verdun (sector of Watronville-Damloup).


                                 1917.


COTES DE MEUSE.

1. The 19th Ersatz Division remained in the same sector of the Cotes de
Meuse for almost all of the year 1917. It lost very slightly.

2. Withdrawn from the sector Moranville-Watronville about November, the
division was sent to rest in the Longwy area.


BEZONVAUX.

3. About December 8, it was assembled and sent to Spincourt where, on
December 11, it went into line north of Bezonvaux.


                              RECRUITING.

The 19th Ersatz Division is recruited from the Kingdom of Saxony.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 19th Ersatz Division remained in Lorraine for a long time; it did
not take part in any serious battles. After October, 1916, it only
occupied quiet sectors on the Cotes de Meuse.

It can not be considered as an attack division.


                                 1918.

1. The division occupied the quiet Beaumont sector until June 30, when
it was put at rest near Longuyon until July 11. During this time the
division was given training to fit it for a war of movement. On July 16
it was moved to the Rheims front. Entrained at Montmedy on the 12th, the
division reached Nouvion Porcien the next day, and went by stages to
Bermericourt (northeast of Rheims), where it rested in reserve. On the
17th it moved to the vicinity of Rozoy.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE AND MARNE.

2. From July 20 to 31 the division was engaged in severe fighting at
Plessier-Huleu and Grand Rozoy.

3. It rested near Marle until the 21st of August undergoing
reconstruction. It entrained on that date at Voyenne and reached La Fere
the next day, from where it marched to Barisis and Folembray.


BATTLE OF THE AILETTE.

4. The division entered the line in the Quierzy-Manicamp-Champs area on
August 23. It sustained a French attack on the 28th, losing nearly 500
prisoners. The division was withdrawn on September 3.

5. The division was moved by train from Voyenne to Haboudange via Marle,
Montcornet, Sedan, Montmedy, Longuyon, Audun le Roman, Thionville, Metz,
and Benestroff. It marched to Hampont to the Huhnerwald Camp, where it
rested until September 15.


LORRAINE.

6. It entered line at Arracourt on the 15th and occupied that quiet
sector until the end of hostilities.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. In 1918 it saw but two weeks’
service on an active front.




                        19th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │91 Res.  │383 Ldw. │91 Res.  │383 Ldw. │         │383 Ldw.
              │         │385 Ldw. │         │385 Ldw. │         │385 Ldw.
              │         │388 Ldw. │         │388 Ldw. │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │        (?)        │2 Sqn. 6 Res. Hus.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │281 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │
              │                   │ 91 F. A. Rgt.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(419) Pion. Btn.:  │519 Signal Command:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 303 Pion. Co.     │ 519 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 319 T. M. Co.     │
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │226 Ambulance Co.  │226 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │396 Field Hospital.│396 Field Hospital.
              │                   │91 Res. Field      │10 Field Hospital.
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │519 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │788 M. T. Col.     │788 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (383d Landwehr Regiment: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg. 385th Landwehr
 Regiment: 7th Corps District—Westphalia. 388th Landwehr Regiment: 12th
                        Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1916.


BELGIUM.

1. The 19th Landwehr Division was formed at the same time as the
divisions of the 200 Series (September-October, 1916). It was formed at
Cortemarck on September 29, 1916, by the union of the 383d, 385th, and
388th Landwehr Regiments. These were made up of Landsturm battalions
(Service of Supplies) of the 4th Army in Belgium, to which were added
returned wounded. The 3d Battalion of the 388th Landwehr Regiment
(Saxon) is the old 4th Battalion of the 100th Landwehr.


DIXMUDE.

2. In the beginning of October, 1916, the 19th Landwehr Division
replaced the 204th Division in the Dixmude-Steenstraat sector. It
remained there more than a year.


                                 1917.


RUSSIA.

1. Relieved from the Dixmude front about the middle of October, 1917,
the 19th Landwehr Division was transferred to Russia at the beginning of
November.


RIGA.

2. Arriving in the Riga area about November 15, it went into line near
the coast.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 19th Landwehr Division is made up either of elderly soldiers or
those of mediocre physical strength, forming a body of men incapable, it
appears, of an offensive effort.

In Belgium, however, the division organized an assault troop capable of
making assaults.


                                 1918.


LIVONIA.

1. The 19th Landwehr Division was identified on the shores of the Baltic
in March. The 383d Landwehr Regiment was at Libau on May 8; the 385th
Landwehr Regiment at Riga on the 15th.


FINLAND.

2. Toward the end of July all three regiments of the division were
identified in Finland, but seem to have gone to Esthonia by August,
where they were again identified in October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             20th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │39.      │79.      │39.      │79.      │40.      │77.
              │         │164.     │         │164.     │         │79.
              │40.      │77.      │40.      │77.      │         │92.
              │         │92.      │         │92.      │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │17 Hus. Rgt. (3    │                   │17 Hus. Rgt. (2
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │20 Brig.:          │20 Brig.:          │20 Brig.:
              │ 10 F. A. Rgt.     │ 10 F. A. Rgt.     │ 10 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 46 F. A. Rgt.     │ 46 F. A. Rgt.     │ 46 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  10:              │  10:
              │                   │ Field Co. 10      │ 2 Co. 10 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 20 Pont. Engs.    │ 20 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 20 Tel. Detch.    │ 20 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 20 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │40.      │77.      │40.      │77.
              │         │79.      │         │79.
              │         │92.      │         │92.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.│5 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │20 Art. Command:   │20 Art. Command:
              │ 46 F. A. Rgt.     │ 46 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 155 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 813 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 921 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1339 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/10 or 127) Pion.│10 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 2 Co. 10 Pions.   │ 2 Co. 10 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 10 Pions.   │ 3 Co. 10 Pions.
              │ 20 T. M. Co.      │ 20 T. M. Co.
              │ (296) Searchlight │ 90 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 20 Tel. Detch.    │ 20 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 20 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 83 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │24 Ambulance Co.   │24 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │100 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │93 Field Hospital.
              │                   │20 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │553 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │3 Gleiwitz Landst. │
              │  Depot            │
              │Btn. (6 C. Dist.   │
              │  Btn. No. 26).    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

              (10th Corps District—Hanover and Brunswick.)


                                 1914.

The 20th Division and the 19th Division formed the 10th Army Corps
(Hanover).


FRANCE.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 20th Division went to the Elsenborn
Camp, August 8–10, and entered Belgium on the 11th. It was a part, with
the 10th Corps, of the 2d Army (Von Buelow). It fought at Charleroi, at
Guise, at St. Quentin. It took part in the battle of the Marne from
September 6 to 9 (Congy, Mondement), after which it retired by way of
Neufchâtel sur Aisne to the northwest of Rheims. It took up its position
between the Aisne and Brimont.


                                 1915.

At the beginning of 1915 it was still holding the lines in the vicinity
of Rheims. At the end of March the 164th Infantry Regiment was
transferred to the 111th Division (new formation).


GALICIA.

2. At the end of April, with its regiments raised to four battalions
each, the 20th Division (as well as the 19th Division) was sent to
Galacia, where it took part in the operation of Mackensen’s army. It
lost very heavily there. From July 28 to September 23 the 11th Company
of the 77th Infantry Regiment received at least 133 men as replacements.


FRANCE.

3. Brought back to France in September, the 20th Division took part, in
the month of October, in the battles in the Champagne.

4. From November, 1915, to June, 1916, it held a sector north of the
Aisne (west of Craonne).


                                 1916.


RUSSIA.

1. On June 8, 1916, the 20th Division, with all of the 10th Army Corps,
was transferred again to the Eastern Front. In four days it arrived in
the Kovel area by way of Berlin and Brest Litowsk.

2. On June 13 it was engaged in stopping the Russian advance and then
occupied a sector near Kiselin. Its regiments were filled up in
September and October.

From June to November the losses of the 92d Infantry Regiment had
averaged 160 men per company. (Statements of deserters.) This is the
number of the replacements received during the same period by the 9th
Company of the 77th Infantry Regiment.


FRANCE.

3. The 20th Division was relieved on November 11 and entrained on the
15th for France. Itinerary: Warsaw-Kalich-Berlin-Dusseldorf-Aix la
Chapelle-Liége-Namur. Billeted first in the area of Anor Hirson, the
20th Division was sent to the Sissonne Camp, where its regiments
received training.

4. At the end of December the division took over the sector of Moulin
sous Touvent, Chevillecourt, where it was relieved on January 30, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. In February, 1917, the 20th Division was transferred to Alsace
(Sundgau) in anticipation of a French offensive.

2. In the beginning of March it was brought back to the Laon area, where
it was billeted until the French attack of April 16; its regiments
received some replacements.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

3. In the night of April 16 all the units of the division were
assembled. On April 17–18 they took their positions along the plateau of
the Chemin des Dames on both sides of Cerny en Laonnois, relieving the
16th Reserve Division, which had suffered heavy losses. Between April 18
and May 5 the three regiments of the 20th Division suffered heavy losses
from bombardments. On May 5 (renewal of the general attack by the
French) the division again lost heavily. It was relieved immediately
after the attack. (Apr. 27 to Aug. 10, the 10th Company of the 77th
Infantry Regiment had received not less than 211 men as replacements.)

4. After a few weeks of rest, the division was put into line (end of
May) in a sector of Champagne (Moronvilliers).


RUSSIA.

5. In the beginning of July it was relieved and transferred for a third
time to the Russian front, first in Galicia and then in Courland. It
remained there until September 19. At this date it entrained at Riga and
was brought back to France by way of Chavli, Kovno, Grodno, Bromberg,
Berlin, Hanover, Cologne, Aix la Chapelle, Mons, Valenciennes.


FLANDERS.

6. Arriving at Roulers on September 27, it immediately went into action
in an attacking sector, north of Zonnebeke, without having any rest, on
October 4.


ARTOIS.

7. Relieved almost immediately, it was put into line on October 17 in
the Queant sector, where it still was at the beginning of February,
1918.


                              RECRUITING.

It is recruited from the Province of Hanover in the Duchy of Brunswick.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

It had very heavy losses on May 5, 1917 (many killed, 700 prisoners),
which, joined to the preceding losses, lessened the value of the 20th
Division very much.

It is to be noted that two weeks before the attack of May 5 the units of
the division defended themselves obstinately.


                                 1918.


CAMBRAI.

1. The division was relieved by the 119th Division about the middle of
January; it, in turn, relieved the 119th Division during the first week
in February. It was relieved by the 195th Division on February 16, and
marched to Aubigny au Bac; it reached Basaecles (southeast of Tournai)
the 18th. Here it was given a month’s course of training in open
warfare.

2. On March 14 the division marched to Peruwelz and then via St. Amand-
Lourches-Bouchain, arriving at Pronville, where it entered line on the
20th. It advanced through Noreuil, Bapaume, Grevillers, Irles, and
Miraumont. During this fighting the division suffered severely, its
casualties amounting to 50 per cent of its effectives; very few officers
left. It did not advance with the rest of the line during the night of
the 24–25th, its place being taken by the 24th Division. It followed in
support of the line, however, and relieved the 24th Division east of
Colincamps on the 29th. A document captured on the 28th shows that the
strength of the 3d Battalion of the 77th Regiment (excluding the machine
gun company) was reduced to 214 men. Another battalion was reduced to 80
men and 1 officer.


WOEVRE.

3. The division was withdrawn early in April, and was sent to the Mars
la Tour region, where it rested and was reconstituted. About the 20th it
relieved the 82d Reserve Division in the Seuzey-Lamorville-Spada sector
(north of St. Mihiel); relieved toward the end of the month, it went to
the Arlon area, where it received large drafts (in large part of the
1919 class), and where it was put through a long and thorough course of
training. Toward the end of June it was transported to the Sedan area,
from which it marched (about July 15) toward Soissons.


SOISSONS.

4. On the 21st of July the division reinforced the front near
Villemontoire (south of Soissons). Here heavy losses were again
suffered. It was relieved by the 50th Reserve Division on the 29th and
went to rest in the Chimay area, where it received a draft from the
disbanded 260th Reserve Regiment (78th Reserve Division).


ARRAS.

5. On the night of the 27–28th of August the division moved up into the
Drocourt-Queant line, south of Drocourt, and during the following days
went into line in the Oppy sector (northeast of Arras), where a British
attack was expected. The division was withdrawn again during the night
of September 1–2.

6. On the 3d of September it came into line near Ecourt St. Quentin
(south of Arleux), and covered the withdrawal across the Canal du Nord.
It was withdrawn on the 10th.


CAMBRAI.

7. On the 12th it counterattacked in the Havrincourt sector (southwest
of Cambrai). During the subsequent fighting the division suffered heavy
losses. It was withdrawn on the 1st of October.

8. After a few days’ rest it relieved the 21st Division in the
Montbrehain sector (southeast of Cambrai), where it fought until the
13th, when it was relieved and went to the vicinity of Montmedy, where
it rested for about three weeks. Losses, 70 per cent.


MEUSE.

9. The division was expected to enter line west of the Meuse, but the
orders were changed suddenly, and it entered line to the east of it near
Reville on November 5. It remained in line until the 11th, not being
heavily engaged, however, all the prisoners captured subsequently
stating that they were members of rear-guard detachments.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 20th is rated as a first-class division. It fought well throughout
the year and suffered enormous losses. Besides the replacements already
noted, the division received a large draft from its recruit depot in
September (about 50 men per company); September 28, the 92d Regiment
received 93 men; October 30, the companies received 30 men apiece from
the 27th Reserve Regiment (197th Division, dissolved); the companies had
a combat strength of 80 to 100 men.




                        20th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[14]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │384 Ldw. │9 Ers.   │384 Ldw. │9 Ers.   │386 Ldw.
              │         │386 Ldw. │         │386 Ldw. │         │
              │         │387 Ldw. │         │387 Ldw. │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │3 Sqn. 4 Res. Hus. │3 Sqn. 4 Res. Hus.
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │Art Command:       │282 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (Staff and 2
              │                   │                   │  Abt.).
              │                   │ 282 F. A. Rgt.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │420 Pion. Btn.:    │1 Ldw. Co. 9 C.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │ 1 Ldw. Co. 9      │520 Signal Command:
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 3 Ers. Co. 24     │ 520 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 320 T. M. Co.     │
              │                   │ 520 (Wurtt.) Tel. │
              │                   │  Detch.           │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │227 Ambulance Co.  │227 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │88 Field Hospital. │520 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │183 Field Hospital.│
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 14:

  The units below are those grouped under the divisional postal sector
  (660). Other units belonging to the 20th Landwehr Division, but
  operating under other divisions, are listed as attached to such
  division.


                                HISTORY.

  (384th Landwehr Regiment: 4th Corps District-Prussian Saxony. 386th
   Landwehr Regiment: 9th Corps District-Mecklenburg. 387th Landwehr
                            Regiment: (?).)


                                 1916.


BELGIUM.

1. The 20th Landwehr Division dates from September 29, 1916. It was
formed at Roulers from the 384th, 386th, and 387th Landwehr Regiments.
These regiments, formed at this time, respectively, at Menin, Renaix,
and Cooescant, were formed two-thirds of men from the Landsturm
battalions assigned to the Service of Supplies in Belgium, and one-third
of returned wounded.


DIXMUDE.

2. At the beginning of October, 1916, the 20th Landwehr Division
relieved the 206th Division in the sector Dixmude-Schoorbakke. It was
retained there until the middle of November, 1917.


                                 1917.


CAMBRAI.

1. Sent into line southwest of Cambrai (Nov. 1917), the division
suffered heavily in the British offensive of November 20, when it lost
2,773 men as prisoners. It was relieved the day after this action.


RUSSIA.

2. Between November 28 and December 5, the 20th Landwehr Division was
transferred to the Eastern Front.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division is of mediocre value.


                                 1918.


PINSK-UKRAINE.

1. After having held the sector south of Pinsk from December, 1917, to
February, 1918, the 20th Landwehr Division went into the Ukraine in
March. The 384th Landwehr Regiment was in the region west of Gomel on
April 23; the division was at Jitomir in May. The division was still in
Ukraine on the 16th of October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             21st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │41.      │87.      │41.      │87.      │42.      │80 Fus.
              │         │88.      │         │88.      │         │81.
              │42.      │80 Fus.  │42.      │80 Fus.  │         │87.
              │         │81.      │         │81.      │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Uhlan Regt.      │                   │6 Uhlan Regt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │21 Brig.:          │21 Brig.:          │21 Brig.:
              │ 27 F. A. Rgt.     │ 27 F. A. Rgt.     │ 27 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 63 F. A. Rgt.     │ 63 F. A. Rgt.     │ 63 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  21:              │  21:
              │                   │ Field Co. 21      │ 1 Co. 21 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 21 Pont. Engs.    │ 5 Co. 21 Pions.
              │                   │ 21 Tel. Detch.    │ 21 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 21 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 21 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │42.      │80 Fus.  │42.      │80.
              │         │81.      │         │81.
              │         │87.      │         │87.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │(?) 5 Sqn. 6       │2 Sqn. 6 Drag. Rgt.
              │  Dragoon Rgt.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │21 Art. Command:   │21 Art. Command:
              │ 27 F. A. Rgt.     │ 27 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 14 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (5, 6, and 7
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 731 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1101 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1131 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/21 or 134) Pion.│21 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 1 Co. 21 Pions.   │ 1 Co. 21 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 5 Co. 21 Pions.   │ 5 Co. 21 Pions.
              │ 21 T. M. Co.      │ 18 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 21 Searchlight    │ 21 T. M. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 21 Tel. Detch.    │21 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 21 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 41 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │46 Ambulance Co.   │46 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │36 Field Hospital. │154 Field Hospital.
              │21 Vet. Hospital.  │303 Field Hospital.
              │                   │21 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │554 M. T. Col.     │554 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │54 M. G. S. S.     │
              │  Detch.           │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

     (18th Corps District—Hesse—Nassau, Hesse—Hombourg, Frankfort.)


                                 1914.

The 21st Division belonged organically with the 25th Division of the
18th Army Corps District (Frankfort on the Main).


ARDENNES.

1. In August, 1914, it formed a part of the 4th Army (Duke of
Wurttemberg). Entering Luxemburg on August 10, Belgium August 12, it
fought on the 20th at Neuf Chateau, on the 22d at Bertrix and Orgeo, on
the 24th at Matton, and crossed the Meuse on the 28th.


MARNE.

2. In September it took part in the battle of the Marne between Vitry
and Sermaize (Etrepy, Pargny sur Saulx). From there it retired in the
direction of Rheims, being in action northwest of the city from
September 15 to 20.

3. In October it was reassigned with the 18th Army Corps to the 2d Army,
which at this time formed the right flank of the German Army (vicinity
of Roye).


                                 1915.


SOMME.

1. It was retained with its army corps for a year in the vicinity of
Roye (until Oct. 15, 1915). In March, the 25th Division transferred the
88th Infantry Regiment for the formation of the 56th Division.

2. On October 15, 1915, it was withdrawn from the front and sent for a
long rest near St. Quentin.


                                 1916.

The 80th Fusiliers took part in the attack at Frise on January 29, 1916.
A few days afterwards the 21st Division was transferred north of Verdun.


VERDUN.

1. From February 27 to March 16 it was engaged at Verdun (Caures wood,
Louvemont, Douaumont).

2. From March 17 to April 9 it was reorganized (imperial review on Apr.
1, at Marville).

3. From April 10 to 25 it again attacked at Verdun. One may judge of the
losses by the replacements destined to make them good: From February 27
to May 10 the 1st Company of the 80th Fusiliers received at least 205
men; the 5th Company of the 81st Infantry Regiment at least 306
(Soldbuecher). The total losses of the 21st Division from March 15 to
May 19, 1916, amounted to 8,549 officers and privates for the infantry
alone. (Official List of Casualties.)

4. About May 15 the 21st Division occupied the sector west of Craonne,
where it was relieved in September. Two battalions of the 87th Infantry
Regiment were sent in haste to Fricourt at the time of the Somme
offensive (July 2).


SOMME.

5. Between September 12 and 15 the 21st Division was transferred to the
Somme (sectors of Clery-Bouchavesnes), where it suffered heavily.

6. At the beginning of October it was withdrawn from the Somme front and
sent to the Cotes de Meuse in the Apremont area, which it occupied until
November 10.

7. At the end of November it again went into action on the Somme (sector
of Gomiecourt wood of Kratz) and remained there until February 10, when
it went to rest near Chaumont Porcien.


                                 1917.


AISNE.

1. On February 26, 1917, the 21st Division was taken to the front south
of Berry au Bac, between the Godat and Loivre.

2. The three regiments of the division were on line on April 16 and
underwent our attack, which caused them very heavy losses (2,319
prisoners).


RUSSIA.

3. Relieved, about April 19, the 21st Division rested for a few days in
the Neufchatel area and then entrained for the Eastern Front (about May
9). On the 16th it detrained at Vilna. After reorganization, it took
over a sector, on June 14, in the neighborhood of Postavy (north of Lake
Narotch), which it occupied until the end of September. There was no
important operation during this period.


FRANCE.

4. On September 25 it was again transferred to France. Itinerary: Vilna-
Posen-Leipzig-Frankfort on the Main-Saarebruecken-Luxemburg-Sedan.

5. Arriving from Russia on October 1, it went into line about the 28th,
in the sector northeast of Rheims. After a rest in January, it returned
there in February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 21st Division is recruited in Hesse-Nassau, Hesse-Homburg, and
Frankfort. They have borrowed very few from other districts, except from
the 8th (Rhine Province), its neighbor.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 21st Division showed itself, in the course of our attack of April
16, 1916, as a good division, which put up a serious resistance.

The 81st Infantry Regiment, however, was criticised for its conduct on
April 4. (Order of the 42d Brigade, of Apr. 9.) (See Appendix to the
British Summary of Information of May 12, 1917.)

On the Russian front, according to the statement of a deserter (Nov. 7,
1917), the attempts at fraternization and exchange of the Russians were
badly received by order of the German commanders.


                                 1918.

1. The division held the Clonay-La Pompelle sector until April 23. A
local operation was attempted on March 1, with the demolition of Fort La
Pompelle as the objective.

2. When relieved on April 23, the division rested several days at
Warmeriville before being transported to St. Quentin. From there it
marched by stages to Rosieres en Santerre (May 1) and later to the Avre
front.


PICARDY.

3. It relieved the 2d Bavarian Division, on May 3–4 in the sector south
of Thennes and held that sector for five weeks. On June 12, the division
moved into second line, and reappeared in line west of Castel-Bois
Senecat in mid-June. During local operations, June 26 and July 2, the
division lost a number of prisoners. It was relieved about the end of
July.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

The division returned to line on August 13 to oppose the British drive
on the Somme. It was engaged north of Lihons (13th) and east of Proyart.
Toward the end of August it was forced to retreat through Cappy, Frise,
Clery, and Le Mont St. Quentin, until its relief on September 1. Twelve
hundred prisoners were lost during the fighting.


LA CHATEAU.

5. On September 9, the division was reengaged northwest of Jeancourt for
four days, again losing heavily in prisoners. From the 13th to the 30th
the division rested in the vicinity of St. Quentin, close to the front.
It was put back in line at Bellicourt on the 30th and remained in until
October 7.

6. The division rested in the Charleroi area and later at Ghent. It was
brought back to the front by stages and reengaged east of Deynze
(Petegem-Ouest de Nazareth) on October 31. In the closing days, the
division was identified south of Heurne (Nov. 5), Gelsen (8th), Wendle
(8th), south of Ghent (10th).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. In 1918 it was used entirely on
the defensive. At the end the regiments had been reduced to two
battalions of three companies. Morale was very low in the fall. Between
August 14 and the middle of October the division lost 2,473 prisoners on
the Somme battle front.




                         21st Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │41 Res.  │80 Res.  │41 Res.  │80 Res.  │41 Res.  │80 Res.
              │         │87 Res.  │         │87 Res.  │         │87 Res.
              │42 Res.  │81 Res.  │42 Res.  │81 Res.  │42 Res.  │81 Res.
              │         │88 Res.  │         │88 Res.  │         │88 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │7 Res. Drag. Rgt.  │7 Res. Drag. Rgt.  │7 Res. Drag. Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │21 Res. F. A. Rgt. │21 Res. F. A. Rgt. │21 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │  (9 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 and 5 Field Cos. │4 and 5 Field Cos.
   Liaisons.  │  Btn. No. 11.     │  2 Pion. Btn. No. │  2 Pion. Btn. No.
              │                   │  11.              │  11.
              │                   │21 Res. Pont. Engs.│221 T. M. Co.
              │                   │21 Res. Tel. Detch.│21 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │21 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │44 Anti-aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │41 Res.  │80 Res.  │41 Res.  │80 Res.
              │         │87 Res.  │         │87 Res.
              │         │88 Res.  │         │(?).
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 4 Res. Drag.│3 Sqn. 4 Res. Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │1 Sqn. 7 Res. Drag.│
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │126 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 21 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 21 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 136 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 808 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1286 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1350 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(321) Pion. Btn.:  │11 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 11 Pions.   │ 4 Co. 11 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 11 Pions.   │ 5 Co. 11 Pions.
              │ 221 T. M. Co.     │ 221 T. M. Co.
              │ 421 Tel. Detch.   │ 27 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │421 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 421 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 129 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │517 Ambulance Co.  │517 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │51 Res. Field      │51 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │52 Res. Field      │69 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │421 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │749 M. T. Col.     │719 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │21 Bav. Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │  (Staff, 1 and 3
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │1 Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (Staff, 5 and 6
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │821 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │90 Artillery
              │                   │  Observation
              │                   │  Section. (Flash
              │                   │  Spotters.)
              │                   │103 Sound Ranging
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │202 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │208 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │237 Carrier Pigeon
              │                   │  Loft.
              │                   │364 Carrier Pigeon
              │                   │  Loft.
              │                   │Elements attached
              │                   │  Aug. 24, 1918.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (18th Corps District—Hesse—Nassau and the south of Westphalia.)


                                 1914.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 21st Reserve Division formed, with the
25th Reserve Division, the 18th Reserve Corps. It belonged to the 4th
Army (Prince Albrecht of Wurttemberg). Detraining near Saarburg (Rhine
Province) on August 10–12, it passed to the north of Luxemburg and
entered Belgian Luxemburg, by Martelange.


ARDENNES.

2. After fighting at Neufchateau on August 22, the 21st Reserve Division
reached Carignan on the 25th, fought at Mouzon on the 28th, crossed the
Meuse at that point, and from there, by Grandpré, skirting the Argonne
to the west, it arrived at the Marne-Rhine Canal on September 6.


ARGONNE-CHAMPAGNE.

3. At the battle of the Marne it went into action on the Saulx in the
vicinity of Mognéville (Sept. 7–10, south of Revigny). It effected its
retreat by way of the Givry en Argonne, Ste. Menehould, Vienne la Ville,
and stopped on the heights to the south of Cernay en Dormois on
September 14.

4. The 21st Reserve Division established its positions in the sector of
Ville sur Tourbe and remained there until June, 1916.


                                 1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. From January to December, 1915, the division was in the sector of
Ville sur Tourbe north of Massiges à L’Aisne.

2. In September the division took part in the Champagne battle.


                                 1916.

1. The 21st Reserve Division continued to occupy the Massiges sector
from January to June, 1916.


VERDUN.

2. After a rest in the Briey area from the end of June until July 15,
the division was sent to Verdun (sector of Fumin wood) where it went
into action from July 15–25 to the beginning of September. During this
period it suffered heavy losses, which made it necessary to give men as
replacements on August 12, taken from the 83d Landwehr Regiment and the
36th Reserve Infantry Regiment, taken in haste from the Argonne; at the
end of August it received conscripts of the 1917 class who had only been
called up in May, many of whom came from depots in Baden.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. At the beginning of September, the 21st Reserve Division came back
into its own sector of Ville sur Tourbe. A short time afterwards it gave
the 81st Reserve Infantry Regiment to the 222d Division a new formation.

4. In the middle of October it was sent to rest in the Rethel area.


VERDUN.

5. On August 26 and 27 it was concentrated in the vicinity of Senon-
Foameix. It occupied the sector of Hardaumont until December 7. After a
few days’ rest it was brought back into line at Verdun (Bezonvaux, on
Dec. 16).


                                 1917.

1. The division left the Verdun front on January 11, 1917, very much
exhausted.


LORRAINE.

2. On February 24, 1917, it took over the sector Letricourt-Moncel in
Lorraine.


AISNE.

3. After a few days’ rest at Morhange it entrained on April 14 for the
Aisne. Detraining between Hirson and Vervins, it was concentrated in the
vicinity of Prouvais-Amifontaine. On April 18 and 19, after the French
advance of April 16 in the vicinity of Juvincourt, it took up its
position between the Miette and the Aisne as a reenforcement division,
and then to replace units in the line. It attacked on May 18, near the
Mauchamp Farm, and suffered heavy losses.

4. Relieved between the 27th and 30th of May, it was sent to rest and
reorganized (June replacements; mostly men of the 1918 class).


CHAMPAGNE.

5. It then occupied a sector in Champagne southwest of Nauroy from July
19–20 to October 22.


CAMBRAI.

6. After a rest in the vicinity of Cambrai in November, it went into
action at the end of November, east of Cambrai (southeast of Bourlon).
It remained in line south of the Bapaume-Cambrai road until the end of
December.


                              RECRUITING.

The division is recruited in Hesse-Nassau and the extreme southern part
of Westphalia. It received few outside elements except under exceptional
circumstances (e. g., on Aug. 12, 1916, at Verdun).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 21st Reserve Division is a good division. (October, 1917.)

On the Aisne front (April to May, 1917) the 21st Reserve Division held a
difficult sector. The unsuccessful counterattacks which it launched
there diminished its offensive value. Nevertheless, on the whole, it
gave a good account of itself.

In Champagne (August to October, 1917) its activity was limited to a few
assaults carried out energetically.


                                 1918.

1. In the March offensive the division advanced from la Vacquerie to
Beaumont Hamel, which it reached on March 27. Here the line stabilized
and it held this sector throughout April, May, and June. It was relieved
by the 16th Reserve Division on the night of July 3–4.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

2. The division rested in the Bapaume area until it returned to line
northwest of Hamelincourt on August 6–7, relieving the 5th Bavarian
Division. It met the British attack in the region and was driven back
through Croisilles, Cherisy, and St. Leger until its withdrawal on
August 30. Nine hundred prisoners were lost in the engagement.

3. The division rested in the Tournai area until September 18, when it
reenforced the front south of Villers-Guislain. About this time the 81st
Reserve Regiment was broken up and distributed among the regiments of
the 21st Reserve Division. The division fought at Gouzeaucourt (28th),
Gonnelieu (30th), Banteux (30th), Gouy (Oct. 3), Beaurevoir (5th),
Villers Outreaux (8th), Clary (9th), Le Cateau (11th). After losing
1,550 prisoners the division was withdrawn on October 17. According to a
divisional order of October 1, the strength was so low as to warrant the
reduction in half of the normal allotment of kitchen and supply wagons.

4. The division returned from close reserve on October 23 northeast of
Haussy. In the closing days it fought at Vendegies (24th), Ruesnes
(24th), Orsinval (Nov. 2), southwest of Wargnies le Grand (4th), east of
Villers Pol and in the Gommegnies sector (5th). The division withdrew on
November 8.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. During 1918 its service was
entirely in the area north and south of the Somme, where it saw a great
deal of heavy fighting.




                        21st Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │11 Ldw.      │20 Ldw.      │11 Ldw.      │20 Ldw.
              │             │35 Ldw.      │             │35 Ldw.
              │             │435 Ldw.     │             │435 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 6 Cuirassier Rgt.   │4 Sqn. 6 Cuirassier Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │            (?)
              │ 253 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(421) Pion. Btn.:          │414 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 1 Landst. Co. 14 C. Dist. │ 1 Ldw. Co. 3 C. Dist.
              │  Pions.                   │  Pions.
              │ 406 T. M. Co.             │ 1 Landst. Co. 15 C. Dist.
              │                           │  Pions.
              │ 521 Tel. Detch.           │ 80 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │521 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 521 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 175 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │553 Ambulance Co.          │553 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │54 Res. Field Hospital.    │54 Res. Field Hospital.
              │105 Res. Field Hospital.   │
              │Vet. Hospital.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │797 M. T. Col.             │797 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (20th and 35th Landwehr Regiments: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg. 435th
             Landwehr: Mixed—11th and 14th Corps Districts.)


                                 1917.


BELGIUM.

1. The 21st Landwehr Division was formed in April, 1917, by the addition
of the 435th Regiment to the two regiments of the 11th Landwehr Brigade.
This brigade, until then independent, had come to Belgium the 2d of
August, 1914, had detached certain of its elements in Picardy, from the
end of September to the end of November, and had fought near Ypres in
November and December. From March to October, 1915, it acted as garrison
at Brussels and Antwerp. At the end of December, 1915, it reappeared on
the Belgian front between Dixmude and Ypres (from Steenstraat to the
Ypres-Zonnebeke road).


RUSSIA.

2. In May, 1917, the 21st Landwehr Division was identified in the
vicinity of Arras. On May 16 it entrained for the Eastern Front.
Itinerary: Liege-Aix la Chapelle-Paderborn-Halle-Posen-Warsaw.
Detraining at Brest-Litovsk on May 21, it remained in training for 10
days, was then sent to the Niémen front, and occupied the Vichnev sector
until March, 1918.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 21st Landwehr Division did work in the service of supplies in
Belgium and held very calm sectors in Russia. Its offensive value seems
mediocre.

On the Russian front in January, 1918, the 20th Landwehr Regiment
received 600 men of the 1919 class in exchange for its men of 25 to 35
years of age sent to the Western Front. Before being brought back to
France in March, 1918, the 35th Landwehr Regiment left its older men in
Russia and received 900 men of 19 to 30 years of age.


                                 1918.

1. The division held the Badonviller sector from April 29 until the
armistice. The division was strong in the number of effectives, but
their quality and morale was low. The division was rated as a fourth-
class division.




                             22d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │43.      │82.      │43.      │82.      │43.      │82.
              │         │83.      │         │83.      │         │83.
              │44.      │32.      │44.      │32.      │         │167.
              │         │167.     │         │167.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Cuirassier Rgt.  │                   │6 Cuirassier Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │  (2 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │22 Brig.:          │22 Brig.:          │22 Brig.:
              │ 11 F. A. Rgt.     │ 11 F. A. Rgt.     │ 11 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │ 47 F. A. Rgt.     │ 47 F. A. Rgt.     │ 47 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  11:              │  11:
              │                   │ Field Co. 11      │ 2 Co. 11 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 22 Pont. Engs.    │ 22 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 22 Tel. Detch.    │ 22 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 22 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │2 Cyclist Co. (11
              │                   │                   │  Jag. Btn.).
              │                   │                   │36 Air Sqn.
              │                   │                   │109 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │43.      │82.      │43.      │82.
              │         │83.      │         │83.
              │         │167.     │         │167.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 6 Cuir. Rgt.│6 Sqn. 6 Cuirassier
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │22 Art. Command:   │22 Art. Command:
              │ 11 F. A. Rgt.     │ 11 F. A. Rgt. (not
              │                   │  including 4 and 5
              │                   │  Abt.).
              │                   │ 50 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 1140 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1141 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1142 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/11 or 128) Pion.│128 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 1 Co. 11 Pions.   │ 1 Co. 11 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 2 Co. 11 Pions.   │ 2 Co. 11 Pions.
              │ 22 T. M. Co.      │ 225 T. M. Co.
              │ 51 Searchlight    │ 51 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 22 Tel. Detch.    │22 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 22 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 109 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.:     │26 Ambulance Co.:
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │ 103 Field         │ 103 Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │ 107 Field         │ 107 Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │ 110 Field         │ 148 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │ Vet. Hospital.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │52 Supply Train.   │
              │51 Supply Train.   │
              │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │2 Cyclist Co. (11  │
              │  Jag. Btn.).      │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

               (11th Corps District—Electorate of Hesse.)


                                 1914.

1. The 22d Division formed a part of the 11th Army Corps (Cassel) with
the 38th Division.


BELGIUM.

2. One of its brigades, the 43d, was sent to Liege and entrained on
August 2–3, 1914. The other rejoined it there and after the surrender of
the city the 22d Division, with the rest of the 11th Army Corps, formed
a part of the 3d Army (Von Hausen). It went to Namur and then to Eastern
Prussia.


RUSSIA.

3. In October the 22d Division (and the 11th Army Corps) was in Poland,
where it remained until May, 1915. It took part in the violent attacks
along the Bzura and the Rawka.


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. In April, 1915, the division gave the 32d Infantry Regiment to the
103d Division (a new formation).

2. In July it was separated from the 38th Division. It took part in the
offensive of the 11th Army (Mackensen), and arrived on the Styr in
October. It then formed a part of the 4th Austrian Army.


                                 1916.

1. In the spring of 1916 the 22d Division was in the rear of Vilna
(May), after having been at Mitau. On June 11 it entrained at Mitau for
Vilna.


GALICIA.

2. It then formed a part of the troops destined to withstand the Russian
offensive in Galicia and took up its position on the Lipa.


ROUMANIA.

3. In December it was sent to Roumania and operated in Moldavia.


                                 1917.


GALICIA.

1. It returned in January, 1917, to the 4th Austrian Army on the Lipa.

2. At the beginning of July it was in Volhynia (Mikolajow, northwest of
Brody).

3. On July 7–9 the division was relieved and sent to the area south of
Tarnopol. It arrived there on July 15 and took part in the offensive
against the Russians. It suffered rather heavy losses in the beginning,
the Russians having resisted for several days.

4. The 22d Division remained in this area until October 7. On this date
it was relieved and entrained for the Western Front (itinerary:
Brzezany-Torgau-Erfurt-Frankfort on the Main-Mayence-Sarrebrucken-
Thionville-Montmedy), detraining at Douzy (east of Sedan) about October
14.

At the end of October the division, after a few days of rest, was put in
line in the Forges sector (Verdun area), where it had a few losses
(November, December). January 1918, it was on the front north of Verdun
(right bank of the Meuse).


                              RECRUITING.

The 22d Division is recruited from the electorate of Hesse. Alsace-
Lorrainers were numerous during its stay on the Eastern Front.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 22d Division, coming from Russia, where it had had rather easy
victories, appeared to have a relatively good morale. Its spirit,
however, did not appear very combative (Nov. 1917).


                                 1918.

1. The division was in line on the right bank of the Meuse (Samogneux-
Cote 344) from January, 1918, to the end of May, when it was relieved by
the 6th Bavarian Division.

2. It was in reserve southwest of Reims on June 16, and came into line
at Anthenay on June 20. About the 1st of July the 103d Division relieved
the 22d Division, which went to rest in the neighborhood of Fismes and
Hourges.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

3. The division was engaged southeast of Ville en Tardenois (Chambrecy,
Champlat, Velval) July 15–26. It fell back in the line Romigny-Ville en
Tardenois and was relieved on August 7. About 400 prisoners were lost in
this fighting.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. The division rested in the Cambrai area until August 29, when it was
moved up to the line. On the 1st of September it was engaged on the
Arras-Cambrai road near Bullecourt. The British attack rolled it back on
Inchy and Marquion, where it was withdrawn on the 10th. The division
lost 1,100 prisoners in the week of fighting.


THE SCARPE.

5. It rested until September 28, when it came into line north of Cambrai
(Epinoy), Sancourt, Blécourt. About October 1 it was moved north and
relieved the 48th Reserve Division north of the Scarpe. In the sector it
fought until October 23 (south east of Lille, St. Amand, southwest of
Odomez).

6. Upon its relief, the division marched from Thulin, west of Mons, on
October 24 to the Le Quesnoy area, and on the next day relieved the
185th Division east of Gussignies. In November it was in the fighting
around Le Quesnoy and Gommegnies until its withdrawal on November 7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was employed in the July
offensive, but made little headway. On the defensive the division
appears to have done better than many divisions of a higher rating.




                         22d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │43 Res.  │71 Res.  │43 Res.  │71 Res.  │43 Res.  │71 Res.
              │         │94 Res.  │         │94 Res.  │         │82 Res.
              │44 Res.  │32 Res.  │44 Res.  │32 Res.  │         │94 Res.
              │         │82 Res.  │         │82 Res.  │         │
              │ 11 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 11 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 11 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Res. Horse Jag.  │1 Res. Horse Jag.  │1 Res. Horse Jag.
              │  Rgt. (3 Sqns.).  │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │22 Res. F. A. Rgt. │22 Res. F. A. Rgt. │22 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │  (9 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No. 4.│  Pion. Btn. No. 4.│  Pion. Btn. No. 4.
              │                   │22 Res. Pont. Engs.│222 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │22 Res. Tel. Detch.│22 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │22 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │43 Res.  │71 Res.  │43 Res.  │71 Res.
              │         │82 Res.  │         │82 Res.
              │         │94 Res.  │         │94 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 1 Res. Horse│1 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.
              │  Jag. Rgt.        │
              │2 Sqn. 1 Res. Heavy│
              │  Cav. Rgt.        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │22 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │ 22 Res. F. A. Rgt.│43 Ft. A. Btn.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │  (Staff, and 1, 2,
              │                   │  and 3 Btries.).
              │                   │737 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1379 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1380 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(322) Pion. Btn.:  │322 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 4      │ 1 Res. Co. 4
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 4      │ 2 Res. Co. 4
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 222 T. M. Co.     │ 103 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 27, 251, and 271  │422 Signal Command:
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Sections.        │
              │ 422 Tel. Detch.   │ 422 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 35 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │511 Ambulance Co.  │511 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │21 Res. Field      │23 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │50 Res. Field      │50 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │422 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

        (11th Corps District—Electorate of Hesse and Thuringia.)


                                 1914.

1. At the beginning of the war the 22d Reserve Division formed the 4th
Reserve Corps with the 7th Reserve Division. It was a part of the 1st
Army (Von Kluck).


BELGIUM.

2. Concentrated at Dusseldorf (Aug. 10) the 22d Reserve Division reached
Brussels by way of Aix la Chapelle, Tongres, and Louvain. The 94th
Reserve Infantry Regiment remained at Brussels until September 5, when
it was hastily called to rejoin the division. The 71st Reserve Infantry
Regiment remained there until August 31 and then figured in the battle
of the Marne on September 6.


MARNE.

3. The 44th Reserve Brigade joined to the 7th Reserve Division went to
Ath, Conde, Amiens (Aug. 30–31), and Creil (Sept. 2), almost without
combat, but by forced marches to the extreme right flank of the 1st
Army. In action on the right bank of the Ourcq, it withdrew to the north
of the Aisne.

4. The 43d Reserve Brigade, of which only one regiment had fought with
the 44th from September 6 to 9 was filled upon the 9th and went to
Peronne. On September 11, strengthened by the 72d Reserve Regiment,
detached from the 7th Reserve Division, it was concentrated north of
Compiegne.


TRACY LE MONT.

5. Until September 20 the 43d Reserve Brigade fought in the vicinity of
Tracy le Mont with some elements of the 7th Reserve Division. The 44th
Reserve Brigade was engaged with the majority of this division on the
Nouvron Plateau.


NOUVRON.

6. On September 20 the 43d Reserve Brigade rejoined the 44th
(Hautebraye-Chevillecourt.)

7. On November 12 elements of the division took part in the attack on
the Nouvron Plateau and suffered rather heavy losses.


                                 1915.


AISNE.

1. The 22d Reserve Division occupied the lines between the Aisne and the
Oise until the autumn of 1915.

2. In January, 1915, elements of the division took part in the battle
around Soissons. In April, 1915, the 32d Reserve Infantry Regiment
became a part of the 113th Division.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. At the end of October the 22d Reserve Division left the area
northwest of Soissons to go to Champagne (Souain sector).


                                 1916.

1. The 22d Reserve Division left Champagne at the end of January, 1916;
it went to rest at Attigny, which it left on February 29.


VERDUN.

2. From March 1 to 5, at the height of the Verdun offensive, the
division was reassembled between Dun and Vilosnes behind the front. On
March 6 it attacked on the left bank of the Meuse. It took part in the
operations in this sector (valley of the Forges and Corbeaux wood) until
the middle of April. In the first attacks of March the 6th Company of
the 82d Reserve Infantry Regiment required replacements of 90 men, among
whom were recruits from the 1916 class. After a few days of rest the 22d
Reserve Division again attacked at Verdun, south of Corbeaux wood and
near the Mort Homme (May 23 to beginning of June). It lost very heavily.
Its attacks at Verdun had cost it 90 per cent of its infantry. From
April 24 to June 26 the 1st and 4th Companies of the 11th Battalion of
Reserve Chasseurs had each received at least 204 men as replacements;
the 6th Company of the 94th Reserve Infantry Regiment, from March 9 to
June 15, 217 men; the 8th Company, 207 men.

3. The division rested and was reorganized in the vicinity of Fourmies-
Hirson; it was then sent between St. Quentin and Tergnier.


SOMME.

4. At the beginning of the Somme offensive the 22d Reserve Division was
concentrated southeast of Peronne on July 2. It went into action south
of the Somme (Biaches-Belloy), and suffered heavy losses (1,500
prisoners between July 2 and July 10).


CHAMPAGNE.

5. Transferred to Champagne, it rested for a few days and then went into
line east of Rheims (Auberive sector) and in the Prosnes sector at the
end of August.

6. At the end of October, after it had rested in the Rethel-Vouziers
sector until November 10, the division was placed behind the Cambrai-St.
Quentin sector.


SOMME.

7. It went back to the Somme at the beginning of December east of
Rancourt and remained there until December 20.


                                 1917.

1. The 22d Reserve Division passed the month of January, 1917, at rest
in the Valenciennes area.

2. In February it took over the Saillisel sector, where it took part in
secondary action. In March the division took part in the withdrawal and
established itself in the Hindenburg line between Gonnelieu and Le
Catelet.

3. About May 20 the 22d Reserve Division went to rest in the
neighborhood of Lens and Tourcoing.


FLANDERS.

4. On June 14 it went into line in the Comines sector, west of Warneton,
where it remained until the end of June.

5. After a period of rest north of Lille (end of June to July 23–24) it
went into action southeast of Zillebeke, where it underwent the British
attack of July 31, and suffered very heavily.

6. Relieved immediately after the attack, the division was sent to the
Bullecourt sector (Aug. 10-Sept. 22).

7. Until October 5 it rested in the vicinity of Courtrai. At this date
it occupied the Becelaere sector as a counterattacking division,
supporting the 4th Guard Division, and suffered heavily from
bombardments (Oct. 5–21).


LORRAINE-ALSACE.

8. At the beginning of November it was in line in Lorraine, southwest of
Delme, then in Alsace (sector of Aspach south of the Rhone-Rhine Canal
in December).


                              RECRUITING.

The 22d Reserve Division is recruited from the Electorate of Hesse and
Thuringia. In case of emergency replacements are occasionally furnished
by neighboring corps districts (8th Corps in June, 1916). At the end of
October, 1917, unequally trained men were received from the Eastern
Front (the 71st Infantry Reserve Regiment receiving men from the depot
of the 146th Infantry Regiment, men from the Service of Supplies,
convalescents, or men of mediocre physical quality).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 22d Reserve Division is a mediocre division (December, 1917). The
units of the 11th Corps District have generally fought well during the
entire war.

The 22d Reserve District lost very heavily in the battles of Verdun and
the Somme and from artillery fire at Ypres.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The division left Alsace about April 6 and came into the Lys battle
line on April 16 northeast of Bailleul. Its former sector in the Vosges
was taken over by an extension of the neighboring divisions. The route
of the division lay through Strasbourg, Treves, Cologne, Verviers,
Liege, Brussels, Courtrai-Roubaix, a journey of two days. The division
participated in heavy fighting about Kemmel until its relief on May 1.

2. When relieved by the 117th Division, it marched to Roubaix, where it
rested for two days. From there it marched to Waereghem, where the 82d
Reserve Regiment rested for about eight days. About May 11 the 22d
Reserve Division entrained at Audenarde and was railed to Rieux, 5 miles
east of Cambrai. The division marched via Cambrai to the Montauban-
Longueval-Gullemont area, where it went into rest billets. On the night
of May 31-June 1 the 1st Battalion, 82d Reserve Regiment, reenforced the
122d Fusilier Regiment (243d Division) near Avelcy.


VERDUN.

3. The division entrained in the Cambrai area on June 8 and traveled via
Valenciennes-Mons Charleroi-Dinant-Mezieres-Sedan to Ligny sur Meuse,
where it detrained on June 9. The next day it relieved the 53d Reserve
Division east of Bethincourt. It held the sector until about July 25.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. Entraining at Brieulles, the division moved by Sedan and Vouziers to
St. Morel and Savigny sur Aisne, where it rested until August 5. On the
6th it came into line in the St. Souplet-Somme Py sector, which it held
until August 23.

5. The division left Champagne and moved from Semide by Laon-La Fere-
Tergnier to the Noyon area. Relieved August 24–27, it detrained at Flavy
le Martel and La Fere, and rested a day at Cugny, Petit Detroit, Bois de
Genlis, and Bois de Frieres before moving east of Noyon to cover the
retreat of elements of the 71st Division and the 105th Division.


NOYON.

6. On August 29 it came into line and held the sector Mont St. Simeon-
Baboeuf. The division resisted the French attack until September 3, when
it fell back slowly toward the Crozat Canal, offering resistance at
Behericourt-Baboeuf (4th), Cuivry-Caillouel-Crepigny-Bethancourt (5th),
and Villequier Aumont (6th). It was relieved on the night of September
7–8 by the 11th Division and rested at Ribemont and then farther north
in the billets at Fontaine Notre Dame, Regny, and Homblieres.


ST. QUENTIN.

7. From September 10 to 12 the division was relieving the 75th Reserve
Division in the sector Castres-Contescourt-Hill 98. The division held in
this vicinity until September 28 when the British advance north of St.
Quentin compelled it to retreat. Between October 2 and 5 the division
held the line Harley-Neuville-St. Amand. On the 8th it was again forced
to retreat. The division was relieved on October 15–16. In this fighting
the division lost at least one-third of its effectives. The battalion
had but three companies, and the effective strength of the infantry
companies averaged about 35. The entire division had but about 1,300
infantry combatants.

8. After its relief by the 18th Division on the night of October 15–16,
the division remained near the front at Grand Verly, Hannappes, and
Lesquielles. It was suddenly alerted on October 17 and obliged to return
to support the 18th Division west of Petit Verly. It put up a stiff
resistance on October 18, but was thrown back east of the Sambre Canal,
losing a large number of prisoners.

In the closing week the division was at Favril (5th), Marvilles (6th).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was heavily engaged at Kemmel
in April, after which it did not appear in an active front until the
autumn. The division resisted the Allied advance on the St. Quentin area
in September and October with great tenacity.




                         22d Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │         1918[15]
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │6 Ldw.       │34 Ldw.      │             │34 Ldw. (3d
              │             │             │             │  Btn.).
              │             │49 Ldw.      │             │49 Ldw. (2d
              │             │             │             │  Btn.).
              │             │10 Landst. (4│             │
              │             │  Btns.).    │             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │            (z)            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │219 F. A. Rgt. (Staff and 3
              │                           │  Abt.).
              │ 219 F. A. Rgt.            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(422) Pion. Btn.:          │522 Signal Command:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ (322) T. M. Co.           │ 522 Tel. Detch.
              │ 30 Searchlight Section.   │
              │ 284 Searchlight Section.  │
              │ Tel. Detch.               │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │551 Ambulance Co.          │11 Res. Field Hospital.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │Field Hospital.            │139 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                 │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────

Footnote 15:

  The units below are those grouped under the 22d Landwehr Division
  Postal Sector (380). Other units of the 22d Landwehr Division, but
  functioning with other divisions, are carried as attached to such
  division.


                                HISTORY.

                     (2d Corps District—Pomerania.)


                                 1917.


RUSSIA.

1. The 22d Landwehr Division was formed on the Eastern Front in the
vicinity of Riga, at the end of March, 1917. The 6th Landwehr Brigade,
which entered into its composition, had belonged to the 1st Landwehr
Division (former Jacobi Division), then had become independent when the
latter left the Riga front to go to Volhynia. It is then that the
addition of the 10th Landsturm Battalion to the Mitau group made the 22d
Landwehr Division from the 6th Landwehr Brigade.


COURLAND.

2. From April to October, 1917, the 22d Landwehr Division remained on
the Riga front (vicinity of Olai).


VOLHYNIA.

3. In October, it was transferred to the west of Kachovka (Volhynia),
where it remained until February, 1918.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 22d Landwehr Division remained on the Russian front from the time of
its formation, March, 1917.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. In February, 1918, the 22d Landwehr Division advanced into the
Ukraine, where it was between Kiev and Koursk on the 24th of March. On
May 9 the division was near Jitomir. The 219th Field Artillery Regiment
was at Kiev on the 24th of May. On September 7 the division was
identified near Stochod.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             23d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │45.      │100 Gren.│45.      │100 Gren.│45.      │100 Gren.
              │         │101 Gren.│         │101 Gren.│         │101 Gren.
              │46.      │108 Fus. │46.      │108 Fus. │         │108 Fus.
              │         │182.     │         │182.     │         │
              │   12 Jag. Btn.    │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │20 Hus. Rgt.       │                   │18 Hus. Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │23 Brig.:          │23 Brig.:          │23 Brig.:
              │ 12 F. A. Rgt.     │ 12 F. A. Rgt.     │ 12 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 48 F. A. Rgt.     │ 48 F. A. Rgt.     │ 48 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  12:              │  12:
              │                   │ Field Co. 12      │ 1 Co. 12 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 23 Pont. Engs.    │ 23 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 23 Tel. Detch.    │ 23 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 23 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │45.      │100 Gren.│45.      │100.
              │         │101 Gren.│         │101.
              │         │108 Fus. │         │108.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqns. 20 Hus.    │1 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.
              │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │23 Art. Command:   │23 Art. Command:
              │ 12 F. A. Rgt.     │ 12 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 19 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (1 and 3
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 891 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 959 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1100 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/12) Pion. Btn.: │23 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 12 Pions.   │ 1 Co. 12 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 12 Pions.   │ 3 Co. 12 Pions.
              │ 6 Co. 12 Pions.   │ 23 T. M. Co.
              │ 23 T. M. Co.      │ 125 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 23 Tel. Detch.    │23 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 23 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 12 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │30 Ambulance Co.   │30 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │114 Field Hospital.│114 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │117 Field Hospital.
              │                   │23 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (12th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. The 23d Division, on mobilization, was a part of the 12th Army Corps
with the 32d Division (2d Army, Von Hausen). It detrained on August
9–11, 1914, at Eifel, north of Treves, and entered Belgium on the 18th
by the north of Luxemburg.


MARNE.

2. It went into action on August 23 at Dinant, crossed the Meuse on the
24th, entered France on the 26th, went to the west of Chalons and took
part in the battle of the Marne on September 7 at Sompuis (west of Vitry
le Francois).


AISNE.

3. The 23d Division, with the 2d Army Corps, established itself in the
area northwest of Rheims.


                                 1915.


AISNE.

1. The division held the front Craonne-Berry au Bac until July, 1916. In
this sector the losses were very slight.

2. In March, 1915, some of its elements were in Champagne for a short
time. In April, the 182d Infantry Regiment was taken for the 123d
Division (a new formation).


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. On July 3, 1916, at the beginning of the Franco-English offensive,
the 23d Division detached some elements of the 101st and 108th Regiments
to reinforce the divisions engaged in the attack (region of Sovecourt-
Vermandovillers).

2. From the end of July and until the 1st of September the 100th
Grenadier Regiment was incorporated in a new division (Franke Division),
which held the front from Deniecourt to Vermandovillers.

3. The other regiments of the 23d Division continued to occupy the
sector of Craonne-Berry au Bac until the end of August.

4. On September 4 the 101st and 108th Regiments, coming from Berry au
Bac, were sent to the Somme. They suffered considerable losses.

5. About September 15 the 23d Division was regrouped with its normal
elements (the Franke Division being dissolved) and received 2,700 men as
replacements (men of the Landstrum called in April and May and young men
of the 1917 class, most of them having had not more than two or three
months’ service. The 12th Company of the 100th Grenadier Regiment
received at least 108 men as replacements on September 20).

6. From October 1 to 6 the 23d Division went back into line between the
Chaulnes Railroad and the south of Vermandovillers. It again lost very
heavily during the time it remained in line until October 20. (The 2d
Company of the 108th Riflemen received, on Oct. 27, replacements of at
least 97 men, most of whom were returned wounded and convalescents.
Since Sept. 17 it had received at least 198 newcomers; the same holds
true for the 4th Company of the 104th Grenadier Regiment).

7. Relieved about October 25, the division was sent to a sector in the
Roye (Beuvraignes) area in November.


                                 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. It occupied this sector (between Armancourt and Roye) until the
moment of the German retirement and retired to St. Quentin on March 25,
1917.

2. Relieved and sent to rest at the beginning of April in the Sedan
area, it went up in the middle of the month to the sector in Champagne
between Hill 232 (east of Nauroy) and the Suippe.

3. On April 19 the 101st and 108th Infantry Regiments counterattacked
energetically and in very good order between the Teton and the Suippe
and obtained some local success for a short time. On April 20 the 100th
Infantry Regiment went into action in its turn.

4. Upon the conclusion of these operations, the 23d Division took up its
position on the new front (west of Auberive) and remained there until
the beginning of December, after making up for the heavy losses suffered
in April. At the beginning of January, 1918, the 23d Division went to
occupy the sector of Loivre, northwest of Rheims, and in February the
sector of Courcy.


                              RECRUITING.

The 23d Division is purely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 23d Division is very good.

It lost very heavily at the time of the offensive, April, 1917, in
Champagne, but still appeared good.


                                 1918.

In February, 1918, the morale of the division seemed high.

1. The division continued in the sector northwest of Rheims (Courcy-
Brimont) until about February 20, where it was relieved by the 213th
Division and moved toward the Somme front.

2. It was transported to Neufchatel on the 23d. From there it proceeded
by stages to north of Guise (Esqueheries, La Neuville-le-Dorengt). It
rested and underwent training in this area until March 18. It marched by
night toward the front by way of Bohain, Fresnoy le Grand (where the
Kaiser inspected it), Le Verguier (evening of Mar. 21–22).


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

3. The division followed the advance in third line from March 22 to 29
through Holnon, Beauvois, Athies, St. Christ, Chaulnes, Rosieres,
Beaucourt en Santerre. It was engaged from March 29 to April 3
(Mezieres, Villers aux Erables, La Neuville Sire Bernard). Its advance
continued to a line east of Mailly-Rainval, Sauvillers. It was in second
line from April 2 to 7, when it returned to line near Grievesnes until
April 13. The division’s losses were estimated to have been about 70 per
cent in the fighting.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. When withdrawn from the Somme, on the 13th, the division was moved to
Champagne and took over a quiet sector east of Auberive on the 31st,
which it held until June 6. While in line the division was
reconstituted.

5. The division rested in the vicinity of Bazoches from June 5 to 15,
undergoing intensive training. It came into line on the night of June
19–20 at St. Pierre Aigle, relieving the 45th Reserve Division. It was
retired from the front at Villers Cotterets about July 1. It rested near
Braisne until the 12th, when it marched toward the Marne front (Foret de
Ris) on July 12.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

6. It reinforced the battle front southwest of Dormans on the 15th. It
crossed the Marne east of Courcelles north of Sawigny and advanced to La
Chapelle Monthodon. On the 17th it was checked and rolled back by the
Foret de Fere to Fresnes (south of Fere en Tardenoise, July 26).


ARTOIS.

7. The division was withdrawn about the end of July and went to Chimay
to rest. On August 13 it entrained and moved to the Douai area via
Valenciennes, where it came into line on August 24 southwest of Arras.
The British attack forced it to give way to the line Beugny-Morchies,
with a loss of 700 prisoners. On the 5th the division withdrew from
line.

8. The division rested until September 27, when it appeared in line
northeast of Bixschoote, southeast of the forest of Houthulst. After
five days of heavy fighting it was withdrawn from line. Eight hundred
prisoners were taken from the division. It was at rest near Gits until
the 14th, when it was again engaged north of Roulers until October 20.
On that date it passed to second line southeast of Ghent, where it was
again in contact with the Allies on November 8. The last identification
was at Sommersaeke, Aecke, on November 9.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a third-class division. Its use in two
offensives of 1918 and its constant employment on active sectors in the
last six months of the war would seem to warrant a higher rating.

At the end the effectives of the division was very much reduced.




                         23d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │45 Res.  │100 Res. │45 Res.  │100 Res. │45 Res.  │100 Res.
              │         │  Gren.  │         │  Gren.  │         │  Gren.
              │         │101 Res. │         │100 Res. │         │101 Res.
              │46 Res.  │102 Res. │46 Res.  │102 Res. │46 Res.  │102 Res.
              │         │103 Res. │         │103 Res. │         │103 Res.
              │ 12 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 12 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 12 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │Res. Hus. Rgt. (3  │                   │Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │23 Res. F. A. Rgt. │23 Res. F. A. Rgt. │23 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │  (6 Btries.).     │
              │                   │32 Res. F. A. Rgt. │32 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (6 Btries.).     │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(?) Res. Co. 2     │4 Field Co. 2 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  Pion. Btn. No.   │  Btn. No. 12.
              │                   │  12.              │
              │                   │23 Res. Pont. Engs.│2 Res. Co. 2 Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Btn. No. 12.
              │                   │23 Res. Tel. Detch.│223 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │23 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │23 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │45 Res.  │100 Res. │46 Res.  │100 Res.
              │         │  Gren.  │         │
              │         │102 Res. │         │102 Res.
              │         │392.     │         │392.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. Res. Hus.   │2 Sqn. 18 Res. Hus.
              │  Rgt. (Saxon).    │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │118 Art. Command:  │118 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 23 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 23 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 15 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 875 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1002 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1003 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│323 Pion. Btn.:    │323 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 12 Pions.   │ 4 Co. 12 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 2 Res. Co. 12     │ 4 Res. Co. 22
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 5 Res. Co. 12     │ 223 T. M. Co.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 223 T. M. Co.     │ 133 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 423 Tel. Detch.   │423 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 423 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 143 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │270 Ambulance Co.  │270 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│  (Sax.).          │
              │520 Ambulance Co.  │4 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │4 Res. Field       │8 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │8 Res. Field       │423 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │423 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │721 M. T. Col.     │721 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (12th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM-ARDENNES-CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 23d Reserve Division, forming on mobilization the 12th Reserve
Corps, with the 24th Reserve Division, was a part in 1914 of the 3d
German Army (Von Hausen). It detrained on August 12–13 at Wengerohr
(Coblentz-Treves line), remained for a few days on the frontier north of
Luxemburg, and entered Belgium on the 19th. It crossed the Meuse at
Antree, below Dinant (Aug, 23), and entered France on the 27th by way of
Phillipville (Marienburg and Couvin). It went across Champagne by
Chateau Porcien, Tagnon, and Le Chatelet (Sept. 1), went to the east of
Rheims, crossed the Marne east of Epernay, and reached the railroad from
Sezanne to Vitry le Francois between Vassimont and Sommesous on
September 8.


MARNE.

2. Engaged in the battle of the Marne, on the extreme right of the 3d
Army, the 23d Reserve Division suffered heavy losses (Sept. 8–9).


CHAMPAGNE.

3. It retired, by way of Mourmelon, to the region of Moronvilliers
Auberive and took up its position there (end of September).


                                 1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 23d Reserve Division occupied the Champagne front (Auberive
sector) until the month of July, 1916.

2. On September 25 it received the French offensive, which caused it
very heavy losses. At this time the 103d Reserve Infantry Regiment was
detached from the 23d Reserve Division and assigned to the Liebert
Division. In October it rejoined the 23d Reserve Division after being
reorganized. Its losses in the Champagne battle had been 140 killed, 751
wounded, and 1,369 missing. On October 2 at least 115 men had been sent
to the 8th Company of the 103d Infantry Regiment as replacements.


                                 1916.

1. The 23d Reserve Division was relieved from the sector of Auberive-St.
Souplet sector between July 15 and 20, 1916, and transferred to the
north of Peronne.


SOMME.

2. It was engaged in the battle of the Somme (north of Hem to the Monacu
Farm) until August 12–14. The 100th Reserve Grenadier Regiment lost
1,700 men there (letter). The 7th Company of the 103d Infantry Regiment
received at least 113 men as replacements between August 1 and 17.


ARTOIS.

3. After a rest in the vicinity of Douai, the division was sent south of
Lens (Angres-Souchez from the beginning of September to Oct. 20). Its
composition was modified by the substitution of the 392d Infantry
Regiment, formed by men taken from various Saxon regiments, for the 103d
Reserve Infantry Regiment.


SOMME.

4. About the middle of October it was again on the Somme (north of
Gueudecourt). It remained there for five weeks and suffered very little.


ARTOIS.

5. Relieved from the Somme on December 3 and 4 the 23d Reserve Division
remained at rest for a few days near Cambrai, and then took over the
sector east of Arras (between Roclincourt and Beaurains). The 101st
Reserve Infantry Regiment was transferred to a new Saxon Division, the
119th, and the 23d Reserve Division was reduced to three regiments.


                                 1917.

1. The division occupied the Artois front during the winter of 1916–17.

2. It was withdrawn at the end of March to go to Belgium.


FLANDERS.

3. Sent to rest in the Bruges area for a fortnight; it then went in line
for a month north of Ypres (calm sector).

4. It was in reserve in June and then went to the front on July 10
between the railroad from Ypres to Staden and the Ypres-Roulers
Railroad. In the course of its relief (July 31) it suffered heavily from
the bombardment which preceded the British attack.

5. Retained in Flanders, it took part on September 22 in the fighting in
the Passchendaele sector and underwent the British attack of September
26, which caused it heavy losses. (The 2d Company of the 100th Reserve
Infantry Regiment was reduced to 25 men.)


RUSSIA.

6. After five days in line the 23d Reserve Division was relieved and
transferred to Russia, where it arrived on October 8.

7. It appeared in the Vilna area between October 10 and 17. In the
middle of November it was identified near Postavy, where it still was at
the end of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 23d Reserve Division is purely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 23d Reserve Division was not seriously engaged during the first half
of 1917, but has suffered heavily since that time.

After the losses which it suffered in July, 1917, it received mediocre
replacements (elderly men and returned convalescents.)

If one adds to that the heavy losses which it suffered at Passchendaele
in September, and in its four months’ stay on the Eastern Front, one may
rest assured that the morale and general quality of the division had
diminished in value for more than a year. (British Summary of
Information, Feb., 1918.)


                                 1918.


ARTOIS.

1. In March the division was transferred to the Western Front. It
entrained near Dvinsk on March 16 and traveled via Vilna-Koenigsberg-
Marienburg-Schneidemuhl-Berlin-Hanover-Menden-Krefeld-Aix la Chapelle-
Hasselt-Louvain-Brussels-Courtrai-Lille, and detrained at Libercourt (16
km. south of Lille) on March 22. It left for the front on March 26.

It came into line in the Oppy sector on March 28. In the attack on this
day all three regiments of the division suffered heavy casualties. The
division continued in line in the vicinity until about June 25.


FLANDERS.

2. When relieved in the Arras sector the division marched north and
relieved the 15th Reserve Division near Calonne sur la Lys about June
27. In later August the division extended its sector to the south to
include the front southwest of Vielle Chapelle, southeast of Merville
and east of Laventie.

The division held this front through August and September. On September
30 the resting regiment of the division—the 100th Reserve Regiment—was
sent up to reenforce the Ypres front. It was engaged for two weeks in
the vicinity of Ledeghem. In October the division was engaged in the
Little area until about the 20th. It was taken out of line north of
Tournai and sent to relieve the 6th Bavarian Reserve Division on the
night of October 22–23 at Octeghem. It remained in line until a few days
before the armistice. The last identification was at Audenarde on
November 2.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its record of more than eight
months’ constant service in line in fairly active sectors indicated
considerable power of resistance.




                         23d Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │14 Ldw.      │27 Ldw.      │13 Ldw.      │26 Ldw.
              │             │26 Ldw.      │             │27 Ldw.
              │             │66 Ldw.      │             │66 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │            (?)            │6 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.
              │                           │43 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                           │91 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.
              │                           │  (Schutz.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │
              │ 103 F. A. Rgt.            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(423) Pion. Btn.:          │1 Landst. Co. 7 C. Dist.
   Liaisons.  │                           │  Pions.
              │ 347 Pion. Co.             │264 Searchlight Section.
              │ (323) T. M. Co.           │283 Searchlight Section.
              │ 523 Tel. Detch.           │112 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │523 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 523 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │558 Ambulance Co.          │558 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │70 Res. Field Hospital.    │99 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │70 Res. Field Hospital.
              │                           │106 Res. Field Hospital.
              │                           │523 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports   │M. T. Col.                 │760 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                 (4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1917.

1. The 23d Landwehr Division, formed at the end of April, 1917, in the
Argonne, was composed of the independent 13th Landwehr Brigade (26th and
27th Landwehr Regiments) and of the 66th Landwehr Regiment taken from
the 5th Landwehr Division. This latter division furnished the staff of
its infantry brigade (14th Landwehr Brigade).

2. After being assigned to the 23d Landwehr Division, the 13th Landwehr
Brigade occupied the sector of Boureuilles north of Vienne la Ville in
the Argonne. It was in the Argonne from September 1914.


RUSSIA.

3. Almost as soon as it was formed the 23d Landwehr Division was
transferred to the Eastern Front (entraining of the 26th Landwehr
Regiment on May 19). Itinerary: Carignan-Liége—Coblentz-Cassel-Halle-
Cottbus-Gnessen-Graudenz-Koenigsberg-Chavli-Poneviej. Going into line
about May 25 in the vicinity of Illukst (Courland) the division remained
in this sector until February, 1918. It was too much weakened to
contribute replacements to the division destined to operate in France,
as, for example, the 87th Division. On December 28 the 1st and 2d
Companies of the 347th Infantry Regiment each received some 75 to 80 men
from the 23d Landwehr Division.


                                 VALUE.

The 23d Landwehr Division is composed entirely of elderly men; in May
1917, the recruit depots of the division furnished men from 40 to 46
years of age. At the end of 1917 the best elements had been taken for
use on the Western Front.


                                 1918.


DVINSK.

1. Beginning in February, the 23d Landwehr Division occupied the Dvinsk
region. A man of the division wrote from that city under date of March
15: “We have been here since the 20th of February. The 23d Landwehr
Regiment, to which I belong, is to remain in Russia for guard duty. We
hold the new frontier.” The 26th Landwehr and 27th Landwehr Regiments
and divisional headquarters were identified here on May 9. On the 18th
of May, elements of the 27th Landwehr Regiment were in the vicinity of
Riejitsa.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                            24th. Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │47.      │139.     │47.      │139.     │47.      │139.
              │         │179.     │         │179.     │         │133.
              │48.      │106.     │48.      │106.     │         │179.
              │         │107.     │         │107.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │18 Uhlan Rgt.      │                   │(?) Sqn. 19 Hus.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │24 Brig.:          │24 Brig.:          │24 Brig.:
              │ 77 F. A. Rgt.     │ 77 F. A. Rgt.     │ 77 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 78 F. A. Rgt.     │ 78 F. A. Rgt.     │ 78 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  22:              │  22:
              │                   │ Field Co. 22      │ 1 Co. 22 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 24 Tel. Detch.    │ 24 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 24 Pont. Engs.    │ 24 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 24 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │24 Art. Survey
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │53 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │89.      │133.     │89.      │133.
              │         │139.     │         │139.
              │         │179.     │         │179.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.│1 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │24 Art. Command:   │24 Art. Command:
              │ 77 F. A. Rgt.     │ 77 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 96 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │  (Staff, and 1, 2,
              │                   │  and 3 Btries.).
              │                   │ 818 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1277 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1278 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/22) Pion. Btn.: │22 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 Co. 22 Pions.   │ 2 Co. 22 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 5 Co. 22 Pions.   │ 5 Co. 22 Pions.
              │ 2 Ers. Co. 24     │ 134 Searchlight
              │  Pions.           │  Section.
              │ 24 T. M. Co.      │24 Signal Command:
              │ 22 Searchlight    │ 24 Tel. Detch.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 24 Tel. Detch.    │ 93 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │47 Ambulance Co.   │47 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │307 Field Hospital.│307 Field Hospital.
              │(?) 24 Vet.        │311 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │24 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.

1. The 24th Division belongs to the 19th Army Corps. It is recruited in
the western part of the Kingdom of Saxony (Leipzig).


MARNE.

2. At the outbreak of the war it formed a part with the 19th Army Corps,
of the 3d German Army (Von Hausen). One of its brigades, the 48th, sent
away secretly, detrained on August 4 at Pruem (Eifel), and entered the
north of Luxemburg on the 5th. The division concentrated in the
Houffalize on August 11, arrived on the banks of the Meuse on the 22d,
which it crossed on the 24th and 25th above Dinant. It was at Châlons on
September 5, and took part in the battle of the Marne on the 7th and 8th
between Vitry le François and Maisons en Champagne. From there it
returned to St. Hilaire le Grand.


FLANDERS.

3. In October, 1914, the 24th Division went over to the 6th Army (Crown
Prince of Bavaria), and took up its position, which crosses the Lys
(Flanders).


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. In March, 1915, the 106th and 107th Infantry Regiments were
transferred to the 58th Division. The 24th Division, reduced to two
regiments, was filled up by taking the 133d Infantry Regiment from the
40th Division. The 19th Army Corps retained the Lys sector until the
month of August, 1917. It detached elements from its divisions to
reenforce other sectors at various times.

2. In January, 1915, the 24th Division had elements in action at
L’Epinette.

3. At the battle of Neuve Chapelle (March, 1915) and at Festubert (May-
June, 1915), it reinforced the 7th Army Corps.

4. At the time of the Franco-British offensive in Artois, units of the
24th Division again acted as reenforcements at La Bassee-Souchez (June
and October, 1915).


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. Relieved at the beginning of August, 1916, in the sector of the Lys,
the 19th Army Corps was sent, about August 8, to the Somme, north of
Pozières, where it suffered considerable losses.

2. At the end of August it was placed for several weeks in the sector of
Neuve Chapelle-La Bassée, then of Le Sars-Butte de Warlencourt. It took
part a second time in the battle of the Somme (October).

The two divisions of the corps suffered very heavily during these two
engagements in the Franco-British offensive. The 24th division lost
6,217 men; that is, 69 per cent of its effectives.

3. The 24th Division was withdrawn from the Somme about November 11 and
transferred to Flanders, where it occupied the line between the Ypres-
Comines Canal and the Douve (December and the first months of 1917).


                                 1917.


FLANDERS.

1. When the British offensive was being prepared on the Wytschaete-
Messines front, the 24th Division was withdrawn from the Ypres-Comines
sector and stationed behind Lille (beginning of April, 1917).

On the 7th of June it was sent toward the front; the 179th Infantry
Regiment was in action east of Wytschaete on the 8th, and the division
occupied the sector of Hollebeke, where it was retained until June 27.

During this period the division suffered heavily.

2. Relieved and sent to rest at the end of June, it went back into line
in Belgium (sector southwest of Houthem) during the month of August.

3. It left the line at the beginning of October, and, after a few days
of rest, again took over a sector in the area southeast of Ypres
northwest of Zandvoorde—west of Gheluvelt. It left there at the end of
October to go to the south of the Scarpe, at Monchy le Preux, where it
was still in line at the beginning of February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 24th Division is purely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In a general manner, the attitude of the 19th Army Corps has been rather
passive since trench warfare succeeded the war of movement.

We may say that the Saxon is a courageous adversary.

The 24th Division is good.


                                 1918.

1. The division held the Monchy le Preux sector until about February 11,
when it was relieved by the 185th Division and transferred to the area
north of Valenciennes to rest and train. On March 16 it began to march
toward the Cambrai front. The route lay through Raismes, Haveluy,
Wallers, Aniche, Aubigny au Bac, Marquion. It reached the original
German front line on March 22 at 9 a. m.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

2. The division followed the advance in reserve until the night of March
24–25, when it came in line south of Bapaume (Ligny-Tilloy). It advanced
in first line by Grevillers (26th), Achiet le Petit, Hebuterne (27th and
29th). From March 30 to April 5 it was in reserve. On the 6th the
division was reengaged near Hebuterne and Bucquoy until April 15.

According to the German press, the Kaiser on March 27 telegraphed the
King of Saxony felicitating him on the success of the 24th Division.

3. The division was at rest from April 15 to the end of May, first at
Bapaume and later at Valenciennes.


PICARDY.

4. The division was engaged from May 28 to June 16 in the sector of the
Bois d’Aveluy (north of Albert). When relieved from this front it went
by railroad to the Cambrai area. The 139th Regiment went into camp at
Eswars and St. Martin; the 133d, at Raillencourt; the 179th, at
Ramillies and Escaudoewres. The division underwent training and executed
divisional maneuvers. Between the 5th and 10th of July the division
marched by Cambrai, Flesquieres, Havrincourt, Bertincourt to the region
Haplincourt Bus for the purpose of reengaging in the Aveluy sector where
the Germans expected an attack by the English. It remained a week in the
region and returned to its cantonments in the Cambrai area.

About July 18 an order was issued placing the division at the
disposition of the 6th Army for a projected offensive in Flanders. This
order was revoked, and about July 20 the division entrained at Ivuy and
Sancourt and moved to Chaulnes (via Peronne). It remained in the
vicinity several days and then moved to Quesnel by narrow-gauge
railroad.


AVRE.

5. From the 1st of August until the 17th the division opposed a lively
resistance to the French attack in the Avre. In this fighting the
division lost 800 prisoners.


LAON.

6. The division rested a week west of Ham. It was engaged west of Coucy
le Chateau (Champs Folembray) from August 30 to September 9. It
retreated about the 9th to Baresis. On October 3 the division was
relieved north of the St. Gobain-Baresis railroad.


ST. QUENTIN.

7. It was moved by trucks to Fontaine-Uterte (north of St. Quentin) and
engaged on October 4 near Sequehart. The division was forced back on
Montbrehain and Andigny. Three hundred and forty-five prisoners were
lost on the 8th. Two days later the division was relieved. On the 17th
the division was again identified in line at Vaux-Audigny, but was
withdrawn in a day or two.

8. It arrived in an area northeast of Fourmies on October 23 and was
still there on the 26th. No later identification was secured.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as a third-class division. Its conduct in the
March offensive and in the defensive in August and October was above the
average and would warrant a higher rating.




                         24th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │47 Res.  │104 Res. │47 Res.  │104 Res. │48 Res.  │104 Res.
              │         │106 Res. │         │106 Res. │         │107 Res.
              │         │13 Res.  │         │13 Res.  │         │133 Res.
              │         │  Jag.   │         │  Jag.   │         │
              │         │  Btn.   │         │  Btn.   │         │
              │48 Res.  │107 Res. │48 Res.  │107 Res. │         │
              │         │133 Res. │         │133 Res. │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Saxon Res. Hus.    │Saxon Res. Hus.    │3 Sqn. Saxon Res.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │24 Res. F. A. Rgt. │24 Res. F. A. Rgt. │24 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │  (6 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │40 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (6 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │Res. Co. 2 Pion.   │3 Res. Co. 12
   Liaisons.  │                   │  Btn. No. 12.     │  Pions.
              │                   │24 Res. Pont. Engs.│4 Res. Co. 12
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │24 Res. Tel. Detch.│224 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │24 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │24 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │28 Labor Btn.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │48 Res.  │104 Res. │48 Res.  │104 Res.
              │         │107 Res. │         │107 Res.
              │         │133 Res. │         │133 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. Saxon Res.  │3 Sqn. 18 Res. Hus.
              │  Hus. Rgt.        │  Rgt. (Saxon).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │120 Art. Command:  │120 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 40 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 68 F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 5 Btry. 7 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 64 (Saxon) Ft. A.
              │                   │  Btn.
              │                   │ 1115 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1116 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1117 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│324 Pion. Btn.:    │324 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 5 Res. Co. 12     │ 1 Res. Co. 12
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 6 Res. Co. 12     │ 6 Res. Co. 12
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 224 T. M. Co.     │ 126 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 424 Tel. Detch.   │424 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 424 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 138 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │271 Ambulance Co.  │271 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │1 Res. Field       │1 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │424 Vet. Hospital. │7 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │424 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │722 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │50 M. G. S. S.
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │207 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │50 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │17 Sound Ranging
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │40 Art. Observation
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │(Elements attached
              │                   │  June, 1918.
              │                   │  German document,
              │                   │  June 15–16,
              │                   │  1918.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.

1. The 24th Reserve Division (12th Reserve Corps with the 33d Reserve
Division) belonged at the outbreak of the war to the 3d German Army (Von
Hausen).

2. Detraining on August 12–13, 1914, northeast of Trèves, (Coblentz-
Trèves railroad), entering Belgium by way of Viel-Salm on the 19th, it
advanced into France by way of the Ardennes and Champagne and from there
to Sompuis (west of Vitry le François, Sept. 8).


MARNE.

3. Going into action on September 8 and 9 in the vicinity of Mailly, it
retired by way of Mourmelon and Sept-Saulx to the east of Rheims
(Moronvilliers-Vaudesincourt). It made a stand in this sector and
established its position there (end of September).


                                 1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 24th Reserve Division remained in line on the Champagne front
(north of Souain, south of St. Souplet-Moronvilliers) from September,
1914, until the beginning of July, 1916. In April, 1915, the 106th
Reserve Infantry Regiment was transferred to the 123d Division, a new
formation.

2. At the end of September, 1915, it suffered very heavy losses while
opposing the French offensive.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. Relieved from its sector in Champagne about the beginning of July,
1916, the 24th Reserve Division was transferred to the Somme. It went
into action between Longueval and Hardecourt, from the middle to the end
of July.

2. Some elements of the division were still fighting on the Somme (near
Martinpuich in September).


ARTOIS.

3. About September 21, the 24th Reserve Division was put in line north
of Arras (area from Lievin to Roclincourt).


SOMME.

4. It left Artois in the middle of November to return to the Somme,
south of Bapaume (Le Transloy-Gueudecourt). It remained there until
December 12, then returned to Artois (sector east of Arras) at the end
of December.


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. The 24th Reserve Division occupied the sector east of Arras until
March 25, 1917. Relieved at this date, it was sent to rest northeast of
Ghent.


GALICIA.

2. On April 26 it entrained for the Eastern Front. Itinerary: Herbestal-
Aix la Chapelle-Dusseldorf-Barmen-Leipzig-Dresden-Georlitz-Lemberg.
Detraining in Galicia, it went into line south of Brzezany, at the
beginning of May. It underwent the Russian offensive at the beginning of
July, in the course of which prisoners of the three regiments and a part
of the artillery of the division were left in the hands of the Russians
(366 prisoners from the 133d Reserve Infantry Regiment).

3. Withdrawn from the front and reorganized, the 24th Reserve Division
again went into action on July 20 (German counterattack). It advanced as
far as Zbrucz and suffered new losses.

4. About August 16 it took over the sector of Skala.

5. Entraining for the Western Front on October 24, it detrained at
Bruges on the 31st. Itinerary: Stanislau-Lemberg-Breslau-Dresden-
Leipzig-Cassel-Trèves—Brussels.


CAMBRAI.

6. After a rest in Belgium during the month of November, the 24th
Reserve Division fought at Cambrai (end of November). It remained in the
sector Flesquieres-Graincourt until the end of February, 1918.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 24th Reserve Division took part in numerous battles; it is a fairly
good division.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved in the Cambrai sector on February 6 by the
27th Division and went to rest in the Ivny area. On the 28th it marched
via Cambrai-Sains Inchy to Prouville and went into line.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

2. It took part in the initial attack and by the 22d had reached
Boursies. On the following day, the division advanced through Hermies to
Ruyaulcourt and was relieved in the evening. The division rested until
April 6 when it came into line north of Hangard where it was engaged
until April 19, when the 19th Division relieved it. The division
suffered very heavily from artillery and machine gun fire in this
sector.

3. The division was at rest until May 1, when it returned to the front
south of the Somme, relieving the 1st Division. About the 24th of May
the division sideslipped north and took the sector astride the Somme. It
was relieved about the middle of June.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

4. The division rested in the Cambrai area undergoing training. It left
Cambrai about July 19 and was engaged west of Fere en Tardenois on July
24. The division took part in the fighting on the Aisne until about
September 5. It passed to second line for about two weeks and returned
to line at Pinon on September 20. Until the armistice, it was constantly
engaged in resisting the Allied advance. It was identified at Verneuil
(Oct. 19), Chalaudry (21st), Mortiers (26th), Crecy (28th), and south of
Landouzy on November 7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was used as an attack division
in March, but thereafter was engaged entirely on the defensive. It
appears to have resisted as well as the average German division.




                        24th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │         1918[16]
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │9 Landwehr.  │24 Landwehr. │             │24 Landwehr.
              │             │48 Landwehr. │             │48 Landwehr.
              │             │427.         │             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │
              │ 250 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────

Footnote 16:

  The 24th Landwehr Division is considered as dissolved.


                                HISTORY.

   (24th and 48th Landwehr Regiments: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1917.


RUSSIA.

1. The 24th Landwehr Division was formed on the Eastern Front about
October, 1917, by the transformation of the 9th Landwehr Brigade (24th
and 48th Landwehr Regiments).

This brigade, after forming a part of the war garrison of Koenigsberg
(August, 1914), then of the Sommer Division, had gone over to the new
10th Landwehr Division in 1915.

Becoming independent, it held the sector of Lake Svir until September,
1915.


SPIAGLA.

2. Made up of the 24th and 48th Landwehr Regiments, to which was
temporarily joined the 427th Infantry Regiment coming from the 205th
Division, the 24th Landwehr Division occupied the sector south of Lake
Narotch-Spiagla until February, 1918.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 24th Landwehr Division is of mediocre quality.


                                 1918.

1. In January, 1918, the division was reduced to two regiments, the
427th Regiment having been sent to the Western Front.


LIVONIA.

2. In March the division advanced into Russia and was identified about
the middle of May in the Ostrov-Reijitsa region. The 427th Regiment was
dissolved, but the 48th Landwehr Regiment was identified in Russia on
the 19th of September. It seems possible that the divisional staff was
also disbanded and that the 9th Landwehr Brigade, with the 48th Landwehr
Regiment under its orders, again became independent.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             25th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │49.      │115 Body │49.      │115 Body │49.      │115 Body
              │         │  Gd.    │         │  Gd.    │         │  Gd.
              │         │  Inf.   │         │  Inf.   │         │  Inf.
              │         │116.     │         │116.     │         │116.
              │50.      │117 Body │50.      │117 Body │         │117 Body
              │         │  Inf.   │         │  Inf.   │         │  Inf.
              │         │118.     │         │118.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Dragoon Rgt.     │                   │6 Dragoon Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │25 Brig.:          │25 Brig.:          │25 Brig:
              │25 F. A. Rgt.      │ 25 F. A. Rgt.     │ 25 F. A. Rgt.
              │61 F. A. Rgt.      │ 61 F. A. Rgt.     │ 61 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  21:              │  21:
              │                   │ Field Co. 21      │ 2 Co. 21 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 25 Tel. Detch.    │ 89 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 25 Pont. Engs.    │ Field Co. 25
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │                   │ 25 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 25 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 25 Pont. Engs.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │14 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │49.      │115 Body │49.      │115.
              │         │  Gd.    │         │
              │         │  Inf.   │         │
              │         │116.     │         │116.
              │         │117 Body │         │117.
              │         │  Inf.   │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 6 Drag. Rgt.│1 Sqn. 6 Drag. Rgt.
              │  (?)              │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │25 Art. Command:   │25 Art. Command:
              │ 61 F. A. Rgt.     │ 25 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 24 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 823 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 866 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1294 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/21 or 134) Pion.│129 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 2 Co. 21 Pions.   │ 3 Co. 21 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 21 Pions.   │ 89 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 89 Res. Pion. Co. │ 68 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 25 T. M. Co.      │25 Signal Command:
              │ 25 Tel. Detch.    │ 25 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 7 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │45 Ambulance Co.   │45 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │298 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │304 Field Hospital.
              │                   │25 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │14 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Section.         │
              │16 Anti-Aircraft   │
              │  Section (3.7 cm. │
              │  automatic guns). │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

              (18th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Hesse.)


                                 1914.


LUXEMBURG.

1. The 25th Division, also known as the Hessian Grand Ducal Division,
formed, in August, 1914, with the 21st Division, the 18th Army Corps. On
August 3 its 50th Brigade set out for Koenigsmacher, near Thionville, as
covering troops. On August 10 and 11 the 25th Division entered the Grand
Duchy of Luxemburg, which it crossed, and entered Belgian Luxemburg on
the 19th.


ARDENNES.

2. It formed a part of the 4th Army (Duke of Wurttemberg) and fought at
Maissin, northwest of Neufchateau on August 22. On August 24, it entered
France; on the 27th it crossed the Meuse below Mouzon. (On Aug. 31 the
losses had been such that the remnants of the 116th Infantry Regiment
formed only four companies.)


MARNE.

3. On September 6 and the days immediately following the 25th Division
took part in the battle of the Marne between Vitry and Sermaize. In the
middle of the month, it was northwest of Rheims, on the Aisne-Marne
Canal. On September 26 it entrained at Laon for Ham.


SOMME.

4. In October the 18th Army Corps was reattached to the 2d Army which
formed at this time the extreme right flank of the German Army (Péronne
area) and the division went into line—the Lihons-Chaulnes road to the
banks of the Avre.


                                 1915.


SOMME.

1. The 25th Division was retained in this sector north of the Avre until
October 15, 1915. During this time it did not take part in any important
action. In March it ceded the 118th Infantry Regiment to the 56th
Division, a new formation.

2. After a long rest in the St. Quentin area (the staff of the 18th Army
Corps was at Fresnoy le Grand in December, 1915, and that of the 25th
Division at Busigny in January, 1916) the 25th Division was transferred
to the sector north of Verdun at the beginning of February, 1916.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. On February 21, 1916, it took part in the general attack north of
Verdun. After advancing rapidly, the 18th Army Corps was stopped in the
area west of Douaumont. On March 9 it failed in its attacks on the
Haudremont Farm.

2. The Army Corps was then sent to rest in the rear area to be
reorganized.

3. About April 10, the 18th Army Corps reappeared in line (Caillette
wood). The 25th Division suffered very heavy losses in its attacks.

4. Relieved about April 25, it was put in line about the middle of May
in the vicinity of Craonne.


SOMME.

5. It was withdrawn from this sector about the 1st of September and
transferred to the Somme, where it went into action from September 15 to
October 1, and again lost very heavily.

6. At the beginning of October the 25th Division left the Somme to
occupy the sector Apremont-Ailly wood in the Woevre.

7. Again transferred to the Somme at the end of November, it was put
into line in the area north of Chaulnes (sector from Kratz wood to the
Demi-Lune). It was in this sector at the time of the retirement on March
16, 1916.


                                 1917.

1. On this date it carried out its retreat by way of Villecourt-Matigny-
Douchy-Roupy, in the direction of St. Quentin.


ST. QUENTIN.

2. On March 20 it began to withstand our advance on the line. Savy-
Dallon-Giffecourt, and when the front was stabilized on April 4 it
occupied the sector in front of St. Quentin and did not leave until the
end of May, after having pillaged the town.

3. It spent the month of June at rest (area of Neuvillette-Bernot).

4. On July 2 it went into line (Itancourt sector), and on July 18
launched an attack upon the salient Moulin de Tous Vents (south of St.
Quentin).


FLANDERS.

5. Relieved about the middle of September, it was sent to the active
sector of Flanders (north of Zandvoorde).

6. At the beginning of October it was sent to rest in the Ghent area.

7. It reappeared on the front, near Passchendaele, in the middle of
November, and remained there except for a few short intervals until its
relief on February 10, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 25th Division is recruited from the Grand Duchy of Hesse. Men are
furnished principally from the rest of the 18th Corps District and the
Rhine District (7th and 8th Corps Districts).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 18th Army Corps has been considered one of the best corps in the
German Army.

In September, 1917, the morale of the 25th Division appeared good. At
this time, as the division had not taken part in any important actions
since September, 1916, it was difficult to form a judgment as to the
combat value of this organization.

Its local operation on the salient of Moulin de Tous Vents (July 18,
1917) was carried out energetically.


                                 1918.

1. The reports concerning the location of the 25th Division during
January and early February are conflicting, mention being made in some
of two reliefs; it seems most likely, however, that the division was not
relieved until February 10, when the 15th Division took over its sector
east of Passchendaele.


MONS.

2. On the 15th it entrained at Iseghem and traveled via Courtrai-Ath-
Mons to Givry; from here it marched to Bavai (southwest of Mons), where
it underwent a course of intensive training in open warfare; cooperation
with tanks was featured.


ST. QUENTIN.

3. The division marched from Pommereuil on the 16th, via Le Cateau and
Busigny, to Becquigny, and from there, on the 19th, to Wiancourt,
reenforcing the battle front near Le Verguier (northwest of St. Quentin)
on the 21st. It was relieved about the 30th, after having suffered heavy
losses.


AMIENS.

4. On April 1 it went back into line southeast of Hangard en Santerre
(southeast of Amiens); it was withdrawn about the 12th and moved by easy
stages to the Lille area, where, on account of its good fighting on the
St. Quentin and Amiens fronts, it was inspected by the Kaiser on April
20. The commander of the 115th Regiment received Pour le Mérite at the
same time.


BETHUNE.

5. During the night of the 26–27th of April it relieved the 240th
Division near Hinges (north of Bethune); relieved by the 36th Reserve
Division on the 10th of May, it went to rest in the area north of Douai.


LYS.

6. On July 4 the division moved up into close reserve in the Laventie-
Estaires area, and during the night of the 6–7th it relieved the 16th
Division near Merville, north of the Lys. On the 20th it was withdrawn,
the 16th Division coming back into line, and went to the Lille area.


SOMME.

7. After about a month’s rest it reenforced the front near Montauban
(southeast of Albert). The front was being forced back here, and so the
division passed successively through Hardecourt, Combles, and the St.
Pierre-Vaast wood, where it was withdrawn September 5, after losing
about 900 prisoners, and went to rest in the Bohain-Malincourt area.


CAMBRAI.

8. The division reenforced the front near Briastre (east of Cambrai) on
October 11, and was withdrawn about the 28th.


VALENCIENNES.

9. On November 1 it came back into line north of Valenciennes, and had
not been withdrawn on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 25th is rated as a first-class division. It did very well in the
large amount of heavy fighting in which it participated during 1918, and
as a result suffered exceedingly heavy losses, especially in officers.
It received numerous large drafts, and so the division’s strength was
rather larger than the average.




                         25th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │116 Res. │49  Res. │116 Res. │50 Res.  │83 Res.
              │         │118 Res. │         │118 Res. │         │118 Res.
              │         │83 Res.  │50 Res.  │83 Res.  │         │168.
              │         │168.     │         │168.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Res. Dragoon Rgt.│4 Res. Dragoon Rgt.│4 Res. Dragoon Rgt.
              │  (3 Sqns.).       │                   │  (2 Sqns.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │25 Res. F. A. Rgt. │25 Res. F. A. Rgt. │25 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (6 Btries.).     │                   │  (9 Btries., Nos.
              │                   │                   │  4–12).
              │                   │13 F. A. Rgt.      │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos., │1 and 2 Res. Cos., │1 and 2 Res. Cos.,
   Liaisons.  │  2 Pion. Btn. No. │  2 Pion. Btn. No. │  2 Pion. Btn. No.
              │  11.              │  11.              │  11.
              │                   │25 Res. Pont. Engs.│1 Co. 29 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │25 Res. Tel. Detch.│2 Co. 29 Pions.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │225 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │25 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │25 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │     1918[17]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │50 Res.  │83 Res.  │50 Res.  │168.
              │         │118 Res. │         │83 Res.
              │         │168.     │         │118 Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 4 Res.      │2 Sqn. 4 Res. Drag.
              │  Dragoon Rgt.     │  Rgt.
              │                   │4 Sqn. 4 Res. Drag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │127 Art. Command:  │127 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 25 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 25 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │  (6 4-gun 6 4-how.
              │                   │  Btries.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(325) Pion. Btn.:  │2 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  11:
              │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 11     │ 1 Res. Co. 11
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 11     │ 2 Res. Co. 11
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 225 T. M. Co.     │ 286 Pion. Co.
              │ 20 Ldw. Field     │ 225 T. M. Co.
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Section.         │
              │ 425 Tel. Detch.   │ 425 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 151 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │518 Ambulance Co.  │518 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │67 Field Hospital. │67 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │68 Field Hospital. │68 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │518 M. T. Col.     │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 17:

  Composition at time of dissolution, October, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (168th and 118th Reserve Regiments: 18th Corps District—Grand Duchy of
 Hesse. 83d Reserve Regiment: 11th Corps District—Electorate of Hesse.)


                                 1914.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 25th Reserve Division, forming with
the 21st Reserve Division the 18th Reserve Corps, belonged to the 4th
Army (Duke of Wurttemberg).


BELGIUM-ARGONNE.

2. It detrained August 9–11 at Hermeskeil (southeast of Treves); entered
Luxemburg the 16th (by way of Remich); crossed Luxemburg on the 19th;
entered Belgium on the 20th. On the 22d it fought at Neufchateau; on the
22d, at Tremblois; crossed the Meuse on the 28th. To the west of the
Argonne the 25th Reserve Division advanced to the area of Revigny. At
the battle of the Marne it fought on the Saulx, in the neighborhood of
Brabant le Roy (Sept. 7–10). It retired by way of Ste. Menehould,
Moinemout, to the south of Cernay en Dormois (Sept. 14).


FLANDERS.

3. In October the 25th Reserve Division was sent to Flanders, south of
the Lys. Toward the end of November it occupied a sector north of
Wytschaete.


RUSSIA.

4. In December the division was transferred to the Eastern Front. It
took part, with the Fabeck Corps, in the operations on the Bzura
(December, 1914, to February, 1915).


                                 1915.


GALICIA.

1. At the end of February, 1915, it was engaged in the Carpathians north
of the Dniester (Von der Marwitz Detachment); in June at Przemysl, then
at Lemberg.


BREST-LITOWSK.

2. In July, the 25th Reserve Division took part in the offensive on
Brest-Litowsk. Its successes occasioned it heavy losses; the 5th Company
of the 168th Infantry Regiment received not less than 199 men as
replacements from June 19 to August 17.


SERBIA.

3. The division took part in the Serbian campaign (October-November).


FRANCE.

4. It was transferred to the Western Front at the beginning of December,
1917. It entrained at Weisskirchen (Hungary). Itinerary: Temesvar-
Budapest-Vienna-Ulm-Stuttgart-Spire-Deux Ponts-Saarbrucken-Sedan
(detrained on Dec. 11).


ARGONNE.

5. On December 18, the 25th Reserve Division went into line on the
Argonne (La Harazee).


                                 1916.

1. The division remained in the Argonne until the end of July, 1916.


VERDUN.

2. At the beginning of July it was transferred to the Verdun area. It
was engaged in the sector of Thiaumont (July-August); in the Nawe wood
(August) and suffered heavy losses. It was again very much exhausted
resisting the French attack of October 24.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. Relieved after this attack, the 25th Reserve Division was sent to
rest in vicinity of Jametz and was reorganized. On November 16 it went
into line east of Auberive. In the course of November it received
important replacements, including a large proportion of the 1917 class.
Its reconstitution was not completed until February; 1917.


                                 1917.

1. The division was retained on the Champagne front (Auberive) until the
end of January, 1917.


MEUSE.

2. On February 27 it went into line on the right bank of the Meuse
(sector of Louvemont-Chambrettes-Caurieres wood) and remained there,
without any important losses, until June 20.

3. After resting until July 6 in the vicinity of Juvigny, Jametz,
Marville, the 25th Reserve Division again occupied the front near Verdun
(north of Vacherauville). North of Louvemont it withstood the French
attack of August 20, which caused it to suffer very heavy losses (47
officers and 1,150 men prisoners, of whom 1,012 belonged to 168th
Infantry Regiment).


VOSGES.

4. The 25th Reserve Division, already weakened by an epidemic of
dysentery, was almost completely exhausted, when it was relieved on
August 25 on the Verdun front. Sent to rest in the vicinity of
Sarreburg, it took over a sector of the Vosges (Blamont), about
September 4.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. Relieved on September 25 and entraining on the 27th at Rechicourt,
the division was transferred to Champagne, where it occupied the sector
Nogent-l’Abbesse (Nov. 11 to beginning of February, 1918).


                              RECRUITING.

The 25th Reserve Division is recruited from the Grand Duchy of Hesse,
the Electorate of Hesse, and Hesse-Nassau. At times replacements were
furnished from the Rhine districts, including the Grand Duchy of Baden
(especially in 1916).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 25th Reserve Division put up a splendid defense against the French
at the time of the attack on August 20, 1917.

It was an excellent organization at the outbreak of the campaign, but it
seems (in spite of recent assertions of prisoners that it is still unfit
to attack and was put in the fourth class, Arbeits Division) that the
25th Reserve Division, although it is exhausted by too long stays in
line, is capable of rendering services even on an active front.
Therefore it must be considered as a good division of the second class
until more detailed information is received (Mar. 30, 1918).


                                 1918.

1. The 25th Reserve Division was relieved by the 21st Division in the
Nogent-l’Abbesse sector on February 6, and went to the Vouziers area,
where it was put through a course of training, but not in open warfare.


AISNE.

2. On the 20th it relieved the 10th Reserve Division near Juvincourt
(northwest of Rheims); it was withdrawn on April 11.


MONTDIDIER.

3. The division moved north by easy stages, and relieved the 6th
Bavarian Reserve Division, west of Montdidier, on the 21st. Here it lost
near Cantigny (north) heavily while trying to prevent Cantigny from
falling to the Americans. It also lost even more heavily during the
offensive of August 9, and was pushed back to Dancourt (southwest of
Roye). It was withdrawn about the 18th.


ST. QUENTIN.

4. On September 1 it reenforced the front near Voyennes (west of St.
Quentin). In the fighting that followed the division was forced back to
the Holnon wood (west of St. Quentin); it was withdrawn here about the
20th.

5. On the 30th, it again reenforced the front in the Lehaucourt sector
(north of St. Quentin). It was withdrawn on October 11, and dissolved.
168th Regiment was transferred to the 21st Reserve Division. 83d Reserve
Regiment was disbanded and drafted to the 22d Division. 87th Reserve
Regiment was disbanded and drafted to the 48th Reserve Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Until 1918 the 25th Reserve had been considered a second-class division.
It is to be noted, however, that although it was trained in February,
the training it received was not in open warfare—not to fit it to become
an attack division. Prisoners captured soon after stated that the
Germans considered it as little better than “a labor division.” It was
not used in any of the offensives made by the Germans, and was not very
tenacious on the defense in any sector that was at all active. Moreover,
two of the divisions that received replacements from the division when
it was disbanded were second class and the other was rated as a fourth-
class division. It was probably a third-class division.




                        25th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │25 Mixed │13 Ldw.  │32 Res.  │13 Ldw.  │32 Res.  │13 Ldw.
              │  Ldw.   │         │         │         │         │
              │         │16 Ldw.  │         │16 Ldw.  │         │16 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │328 Ldw. │         │328 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 6 Res. Drag.│2 Sqn. 6 Res. Drag.│2 Sqn. 6 Res. Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │254 F. A. Rgt.     │244 Art. Command:  │244 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 254 F. A. Rgt.    │ 254 Ldw. F. A.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│407 T. M. Co.      │425 Pion. Btn.:    │425 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │525 Tel. Detch.    │ 1 Res. Co. 21     │ 4 Co. 27 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 4 Co. 27 Pions.   │ 3 Landst. Co. 6 C.
              │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │ 407 T. M. Co.     │ 12 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │525 Tel. Detch.    │525 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 525 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 81 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │554 Ambulance Co.  │554 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │414 Field Hospital.│414 Field Hospital.
              │                   │6 Ldw. Field       │6 Ldw. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │525 Vet. Hospital. │525 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │M. T. Col.         │790 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1916.


AISNE.

1. The 25th Landwehr Division was organized in part from the former 25th
Mixed Landwehr Brigade, independent (13th and 16th Landwehr Regiments),
which entered Belgium on August 20, 1914, and went immediately after the
battle of the Marne to the Laon area, where it occupied the Craonne-La
Ville aux Bois sector from the end of September, 1914, until almost the
end of 1916.

2. In October, 1916, the 25th Landwehr Brigade was transformed into the
25th Landwehr Division by the addition of a third regiment, the Schuster
Regiment, which had existed for only a short time.

3. The division was then sent to the west and sent into line between
Vailly and Chavonne (October).


                                 1917.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

1. At the beginning of February, 1917, the 186th Infantry Regiment was
added as a third regiment to the 25th Landwehr Division. The division
was still occupying the sector east of Vailly when the French offensive
was launched on April 16. The division suffered heavy losses, retiring
to the Chemin des Dames by way of Ostel, Aizy, Jouy (Apr. 16–22).


UPPER ALSACE.

2. Relieved north of the Aisne about April 25, the 25th Landwehr
Division was transferred to Upper Alsace. At the beginning of May it
went into line near the Swiss frontier (Hirtzbach, Largitzen, Bisel). It
did not leave this sector since that time.

3. In May the 186th Infantry Regiment was replaced by a new regiment,
the 328th Landwehr Regiment, formed by taking one battalion of each of
the three regiments of the 13th Landwehr Division.


                              RECRUITING.

The division has a marked sectional quality; the infantry and field
artillery come entirely from Westphalia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

This is purely a sector division. The 25th Landwehr Division has been in
line near the Swiss frontier for more than a year.

Since its arrival in Upper Alsace (May, 1917) the division has possessed
an assault detachment supposed to carry out raids (June, 1918).


                                 1918.


ALSACE.

1. The division remained in the Hirzbach-Swiss frontier sector all
through the year until the signing of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 25th Landwehr Division is rated as a fourth-class division, as being
fit to hold only a quiet sector. On the 11th of November, soon after the
hour fixed for the suspension of hostilities, a number of men came over
to the French lines to fraternize; they were taken prisoners. It seems
that there had been a great deal of revolutionary agitation in the
division. On October 8 a doctor had had his epaulettes cut to pieces; on
the 9th the Soldiers’ Council had come together and had elected
representatives; on the 10th the company commander (of at least one
company) had read the program for the organization of the Soldiers’
Council. Prisoners state that the causes of this state of mind were the
recent defeats suffered by the German forces, the weariness caused by
four years of war, and the Kiel disturbances. From the 10th of November
on none of the advanced posts had been occupied, and the men refused to
do any work, the war having come to an end, to their mind.




                             26th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │51.      │119 Gren.│51.      │119 Gren.│51.      │119 Gren.
              │         │125.     │         │125.     │         │121.
              │52.      │121.     │52.      │121.     │         │125.
              │         │122 Fus. │         │122 Fus. │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │20 Uhlan Rgt.      │20 Uhlan Rgt.      │20 Uhlan Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │26 Brig.:          │26 Brig.:          │26 Brig.:
              │ 29 F. A. Rgt.     │ 29 F. A. Rgt.     │ 29 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │ 65 F. A. Rgt.     │ 65 F. A. Rgt.     │ 65 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Field Co. 1 Pion.│1 Field Co. 1 Pion.│1 and 5 Field Cos.
   Liaisons.  │  Btn. No. 13      │  Btn. No. 13:     │  1 Pion. Btn. No.
              │                   │                   │  13:
              │                   │ 26 Pont. Engs.    │ 26 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 26 Tel. Detch.    │ 26 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 26 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │51.      │119 Gren.│51.      │119.
              │         │121.     │         │121.
              │         │125.     │         │125.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │20 Sqn. 20 Uhlan   │2 Sqn. 19 Uhlan
              │  Rgt. (?).        │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │26 Art. Command:   │26 Art. Command:
              │ 29 F. A. Rgt. (9  │ 29 F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).        │
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 5 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (5, 6, and
              │                   │  13 Btries.).
              │                   │ 1376 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1377 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1378 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/13 or 129) Pion.│143 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 13 Pions.   │ 1 Co. 13 Pions.
              │ 5 Co. 13 Pions.   │ 5 Co. 13 Pions.
              │ 26 T. M. Co.      │ 26 T. M. Co.
              │ 311 Searchlight   │ 140 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ Tel. Detch.       │26 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 26 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 70 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │3 Ambulance Co.    │33 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │33 Ambulance Co.   │250 Field Hospital.
              │250 Field Hospital.│259 Field Hospital.
              │259 Field Hospital.│26 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │599 (?) M. T. Col. │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (13th Corps District—Wurttemberg.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE-ARGONNE.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 26th Division formed the 13th Army
Corps, with the 27th Division, and was a part of the 5th Army (German
Crown Prince), and went into action on August 22 at Baranzy, northwest
of Longwy, and on August 24 near Longuyon. On August 31 it crossed the
Meuse in the vicinity of Sassey, proceeded between the Meuse and the
Argonne by way of Epinonville, Cheppy, Clermont, and Thiaucourt, fought
on September 6, 7, 8, and 9 near Pretz and Beauzée, and retired toward
Evre, Wally, and the Argonne (Apremont-Grurie wood). (On Sept. 11 the
8th Company of the 119th Grenadier Regiment had already had 3 officers
and 168 men as casualties; the 10th Company was reduced to 2 officers
and 59 men.)


FLANDERS.

2. Separated then from the 27th Division, which remained in the Argonne,
the 26th Division was transferred west of Lille on October 8, and fought
at Fromelles, Aubert, and Maisnil from October 20 to 28.

3. At the end of the month it went north and took part in the attacks
upon Messines on October 31.


RUSSIA.

4. At the end of November the division entrained for Russia with the
25th Reserve Division, these two divisions forming the reorganized 13th
Army Corps.


POLAND.

5. In December and January, 1915, it was a part of the Fabeck Corps, and
fought in Poland on the Bzura and the Rawka where it suffered heavily.


                                 1915.

1. In March, 1915, the 26th Division was sent to the front north of
Prasnysz. It then composed the 13th Army Corps, with the 4th Guard
Division and the 3d Division. In May it gave the 122d Fusilier Regiment
to the 105th Division, a new formation. In June and July it took part in
the offensive upon the Narew.


SERBIA.

2. Assigned to the army of Gen. von Koevess, it took part in the
campaign against Serbia (October) and advanced along the Morava to
Kragujevatz.


BELGIUM.

3. Sent to rest at Belgrade, at the end of November, before its
departure for the Western Front, it entrained at Semlin on November 26
and was transferred to Belgium. (Itinerary: Budapest-Vienna-Munich-Ulm-
Deux Ponts-Saarbrücken; detraining at Bertrix on Nov. 20.)

4. In December it was concentrated in the vicinity of Courtrai, where
the 27th Division was and again formed the 13th Army Corps with this
division as it had done originally.


                                 1916.

1. In January, 1916, the 26th Division went into line southeast of Ypres
(between Hooge and the south of Sanctuary wood). It held this sector
until the month of July and suffered heavy losses July 2 (Zillebeke).


SOMME.

2. At the end of July the division was sent to the Somme and opposed the
British troops on the Longueval front. It lost very heavily while
resting at Guillemont. (Aug. 18–19).


FLANDERS.

3. Relieved on August 25, it took over the sector of Wytschaete
(September to November 11).


SOMME.

4. About November 11 the division left Flanders and returned to the
Somme. It occupied the Transloy sector from December 7 to the beginning
of March, 1917.


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. The division was in reserve during the month of March behind the
Artois front; went into action south of the Scarpe at the time of the
British offensive. On April 25 it launched a counterattack at Monchy le
Preux.

2. Relieved in a fortnight and sent to rest, it went back to the same
sector (south of the Scarpe); remained there from May 31 to the end of
July without any important losses and went to rest near Cambrai during
the first half of August.


FLANDERS.

3. From August 16 to September 4 it occupied the sector north of
Langemerck, where the artillery caused it heavy losses.


LORRAINE.

4. Sent to rest in Lorraine, it was trained and was outfitted for
mountain warfare and then sent to the Italian front at the end of
September.


ITALY.

5. It formed a part of the Berrer Corps (14th German Army) on October
20, fought northwest of Tolmino on October 24, entered Udine on the
28th, and reached the Tagliamento on the 29th.


                              RECRUITING.

The 26th Division is recruited entirely in Wurttemberg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 26th Division conducted itself well in the numerous battles in which
it took part. It is to be especially noted that at Poelcappelle, in
August, 1917, some units mutinied and left the first line vacant, when
the relief did not arrive quickly enough. This weakening of the morale
of the 26th Division was probably only temporary and will disappear, no
doubt, after a period of rest. (British Summary of Information, October,
1917.)


                                 1918.


FRANCE.

1. The 26th Division, after having done very well in Italy, was
transported to the Western Front, detraining in the Freiburg region
(southeast of Dieuze), and remaining here until March 10.


CAMBRAI.

2. The division entrained at Strassburg on the 11th and 12th, and
detrained near Peruwelz on the 13th and 14th, remaining in the
neighborhood of Valenciennes until the 17th; from here it proceeded by
night marches via Denain and Aniche to the Estrées-Ecourt-St. Quentin
region (south of Douai), where it arrived on the 20th. On the 26th it
went into close reserve near Fontaine les Croisilles, and the next day
it entered line near Hamelincourt (south of Arras). It attacked the next
day, but made no headway. It was relieved by the 111th Division on the
31st, and rested near Croisilles until April 3.

3. Then it marched via Bapaume and Miraumont and entered line south of
Hébuterne (south of Arras), taking part in the unsuccessful attack of
the 5th. It was relieved about the 12th of May by the 16th Reserve
Division, and went to the Denain region to rest and refit. On June 15 it
was in army reserve in the Roye-Carrépuis area.


RHEIMS.

4. About July 3 it went to the vicinity of Neuflize (northeast of
Rheims); the 15th it entered line north of Prosnes (southeast of
Rheims), and was withdrawn on the 17th.

5. By traveling in trucks, the division reached Bazoches on the 21st; it
remained in reserve the 23d and 24th, and relieved the 45th Reserve
Division east of Saponay (northwest of Fere-en-Tardenois) during the
night of July 25–26. The Allied push forced the front back here, and the
division was identified north of Saponay on August 2, northeast of
Fismes on the 18th, east of Braine on the 20th. It was relieved about
the 10th of September and went to rest north of Pont Arcy (northwest of
Fismes).

6. On the 3d of October it came back into line north of Soupir (east of
Vailly), and was still in line on November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 26th is rated as a first-class division. While it was in Alsace
(January, February, and the first part of March) it was thoroughly
trained in open warfare, and so it was used as a shock division, but it
did not succeed in making much headway in its first two engagements. It
did fight tenaciously, however, then and in subsequent fighting, and was
mentioned in the German communiques of October 27 and November 2 as
having particularly distinguished itself. It suffered heavy losses, so
that despite the large numbers of reenforcements sent it from time to
time, its battalions were reduced to three companies.




                         26th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │51 Res.  │121 Res. │51 Res.  │121 Res. │51 Res.  │119 Res.
              │         │180.     │         │180.     │         │180.
              │         │99 Res.  │         │99 Res.  │52 Res.  │121 Res.
              │52 Res.  │119 Res. │52 Res.  │119 Res. │         │99 Res.
              │         │120 Res. │         │120 Res. │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │Wurtt. Res. Drag.  │Wurtt. Res. Drag.  │Wurtt. Res. Drag.
              │  Rgt. (3 Sqns.).  │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │26 Res. F. A. Rgt. │26 Res. F. A. Rgt. │26 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │  (6 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │27 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (6 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 2 Pion.│4 Field Co. 13
   Liaisons.  │  Btn. No. 13.     │  Btn. No. 13.     │  Pions.
              │                   │26 Res. Pont. Engs.│6 Field Co. 13
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │26 Res. Tel. Detch.│226 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │26 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │26 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │51 Res.  │119 Res. │51 Res.  │180.
              │         │121 Res. │         │119 Res.
              │         │180.     │         │121 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 20 Uhlan    │2 Sqn. 20 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │122 (Wurtt.) Art.  │122 Art. Command:
              │  Command:         │
              │ 26 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 26 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │
              │                   │ 59 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 1261 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1262 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1316 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│326 Pion. Btn.:    │326 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 4 Co. 13 Pions.   │ 4 Co. 13 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 6 Co. 13 Pions.   │ 6 Co. 13 Pions.
              │ 226 T. M. Co.     │ 226 T. M. Co.
              │ 426 Tel. Detch.   │ 36 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │426 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 426 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 139 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │522 Ambulance Co.  │522 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │502 Field Hospital.│502 Field Hospital.
              │505 Field Hospital.│245 Vet. Hospital.
              │146 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │2 (Wurtt.) Cyclist │
              │  Co.              │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (13th Corps District—Wurttemberg.)


                                 1914.


VOSGES.

1. At the beginning of the war the 26th Reserve Division, forming the
14th Reserve Corps with the 28th Reserve Division, was a part of the 7th
German Army. While the 99th Reserve Infantry Regiment formed in Alsace
and at once went to the valley of the Bruche, the 180th Infantry
Regiment went to Ste. Marie aux Mines on August 8. The three reserve
regiments (119th, 120th, 121st) detrained between Freiburg and Neu-
Breisach on August 8–11 and fought at the Donon and in the valley of the
Bruche from August 17 to 24. Going then to the western slope of the
Vosges, the division reached St. Die on August 28, then advanced as far
as Rougiville, from which place it was sent to Ste. Marie aux Mines.


SOMME.

2. On September 11 the 26th Reserve Division was sent to the Somme and
assigned to the 2d Army. It went into action on both banks of the Ancre,
near Thiepval, near Miraumont and Beaumont Hamel, beginning on the 27th.

3. It occupied this sector of the front (south of Hebuterne, north of
Ovillers) until July, 1916. During this period it did not take part in
any important action.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. In March, 1915, the 120th Reserve Infantry Regiment was given to the
58th Division, a new formation.

2. In May, 1915, elements of the 26th Reserve Division were sent to
Artois on detached service and fought at Neuville-St. Vaast. In June
some units of the 99th Reserve Regiment (3d and 4th Battalions) and the
180th Infantry Regiment took part in the battles around Arras (Le
Labyrinthe).


SOMME.

3. At the beginning of July these elements rejoined the division, which
continued to hold the Somme sector before Bapaume.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. On July 1, 1916, the 26th Reserve Division withstood the Franco-
British offensive north and south of the Ancre (Beaumont Hamel,
Ovillers, Thiepval). (The total of the losses on the Somme amounted to
10,042 men.) The 99th Reserve Infantry Regiment lost 48 officers and
2,070 men. (Official List of Casualties.)


ARTOIS.

2. Relieved along the Somme about October 6, the division was sent south
of Arras (Monchy aux Bois) on October 10. Some elements of the division
were still engaged on both banks of the Ancre in November.


                                 1917.


HINDENBURG LINE.

1. After having occupied the calm sector of Artois for the winter of
1916–17, the 26th Reserve Division took part in the withdrawal of the
German troops about March 20. It left the front of Monchy aux Bois and
retired southeast of Croisilles (Lagnicourt-Ecoust-St. Main). It fought
along this line until April 7–13 and suffered some losses (Noreuil, Apr.
2).

2. After a rest of a month in the vicinity of Valenciennes, in the
course of which it sent some elements south of St. Quentin (Itancourt,
May 4–11), the 26th Reserve Division went back into line between Arras
and St. Quentin (Bullecourt-Queant) about May 17.


FLANDERS.

3. On August 10 the division was withdrawn from the front and entrained
at Aubigny au Bac (south of Douai) for Belgium. It went into action
north of Langemarck (Aug. 19-Sept. 16). It was then sent to rest
(vicinity of Bohain, northeast of St. Quentin) until October 14.

4. About October 17 the 26th Reserve Division went back into line north
of Ypres (The Ypres-Staden railroad—Houthulst wood) until October 23.

5. Sent to rest south of Cortemarck, it was transferred at the end of
October to Eerneghem, where it was first in reserve.

6. In the middle of November the 26th Reserve Division took over the
calm sector of Merckem, which it occupied until February, 1918, after a
short rest in the middle of December.


                              RECRUITING.

Since the departure of the 99th Reserve Infantry Regiment, the 26th
Reserve Division is made up entirely of Wurttembergers.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 26th Reserve Division is a very good division, of a combative value
equal to that of the majority of the active divisions. In the battle of
the Somme, in 1916, it opposed a stubborn resistance to the British
advance and launched vigorous counterattacks.

The division has not been seriously engaged since 1916; it was
thoroughly rested on the Flanders front. Not having been exposed to
violent battles and not having any great losses, its morale has not been
shaken. (British Summary of Information, February, 1918.)


                                 1918.


BELGIUM.

1. The 26th Reserve Division was withdrawn from the Merckem sector on
the 20th of February, and went to the area west of Antwerp. Here, it was
very probably trained in open warfare, but the fact has not been
definitely established.


ARRAS.

2. It left about March 11 and entered line near Hénin (southeast of
Arras) on the 24th. Its mission was to protect the troops engaged in the
main attack farther to the south against a flanking movement by the
British troops massed around Arras. In so doing, it became heavily
engaged, and is reported to have lost 60 per cent of its strength. It
was relieved on May 14, and went to rest in the Arleux area (south of
Douai).

3. On June 9 it relieved the 41st Division east of Hebuterne. A week or
so later it extended its sector toward the south so as to relieve the
16th Reserve Division. It was relieved about July 23 by the 183d
Division, and went to rest in the Bapaume area, after having suffered
severe losses.


SOMME.

4. On August 10 the division reenforced the front astride the Braye-
Corbie road (north of the Somme). It did not become heavily engaged this
time; withdrawn about the 18th, and went to rest in the Douai area.
Battalions were reduced to three companies.


ARRAS.

5. It reenforced the front near Vis en Artois (on Arras-Cambrai road) on
August 27. After suffering heavy losses it was withdrawn on the 31st to
region north of Cambrai.


CAMBRAI.

6. It came back into line on the 29th of September, after having rested
and thoroughly refitted, reenforcing the front near Tilloy (northwest of
Cambrai). It was heavily engaged, and fought very well. A few days later
Gen. von Beulow (commanding the 17th Army) sent a telegram to the King
of Saxony saying that the division had fought in an exemplary manner at
Cambrai, where it had several times reestablished the situation by its
counterattacks on the 29th, inflicting enormous losses on the enemy, and
thus preventing the town from falling into their hands. It was withdrawn
about the 9th of October.


VALENCIENNES.

7. On the 13th it relieved the 22d Division near Herin (west of
Valenciennes). It had not been withdrawn on the 11th of November.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 26th Reserve is rated as a first-class division. It did not
distinguish itself in the fighting during 1918 (except on the Cambrai
front, as already noted), still it could be depended upon and on the
whole fought well. In this connection it is to be noted that the 26th
Division had been held in reserve to relieve the 26th Reserve in the
March offensive, but the relief was considered unnecessary.




                        26th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │51 Ldw.      │119 Ldw.     │51 Ldw.      │119 Ldw.
              │             │123 Ldw.     │             │123 Ldw.
              │             │124 Ldw.     │             │124 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 20 Uhlan Rgt.       │3 Sqn. 20 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │
              │ 116 F. A. Rgt.            │116 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(426) Pion. Btn.:          │(426) Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 4 Ldw. Co. 13 Pions.      │ 4 Ldw. Co. 13 C. Dist.
              │                           │  Pions.
              │ 6 Ldw. Co. 13 Pions.      │ 3 Searchlight Section.
              │ 326 T. M. Co.             │526 Signal Command:
              │ 526 Tel. Detch.           │ 526 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 180 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │569 Ambulance Co.          │569 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │Field Hospital.            │251 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │256 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                 │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (13th Corps District—Wurttemberg.)


                                 1917.

1. The 26th Landwehr Division was formed on the Alsatian front at the
beginning of the year 1917. Two of its regiments, the 119th and 123d
Landwehr, forming the 51st Landwehr Brigade, had belonged to the 7th
Landwehr Division until that time. Its 3d Regiment, the 124th Landwehr,
came from the 2d Landwehr Division.


UPPER ALSACE.

2. Since its formation the 26th Landwehr Division has continually
occupied the Upper Alsace front (north of Cernay, Hartmannswillerskopf).


                              RECRUITING.

The division is entirely recruited from Wurttemberg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 26th Landwehr Division is purely a sector division. Each regiment
has an assault troop composed of young men.


                                 1918.


ALSACE.

1. The 26th Landwehr Division remained in the sector north of Cernay
(southwest of Colmar,) throughout 1918.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

In view of the division having been kept so long in what was probably
the most quiet sector on the whole front (only 1 prisoner was taken
after Dec. 15, 1917), when the need for troops was so great that fourth-
class divisions were frequently used on very active fronts, it would
seem that the 26th Landwehr was one of the poorest divisions in the
German Army.




                             27th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │53.      │123 Gren.│53.      │123 Gren.│53.      │123 Gren.
              │         │124.     │         │124.     │         │124.
              │54.      │120.     │54.      │120.     │54.      │120.
              │         │127.     │         │127.     │         │127.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │19 Uhlan Rgt.      │19 Uhlan Rgt.      │19 Uhlan Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │27 Brig.           │27 Brig.           │27 Brig.
              │                   │                   │
              │ 13 F. A. Rgt.     │ 13 F. A. Rgt.     │ 13 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 49 F. A. Rgt.     │ 49 F. A. Rgt.     │ 49 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  13.              │  13.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │Field Co. 13 Pions.│2 Co. 13 Pions.
              │                   │27 Tel. Detch.     │1 Res. Co. 24
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │27 Pont. Engs.     │Co. 29 Pions.
              │                   │                   │27 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │27 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │23 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │68 Anti-Aircraft.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │53.      │123 Gren.│53.      │120.
              │         │120.     │         │123.
              │         │124.     │         │124.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 19 Uhlan    │5 Sqn. 19 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │27 Artillery       │27 Art. Command:
              │  Command.         │
              │ 49 F. A. Rgt.     │ 13 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 4 Abt. 13 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (11, 12, and
              │                   │  13 Btries.).
              │                   │ 1289 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1290 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1291 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│129 Pion. Btn.     │12 (Saxon) Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  (former 1 Pion.  │  Btn.:
              │  No. 13).         │
              │2 Co. 13 Pions.    │ 2 Co. 13 Pions.
              │3 Co. 13 Pions.    │ 3 Co. 13 Pions.
              │                   │
              │27 T. M. Co.       │ 27 T. M. Co.
              │52 Searchlight Co. │ 137 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │27 Tel. Detch.     │27 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 27 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 154 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │31 Ambulance Co.   │31 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │253 Field Hospital.│253 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │255 Field Hospital.
              │                   │27 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │560 M. T. Col.     │560 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │3, 34, and 99 Anti-│
              │  Aircraft.        │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (13th Corps District—Wurttemberg.)


                                 1914.

The 27th Division belongs to the 13th Army Corps (Royal Wurttemberg),
with the 26th Division.


LORRAINE.

1. At the beginning of the war it formed a part of the 5th Army (German
Crown Prince). It was engaged in the battle of Longwy, August 22, 1914
(between Longwy and Virton); on the 23d, north of Longuyon. On August
30, at Dun and Sassey, it crossed the Meuse and went south with the 5th
Army between the Meuse and the Argonne. It fought at Pretz and
Vaubécourt on September 6 and 7. Following the retirement to the north,
it took up its positions in the Argonne.

2. At the beginning of October the 13th Army Corps was broken up and the
two divisions were separated for more than a year.


ARGONNE.

3. The 27th Division remained in the Argonne until the end of 1915.


                                 1915.


ARGONNE.

1. In the Argonne (Binarville-Grurie wood) the 27th Division was engaged
in mine warfare. In August, 1915, it took part in the local offensive of
the Army of the Crown Prince.

2. In September, at the time of the French offensive, elements of the
53d Brigade were sent to Champagne (northwest of Massiges), where they
remained in reserve.

3. In December the 27th Division entrained at Grandpré for the Courtrai
area, where the 13th Army Corps was re-formed as in the beginning, the
26th Division having returned from Serbia.


                                 1916.


YPRES.

1. From January to July, 1916, the 13th Army Corps was in line southeast
of the Ypres salient. The 27th Division was on the left of the 26th,
between Sanctuary wood and the Ypres-Comines Canal. On February 24 units
of the 27th Division gained possession of the British trenches of Bluff
(north of the canal), but lost them on March 2. In this action the 123d
Grenadier Regiment lost very heavily.

On June 2 the two divisions of the corps made a violent attack upon the
Canadians in the Cillebeke sector. They gained possession of Observation
Ridge, but were forced to abandon it by a counterattack. In these
battles the regiments lost heavily.


SOMME.

2. At the end of July the 13th Army Corps was withdrawn from the Ypres
salient and transferred to the Somme front. On August 1 the 27th
Division went into line in the Guillemont sector. It put up a successful
resistance to the attacks upon the village, but had serious losses.

3. It was relieved on August 25 and put in the Wytchaete sector, where
it remained for about two and one-half months (until Nov. 11).

4. In the middle of November the 27th Division returned to the Somme a
second time, north of Sailly Saillisel.


                                 1917.

1. The 27th Division was retained on the Somme until the beginning of
1917. On this date it was sent east of Cambrai. During the month of
March it was in line in the Roisel area.


ARTOIS.

2. After a short rest in the vicinity of Valenciennes it went into
action in the Bullecourt sector (southeast of Arras), where it had very
heavy losses (Apr. 7 to May 11). The dissolution of the 627th Infantry
Regiment, formed in Wurttemberg, served to make up a part of its losses,
and 600 men from this regiment came to the 27th Division.

3. Withdrawn about May 11 from the Arras front, the 27th Division
occupied a sector in the vicinity of Le Catelet (between Gonnelieu and
Honnecourt) at the beginning of June.

4. At the beginning of August it was relieved; entrained on August 12 at
Caudry, and was transferred to Flanders by way of Lille-Tourcoing-Menin-
Ledeghem-Roulers.

5. On August 26 it went into action northeast of Ypres (southeast of St.
Julien). In this sector it did not take part in any important attack but
suffered heavily from artillery fire.

The division was sent to the rear on September 12–13 and rested for a
month northeast of Ghent.

On October 11 it went back into line northeast of Ypres (near the Ypres-
Thourout railroad) and remained there until November 11. It was sent
almost immediately to Alsace, where it arrived between November 16 and
18.


                              RECRUITING.

The 27th Division is recruited entirely from Wurttemberg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 27th Division has fought well ever since the beginning of the war.
It seems that the heavy losses which it has suffered have weakened its
morale to a slight extent. Nevertheless, it may be considered as a very
good division (Dec. 9, 1917).


                                 1918.


CAMBRAI.

1. The 27th Division remained in the region of Schlettstadt (north of
Colmar) until February 2. While here it received some 1919-class
recruits. It then went to Cambrai, where it arrived on the 4th. On the
6th it relieved the 24th Reserve Division west of Graincourt (southwest
of Cambrai). It was relieved by the 53d Reserve Division early in March
and went to the neighborhood of Avesnes le Sec (southwest of
Valenciennes), where it was trained in open warfare.

2. Subsequently it was transferred to the Cambrai region. Between the
evening of March 20 and 5 a. m. on the 21st, it marched nearly 20 miles,
when it came into line near Villers-Guislain (south of Cambrai). It was
immediately heavily engaged and suffered severe losses. The 6th Company
of the 124th Regiment had lost 84 men by the time it had reached Fins. A
draft of 30 men was received at Guinchy. Withdrawn the 23d.

3. On April 4 it relieved the 54th Reserve Division near Aveluy (north
of Albert). Fighting on the 5th, the 6th Company of the 124th Regiment
lost 50 per cent of its effectives. All three regiments suffered heavy
losses. One battalion of the 120th Regiment was practically annihilated.
It was relieved by the 3d Naval Division on the 24th and went to rest
south of Tournai.

4. The division left on July 24 and marched via Landas-Marchiennes-
Neuville sur l’Escaut (south of Denain, rest)-St. Vaast (east of
Cambrai, rest)-Fins-Nurlu (rest)-Peronne, into line in the Morlancourt
sector (south of Albert), where it relieved the 107th Division about the
3d of August. In the heavy fighting that ensued it was forced back
through Bray and Suzanne. It was withdrawn the 28th after leaving more
than 1,400 prisoners in the hands of the British. It went to rest in the
vicinity of Briastre (south of Solesmes), and while here received as a
draft the dissolved 248th Reserve Regiment (54th Division disbanded).


MEUSE.

5. The division now became army and corps reserve. On September 6 it
entrained and traveled to Spincourt, arriving on the 10th. It then
marched to Camp Priester (near Loison), where it remained 14 days as
army reserve. About the 26th it entered line near Flabas (north of
Verdun). Five days later it was withdrawn and went back to the camp and
remained eight days.

6. Then it went to the Jaeger Lager near Billy (south of Longuyon).
About the 11th of October it entered line near Douaumont (north of
Verdun). On the 29th it was relieved and marched to the Jaeger Lager,
and then by truck via Stenay to a farm about 10 kilometers away.

7. On November 1 it reenforced the front near Tailly (southwest of
Stenay); it was still in line on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 27th has always been considered one of the very best German
divisions, and its conduct in the fighting during 1918 confirms its
rating as a first-class shock unit. It suffered severely, especially in
the spring, but not a great deal later on. Its moves toward the end of
the war seem to indicate that it was to form part of the reserve with
which the Germans hoped to regain the initiative.




                             28th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │55.      │109.     │55.      │109.     │55.      │109.
              │         │Body     │         │Body     │         │Body
              │         │  Gren.  │         │  Gren.  │         │  Gren.
              │         │110 Gren.│         │110 Gren.│         │110 Gren.
              │56.      │40 Fus.  │56.      │40 Fus.  │56.      │40 Fus.
              │         │111.     │         │111.     │         │111.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Jag. z. Pf.      │                   │5 Jag. z. Pf.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │28 Brig.           │28 Brig.           │28 Brig.
              │14 F. A. Regt.     │14 F. A. Regt.     │14 F. A. Regt.
              │50 F. A. Regt.     │50 F. A. Regt.     │50 F. A. Regt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Bn. No. 14:│1 Pion. Bn. No. 14:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ Field Co. 14      │ 1 Co. 14 Pions.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 28 Tel. Detch.    │ 3 Co. 36 Pions.
              │                   │ 28 Pont. Engs.    │ 28 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 28 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 28 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │29 Antiaircraft 1st
              │                   │                   │  Bav. Labor Bn.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │56.      │109.     │55.      │40.
              │         │Body     │         │109.
              │         │  Gren.  │         │
              │         │40 Fus.  │         │110.
              │         │110 Gren.│         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2d Sq. 5 Jag. z.   │2 Sqn. 5 Horse Jag.
              │  Pf.              │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │28 Art. Command:   │28 Art Command:
              │ 14 F. A. Regt.    │ 14 F. A. Regt.
              │                   │ 55 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 801 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 991 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1129 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│130 Pion. Bn.      │14 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  (former 1 Pion.  │
              │  No. 14):         │
              │ 2 Co. 14 Pions.   │ 2 Co. 14 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 14 Pions.   │ 3 Co. 14 Pions.
              │ 28 T. M. Co.      │ 94 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 28 Tel. Detch.    │28 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 28 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 55 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │35 Ambulance Co.   │35 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │262, 292 Field     │261 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │262 Field Hospital.
              │                   │28 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │67 Truck Train.    │561 M. T. Col.
              │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │40 M. G.           │
              │  Sharpshooters    │
              │  Detch.           │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

       (14th Corps District—Northern part Grand Duchy of Baden.)


                                 1914.


ALSACE-LORRAINE.

1. The 28th Division formed a part of the 14th Army Corps with the 29th
Division, also from Baden. At the beginning of the campaign went to
Upper Alsace to reenforce the 29th Division; fought at Mulhousen on
August 9, and on the 13th west of Altkirch. Returning to Mulhousen on
the 14th, it entrained at Muelheim on the 16th for Petite Pierre. The
14th Army Corps was placed on the left flank of the 6th Army and took
part with it in the battle of the 20th. The 28th Division then crossed
the frontier and advanced to Mortagne at the beginning of September. On
September 11 it recrossed the frontier and went to the west of Pont à
Mousson, where it went into action between September 20 and 29.


ARTOIS.

2. Withdrawn from La Haye at the end of the month, it entrained on
October 4 at Metz, detrained at Mons, and from there marched to the
front—La Bassée, Ablain, St. Nazaire.


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. From October, 1914, to May, 1915, its regiments were exhausted one
after the other on the plateau of Notre Dame de Lorette. (On November
30, 1914, the 110th Grenadier Regiment acknowledged casualties of 58
officers and 3,814 men since the beginning of the campaign.) The 28th
Division again suffered very heavily during the winter (especially the
110th Grenadiers and the 40th Fusileers); finally it lost very heavily
from April 9 to May 3 (Carency-Ouvrages-Blancs). In the course of these
battles the 111th Infantry Regiment was almost completely destroyed. On
May 10 its first battalion had only 3 officers and 272 men. (Notebook of
the captain commanding the battalion.) The Casualty Lists report 32
officers and 1,737 men as casualties.

2. The division was relieved on May 15, sent to rest in the area Lens,
Pont à Vendin, Héuin-Liétard, and reorganized.

3. About May 25 it was put back into line (Ablain-Lorette) and again
suffered very heavy losses.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. Withdrawn from Artois about June 13, it was transferred to the
northeast of Reims. Beginning with June 18, it occupied the front
between Bétheny and the Sillery-Beine road. In this sector it had only a
few local actions and very few losses.

5. During the offensive of September, 1915, the division detached two
battalions (one from the 109th Grenadiers and one from the 110th
Grenadiers) to act as reinforcements in the Somme Py area.

6. On October 19 and 20 a gas attack was rather poorly carried out by
the Badensian Infantry (La Pompelle-Prosnes front).

7. The 28th Division was relieved about November 10. At the beginning of
December it went into the sector of Tahure-Butte du Mesnil which it
occupied for the entire winter without any notable action.


                                 1916.

1. About the end of April, 1916, the 28th Division left the sector of
the Butte du Mesnil. It was sent to rest for a week in the Vouziers
area, and about May 5 went back into line (sector of Maisons de
Champagne-La Justice). During this time the units received intensive
training.


SOMME.

2. During the first half of July the regiments of the division (minus
the 109th Infantry Regiment, which had remained in Champagne) were
successively relieved and transferred by way of Charleville, Hirson, and
St. Quentin to the Biaches area (Somme). Between July 16 and 20 they
established their positions between the Somme and the Barleux.

3. The 28th Division was retained in this sector until the beginning of
October. It suffered heavy losses there, which were partially covered by
reenforcements sent from the depots of the 14th Army Corps (1915 and
1916 classes).

4. At the beginning of October the division was sent to Champagne, into
the sector east of Tahure. It left this about the 20th and reoccupied it
from December until the end of January, 1917.


                                 1917.


MEUSE.

1. At this time the 28th Division was transferred to the Verdun area. It
was sent into line in the Caurières wood sector and remained until the
beginning of September. It took part in the attacks on this front in the
middle of August.


ALSACE.

2. Withdrawn from the Verdun area about the middle of September the
division was sent to Alsace, northwest of Altkirch and was in the front
line on October 20. It soon left this for the Montmedy area, then for
Laon, and finally for the Cambrai front where it fought at Gonnelieu on
November 30. Relieved at the beginning of December, it was sent to rest
in the Ardennes and, at the beginning of February, 1918, occupied a
sector at Mount Cornillet.


                              RECRUITING.

The 28th Division is recruited almost exclusively from Baden. A slight
admixture from the 4th Corps District. The 40th Fusileers, although a
Prussian regiment, was recruited in the Grand Duchy of Baden.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 28th Division has always given a good account of itself and must be
considered a good division (July, 1917).

At the beginning of March, 1917, it carried out an attack against the
Caurières wood with a great deal of vigor. A division order (dated Mar.
3, 1917) found on a corpse praises the heroism of the valiant troops of
the 28th Division and calls its regiments “The conquerors of Lorette.”


                                 1918.


AISNE.

1. The division held the Butte du Mesnil sector continuously until May
13, when it rested for 10 days in the vicinity of Vouziers. On May 23
the division entrained at Montcornet and was moved to the region of
Laon. It came into line on May 31, reenforcing the Aisne battle front
between Chateau de Maucreux and Troësnes. It was relieved on June 8 by
the 10th Reserve Division.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

2. Its stay out of line was short, for on June 13 it again relieved the
50th Division near Verneuil; about this time the divisional commander,
Lieut. Gen. Hahn, was decorated. The division was withdrawn from the
Marne front about July 1. It returned to reenforce the battle line near
Chaumuzy, southwest of Rheims on July 24. It fell back to the Vesle,
where it held the line until August 26.


WOEVRE.

3. The division then went to rest in the vicinity of Baroucourt for
three weeks. It left that place on September 14 and marched via
Amermont-Offleville-Gondrecourt Rouvers-Etain to a position in line near
Grimacourt and Hermeville, relieving the 8th Landwehr Division which
side slipped to the south. It held this sector until October 19, when it
was withdrawn and moved from Conflans, via Arlon, to Flanders on October
22.


MONS.

4. On November 1, the division came into line at Maresches in which area
it fought until the armistice. The last identifications were at Sebourg
(Nov. 4), west of Roisin (6th), and Dour (9th).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was not greatly used in 1918,
spending most of the time on quiet fronts. After the Vesle fighting in
August, the battalions of the division were reduced to three companies.




                         28th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │55 Res.  │109 Res. │55 Res.  │109 Res. │55 Res.  │109 Res.
              │         │110 Res. │         │110 Res. │         │110 Res.
              │56 Res.  │40 Res.  │56 Res.  │40 Res.  │         │111 Res.
              │         │111 Res. │         │111 Res. │         │
              │         │9 Res.   │         │8 Res.   │         │
              │         │  Jag.   │         │  Jag.   │         │
              │         │  Bn.    │         │  Bn.    │         │
              │         │14 Res.  │         │14 Res.  │         │
              │         │  Jag.   │         │  Jag.   │         │
              │         │  Bn.    │         │  Bn.    │         │
              │         │         │         │55 Ldw.  │         │
              │         │         │         │  Brig.  │         │
              │         │         │         │  Ers.   │         │
              │         │         │         │  Bn.    │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Res. Drag.       │8 Res. Drag.       │8 Res. Drag.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │29 Res. F. A. Rgt. │29 Res. F. A. Rgt. │28 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │  (29 btries.).    │  (6 btries.).
              │                   │                   │29 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (6 btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │1 Ers. Abt. of 76
              │                   │                   │  F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2│1 and 2 Res. Cos. 2
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Bn. No. 13.│  Pion. No. 13.    │  Pion. No. 13.
              │                   │28 Res. Pont. Engs.│228 T. M. Co.
              │                   │28 Res. Tel. Detch.│28 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │28 Res. Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │56 Res.  │109 Res. │56 Res.  │109 Res.
              │         │110 Res. │         │110 Res.
              │         │111 Res. │         │111 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3d Sq. 22d Drag.   │3 Sqn. 22 Drag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │29 Res. F. A. Rgt. │29 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 btries.).     │
              │                   │2 Abt. 1 Gd. Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (7 and 9
              │                   │  btries.).
              │                   │766 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │
              │                   │918 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1366 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│328 Pion. Bn.      │328 Pion. Bn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │1st Co. 16th Pion. │ 4 Co. 16 Pions.
              │4 Co. 16 Pion.     │ 1 Ers. Co. 16
              │                   │  Pions.
              │228 T. M. Co.      │ 72 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │428 Tel. Detch.    │428 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 428 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 160 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │514 Ambulance Co.  │514 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │56, 57 Res. Field  │56 Res. Field
              │  Hospitals.       │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │57 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │428 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │725 Light Mun. Col.│725 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                      (14th Corps District—Baden.)


                                 1914.


VOSGES.

1. At the beginning of the war the 28th Reserve Division formed in the
Grand Duchy of Baden, and constituting the 14th Reserve Corps, with the
26th Reserve Division, belonged to the 7th Army (Von Heeringen). The
division detraining near Emmendingen (Baden), entered Alsace by way of
Markolsheim on August 10. It was engaged in the valley of the Bruche
beginning on the 15th, fought at Donon on the 20th, and went down toward
the Meurthe, where it fought until September 5 (Nompatelize and la
Bourgonce), suffering heavy losses (two-thirds of the effectives of the
111th Reserve Infantry Regiment).


SOMME.

2. After September 5 the 28th Reserve Division retired toward Blamont on
September 15. On September 22 and 23 it entrained at Teterchen
(Lorraine) for Cambria, where it detrained on September 26 and 27. It
was assigned to the 2d Army with the other division of the 14th Reserve
Corps.


                                 1915.

1. The division occupied the sector crossed by the Albert-Bapaume road
(Ovillers to Fricourt) until July, 1916.

In April, 1915, the 28th Reserve Division lost the 40th Reserve Infantry
Regiment, which went to the 115th Division, and its two battalions of
Chasseurs left it—one in January, the other in May.

2. In August and September, 1915, elements of the division were in
reserve in the area south of St. Quentin.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. The 28th Reserve Division did not have any great losses on the Somme
between October, 1915, and July, 1916. Its combat activity was weak
during this period.

2. On July 1, 1916, the Division supported the entire weight of the
British offensive north of the Somme, and suffered very heavy losses
(casualties of the 111th Reserve Infantry Regiment, 39 officers and
1,821 men).

3. On July 4 the division was withdrawn from the front, sent to rest,
and reorganized.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. Transferred to Champagne on July 10, it took over the sector west of
Auberive (July 14 to the beginning of October).


SOMME.

5. The 28th Reserve Division was brought back to the Somme at Thiepval
about October 5; it was in action until the end of October and lost
heavily. On the one day of October 24 the 9th Company of the 111th
Reserve Infantry Regiment noted the arrival of 134 men as replacements.


MEUSE (AVOCOURT).

Relieved about October 28, the division was sent to the Stenay area and
reorganized.

Beginning of November, it occupied, at Verdun, the Avocourt sector at
Hill 304.


                                 1917.

1. On the Avocourt front the 28th Reserve Division took part in a few
local engagements. It left this sector between April 7 and April 15.


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

2. Concentrated in the area northwest of Montfaucon, the division
entrained about April 16 at Brieulles sur Meuse, Dun, Romagne and was
transferred to Rozoy sur Serre; from there it marched to the sector east
of Californie Plateau (Apr. 21). It underwent the French attack of May
4, which caused it heavy losses. Elements of the division lost very
heavily counterattacking on the days following.

3. The division was relieved on May 18 and reorganized hastily
(replacements of 1,100 men including 25 per cent of the 1918 class and
men from the 626th Infantry Regiment dissolved). It was sent to Verdun
to the Talou sector on May 20.


VERDUN.

4. The division, weakened by an epidemic of dysentery, was withdrawn
from the front on July 8 and sent to rest in the area of Marville-Jametz
until the beginning of August.

5. It went back into line at this date, on the right bank of the Meuse
(Talou, Hill 344). It lost very heavily from the French attack of August
20 (47 officers and 1,150 men as prisoners) and was relieved on August
30.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. At the beginning of September it occupied the sector of Ville sur
Tourbe in Champagne.


                              RECRUITING.

The 28th Reserve Division is recruited mostly from Baden. In addition,
there are men from Rhenish-Hesse and the Rhine districts. There was also
a small number of men from the 4th Corps District (1918 class).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The combat value of the 28th Reserve Division appears mediocre.

During the entire time that it spent on the Somme (October, 1914-July,
1916), the division remained on the defensive.

Having lost very heavily on the Somme, it showed no great activity on
the Somme (August-October, 1916).

On the Californie Plateau (May, 1917), the 28th Reserve Division
appeared very much inferior to the guard.

At Hill 344 (Aug. 20), the attitude of the regiments of the 28th Reserve
Division was rather passive, and the resistance was quite weak.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved south of Beine (Champagne) on February 16.
It entrained on the following day for Cartignies, near Avesnes, where it
underwent training for offensive operations. It remained there until the
14th of March, when it commenced to march by night to the front via
Etreux-Fresnoy-Le Nouvion-Wassigny-Essigny le Petit Remancourt, arriving
in line on March 20.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

2. The division was in the front line of the attack at Fayet on the
21st. On the 23d it passed through Savy and reached Vaux. On the 26th it
passed through Parvillers and Erches, proceeding on the 27th via Warsy
to Becquigny. The division distinguished itself in the fighting, though
at a heavy cost. Some companies are known to have lost 75 per cent of
their effectives. When withdrawn from the front line on March 29, the
division was held in reserve on the front at Davenscourt, Warsy, and
Gruny until April 17. Two thousand five hundred men, with a large
percentage of the 1919 class, were received at this time as
reinforcements.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

3. The division rested in the Avesnes-Maubeuge area until May 22, when
it marched via Marle-Ste. Preuve-Montaigu May 22–27. The division was
used as an attack division to break through on the Aisne front. It
attacked southwest of Craonne on the 27th and advanced by Corbeny,
southwest of Craonne, Merval, east of Fismes, Treloup (30th) and
Jaulgonne. Prince von Buchau, the divisional commander, was killed on
May 30. In the advance to the Marne the division covered 60 kilometers.


CHATEAU THIERRY.

4. The division was out of line June 3 to 7. On the 8th, it reentered
line before Bouresches (west of Chateau Thierry) where it opposed the 2d
United States Division until July 3. Heavy losses were received in the
fighting in the Bois Belleu on June 10–11. The division received a draft
of 200 men in June. The division was withdrawn on July 3 and rested
southwest of Soissons from July 7 to 18.


SOISSONS.

5. It was alerted on July 18 and engaged south of Soissons (Berzy-
Courmelles) on the next day. It was heavily engaged until August 1, when
it entrained north of Laon and moved to north of Vouziers on August 1.
Here the division rested until the middle of August. A draft of 400 men
was received early in August.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. The division was engaged in the sector north of Mesnil les Hurlus
about August 20 until the end of the month, when it was withdrawn.

7. After leaving the line at Tahure the division was shifted back and
forth behind the Argonne and Meuse sectors ready to be thrust into line.
It was moved from Juniville to Longuyon on September 5 and stayed at St.
Jean les Buzy (west of Conflans) until the 26th. From there it moved to
the Damvillers region, and on October 1 was sent to Milly and Villers
devant Dun.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

8. The division was engaged near Cunel from October 3 to 18, when it was
withdrawn to Stenay where it received replacements. The company strength
was brought up to 40–50 men. On the 24th it was again in line near
Bantheville and continued in to the end. It fell back north of Villers
devant Dun on November 1–2, where it was last identified.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. It was one of the best of the
German divisions. It was used as an assault division in the Somme and
Aisne offensives and met with great success. Following the attack it
received in June in the Bois de Belleu, the division was not seriously
engaged until it was thrown in the Argonne in an effort to stop the
American advance. Its morale remained high up to the last though its
effectives dwindled.




                             29th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │57.      │113.     │57.      │113.     │57.      │113.
              │         │114.     │         │114.     │         │114.
              │58.      │112.     │58.      │112.     │58.      │112.
              │         │142.     │         │142.     │         │142.
              │84.      │169.     │84.      │169.     │         │
              │         │170.     │         │170.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │22 Drag.           │                   │5th Jag. z. Pf.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │29 Brig.           │29 Brig.           │29 Brig.
              │30 Regt.           │30 Regt.           │30 Regt.
              │76 Regt.           │76 Regt.           │76 Regt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. No. 14.    │1 Pion. No. 14.
   Liaison.   │                   │                   │
              │                   │Field Co. 14 Pion. │2 Co. 14 Pion.
              │                   │29 Tel. Detch.     │29 T. M. Co.
              │                   │29 Pont. Engs.     │29 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │29 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │29 Div. M. G. Co.
              │                   │                   │60 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │58.      │112.     │58.      │112.
              │         │113.     │         │113.
              │         │142.     │         │142.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sq. 5th Jag. z.  │4 Sqn. 5 Horse Jag.
              │  Pf.              │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │29 Art. Command:   │29 Art. Command:
              │ 30 Regt.          │ 30 F. A. Regt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 9 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Regt.
              │                   │ 734 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 827 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 932 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│130 Pion. Btn.     │130 Pion. Btn.
   Liaison.   │                   │
              │1 and 5 14 Pion.   │1 Co. 14 Pion.
              │29 T. M. Co.       │5 Co. 14 Pion.
              │29 Tel. Detch.     │29 T. M. Co.
              │                   │185 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │29 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 29 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 31 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │36 Ambulance Co.   │36 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │263, 266 Field     │263 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │29 Vet. Hospital.  │266 Field Hospital.
              │                   │29 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │562 Light Mun. Col.│562 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (14th Corps District—Southern part Grand Duchy of Baden and Upper
                                Alsace.)


                                 1914.


ALSACE-LORRAINE.

1. The 29th Division is a division of Baden, like the 28th, with which
it formed the 14th Army Corps. Entering the campaign with its three
brigades, it fought at Mulhouse on August 9, 1914. On August 14 taken to
the right bank of the Rhine, it entrained for Zabern and took part in
the battle of the 20th, after which it crossed the French frontier of
Lorraine. Suffering heavily on the Meurthe, it retired to Dieuze, from
which place it was sent to the front at La Haye west of Pont a Mousson.


ARTOIS.

2. It was transferred to the area north of Arras at the beginning of
October, 1914 (front of La Bassee, Ablain, St. Nazaire).


                                 1915.


ARTOIS.

1. From October, 1914, to May, 1915, all the regiments of the 29th
Division suffered heavy losses on the plateau of Notre Dame de Lorette.
On January 28, 1915, the 3d Company of the 196th Infantry Regiment had
only 38 men left (letter). The 58th Brigade, especially, which contained
a greater number of Alsace-Lorrainers than the others, lost very heavily
in the course of this winter. At the end of November, 1914, the 142d
Infantry Regiment had already had casualties of 44 officers and 2,603
men. On February 24, 1915, the 2d Company of the 142d Infantry Regiment
had already received 358 men as successive replacements. But it was from
May 8 to 13 that the regiments of the division suffered most heavily
(1,000 men of the 114th Infantry Regiment). In March the 84th Brigade
was taken from the 28th Division and transferred to the 52d Division (a
new formation).

2. About May 15 the division was withdrawn from the front and sent to
the area of Lens, Pont a Vendin, Henin-Lietard.

3. Sent back into line about May 25 (Souchez-Fond de Buval-Chateau de
Carleul), it again suffered heavy losses.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. The division was again relieved about June 13 and sent northeast of
Rheims (sector between the Sillery-Beine road and Prosne), on June 18.
It held these lines until the beginning of November.

5. During its stay in the Rheims area, the 29th Division sent one
battalion of the 113th Infantry Regiment into the Champagne battle.

6. On October 19 and 20 the 112th and 142d Infantry Regiments attempted
a gas attack upon the sector La Pompelle-Prosnes. During this period
(June to November, 1915) the losses of the division were insignificant.

7. About November 10 the 29th Division left this sector to go farther
east, to the Tahure-Butte du Mesnil (Nov. 23). It occupied this sector
until the end of September, 1916.


                                 1916.

1. During the entire winter of 1915–16 the 29th Division held the front
of Tahure-Butte du Mesnil without any notable action. In the course of
their period of rest in the Vouziers area its battalions continued their
training.


SOMME.

2. At the end of September, the division was transferred to the Somme.
After this time the two divisions of the 14th Army Corps seemed to have
become “flying divisions.” The 114th Infantry Regiment was withdrawn
from the division and assigned to the 212th Division, later to 199th
Division.

3. On October 4 the 29th Division went into action on the Somme east of
Cléry. It was retained in this area until the beginning of February,
1917. On January 31, its regiments, each of which contained four
battalions since the autumn of 1916, were reduced to three, the men of
the 4th battalion being assigned to the other three.


                                 1917.

1. On February 15, 1917, the 29th Division was sent to rest north of St.
Quentin, where it worked on the Hindenburg line.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Transferred to the Rethel area on April 1, it was engaged south of
Nauroy (west of Cornillet) on the 17th, where it lost heavily. It was
relieved about April 20 and filled up with men of the 1918 class and of
the 626th Infantry Regiment, dissolved at the end of April.

3. From May 10 until about the middle of June, it occupied the sector of
Tahure-Butte du Mesnil.

4. About June 14 it was sent to the rear and rested in the area east of
Vouziers-Attigny. The three regiments were filled up with important
replacements (men of the 1918 class and the last of the 1917 class
incorporated in the army in October, 1916).


VERDUN.

5. About July 10–12, the 29th Division entrained for the Verdun front
and was sent into the sector of Avocourt wood. It underwent the French
attack the 17th which caused it great losses.

6. On August 1 the 29th Division launched an attack to retake the
positions lost on the 17th. Taken to the rear at the beginning of
August, it was again engaged at the time of the French offensive of
August 20 and counter attacked unsuccessfully (west of Hill 304)
suffering heavy losses.

7. Relieved on October 24–25, it went to rest in the area of Joeuf
(Landres, St. Georges, and vicinity), where it was reorganized. The
gravity of its losses caused conscripts of the 1918 class called out in
June, having only two months’ instruction, to be sent to it (5th company
of the 142d Infantry Regiment for example).

8. About October 6, the division went back into line on the right bank
of the Meuse (north of Hill 344). It remained there until the last of
December.


                              RECRUITING.

The 29th Division is recruited almost exclusively in Baden, the regional
character being accentuated by the return of the men from the 14th Corps
District who had been serving in the regiments of the 4th Corps
District.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Until the attacks of April, 1917, the 29th Division was considered a
good division, well trained and well officered. The cohesion of the
troops appears to have suffered from the large proportion of raw
replacements, in consequence of their losses.

On August 21, 1917, the 142d Infantry Regiment launched a counter attack
(west of Hill 304) which failed because of lack of cohesion and liaison
between the different units and because of the heavy losses caused by
the French machine guns.


                                 1918.


VERDUN.

1. The division held the Beaumont sector until about April 1, when it
was relieved by the 19th Ersatz Division. It rested in the Montmedy-
Virton area (Meix) from April 6 to 25. The division was high in
effectives at this time, the companies averaging 180 to 200 men.

2. On April 25–28 the division was railed to Belgium via Sedan-
Charleville-Namur-Bruxelles-Courtrai. It marched to Wervieq, rested
there until April 30 and marched into line northeast of Mount Kemmel on
the night of May 1–2.


LYS.

3. The division was in line until May 15 at Kemmel. Losses from
artillery fire were considerable. It was relieved by the 8th Division
and rested at Oostroosebeke (north of Courtrai) until June 14.

4. On the night of the 14–15, the division entered line east of
Langemarck, relieving the 49th Reserve Division. On July 15, the 49th
Reserve Division returned and relieved the 29th Division, which rested
near Gits (Roulers) until the 25th. Then it entrained and moved to the
Laon district, detraining at Malmaison. From there the division was
taken in trucks on the Vesle front.


AISNE.

5. It held the Courlaudon sector (east of Fismes) from August 1 to 31,
when it retreated to the Aisne (Maizy). It was withdrawn about September
8. It rested near Laon until the 15th, when it was reengaged north of
the Aisne (Allemant) from September 16 to 24. It retreated behind the
Ailette Canal (east of Anizy and Chavignon) and was relieved on October
1.

6. The division left Laon on October 2 and was brought by rail and truck
to Fresnoy le Grand, coming into line on October 6 in that area. On the
7th and 8th French attacks forced the division to withdraw by Croix
Fonsomme, Seboncourt. On the 13th the division was relieved by elements
of the 81st Reserve Division and held in rear of the line. On the 18th
it was reengaged south of Le Cateau (Ribeauville). In November the
division retreated on the axes Fresmy, Prisches, in the direction of
Avesnes, where it was last identified on November 7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. In 1918 it was used to hold
active defensive sectors. In the middle of October its effectives had
greatly diminished.




                        29th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │29       │28 Ldw.  │29       │28 Ldw.  │29 Ldw.  │28 Ldw.
              │  (Mixed)│         │  (Mixed)│         │         │
              │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.   │         │         │
              │         │29 Ldw.  │         │29 Ldw.  │         │29 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │  (427). │         │
              │         │         │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │5 Sqn. 8 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ldst. Btry. 8    │247 Rgt.           │247 Art. Command.
              │  Corps.           │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │Pion. Bn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │182 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │289 Wireless.
              │                   │                   │302 Wireless.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │Field Hospital.
              │                   │                   │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │11th Ldst. Bn.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │         │29 Ldw.  │28 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │29 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │   (?)
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Sqn. 8 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │        (?)
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │        (?)
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │555 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │                   │327 Field Hospital.
              │                   │140 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1915.

1. The 29th Landwehr Division was formed from the 29th Landwehr Brigade.
The latter was transformed into a division on the Russian Front about
November 1917.


FRANCE.

2. Entering Belgium on August 20, 1914, at Charleroi on the 31st, at
Berry au Bac at the end of September, then attached to the 18th Army
Corps north of St. Quentin, then to the 14th Reserve Corps, the 29th
Landwehr Brigade was transferred to the Eastern Front at the end of
March, 1915. In April and May it was in Poland south of Rawa; it was
then attached to the Posen Corps (9th Corps).


COURLAND.

3. The German offensive in the summer of 1915 sent the 28th Landwehr
Regiment to Courland (vicinity of Toukkoum, in August). This regiment
took up its position in October in the vicinity of Kalnzem (north of
Mitau). The 29th Landwehr Regiment, after taking part in the operations
at Vilna, was brought to the east of Olai, in October, and rejoined the
28th Landwehr Regiment in the vicinity of Kalnzem, at the beginning of
November.


                                 1916.


COURLAND.

1. The 29th Landwehr Brigade remained on the Mitau Front (Kalnzem-
Chmarden) during the whole of the year 1916 and until March, 1917. It
then formed a part of the Winecken detachment. In October it received a
new regiment, the 427th Infantry Regiment, which was taken from it in
January, 1917.


                                 1917.


COURLAND.

1. About the middle of March, 1917, the 29th Landwehr Brigade was
relieved north of Mitau and sent west of Jakobstadt. It appears to be in
reserve in this sector at the time of the operations against Riga. It
then came into line north of Kreuzburg (vicinity of Jakobstadt).

2. About the month of November the 29th Landwehr Brigade was transformed
into the 29th Landwehr Division, which did not prevent the taking of men
from the division to reinforce its neighbor, the 77th Reserve Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

On the Russian Front since 1914, the elements of the 29th Landwehr
Division can have only a mediocre combat value.


                                 1918.


ESTHONIA.

1. The 29th Landwehr Division occupied a very extended sector north of
Kreuzburg until March, 1918. The division was sent then to the Polotsk-
Vitebsk region and then to the Baltic Provinces. It was in Esthonia at
the beginning of May; to the west of Reval early in June. “I have been
in Esthonia three weeks now for guard duty,” a man wrote on May 19. The
division was identified here several times subsequently, the last
identification being on the 5th of September.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.


                             30th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │60.      │99.      │60.      │99.      │60.      │99.
              │         │143.     │         │143.     │         │105.
              │         │         │         │         │         │         .
              │85.      │105.     │85.      │105.     │         │143.
              │         │136.     │         │136.     │         │
              │     8 Jag. Bn.    │         │         │         │
              │    14 Jag. Bn.    │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Jag. z. Pf.      │                   │8 Res. Hussars (2
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │30 Brig.           │30 Brig.           │30 Brig.
              │51 Regt.           │51 Regt.           │51 Regt.
              │84 Regt.           │84 Regt.           │84 Regt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. No. 15.    │1 Pion. No. 15.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │Fld. Co. 15 Pion.  │1 Co. 15 Pion.
              │                   │30 Pont. Engs.     │30 T. M. Co.
              │                   │30 Tel. Detch.     │30 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │30 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │30 Antiaircraft
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │60.      │99.      │68.      │99.
              │         │105.     │         │105
              │         │         │         │  (Saxon).
              │         │143.     │         │143.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Res. Hussars (?).│5 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │30 Art. Command:   │30 Art. Command:
              │ 84 Regt.          │ 84 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 10 Bav. Ft. A.
              │                   │  Btn.
              │                   │ 885 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1369 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1394 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│131 Pion. Bn.      │15 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │1, 5/15 Pion.      │ 1 Co. 15 Pions.
              │30 T. M. Co.       │ 5. Co. 15 Pions.
              │30 Tel. Detch.     │ 182 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 30 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 161 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │30 Signal Command.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │37 and 39 Ambulance│30 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│  Cos.             │
              │Field Hospital.    │275 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │276 Field Hospital.
              │                   │30 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │30 Antiaircraft    │
              │  Detch.           │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (15th Corps—District, Alsace.)


                                 1914.


ALSACE-LORRAINE.

The 30th Division constituted the 15th Army Corps (Strassburg) with the
39th Division.

1. At the beginning of the campaign the 30th Division formed a part of
the 7th Army (Von Heeringen). Entraining on August 8, 1914, for Upper
Alsace, it fought there until the 13th. It was transferred from there to
south of Sarreburg and crossed the French frontier after the battle of
the 20th. It advanced by way of Raon l’Étape across the Meurthe. At the
beginning of September it was concentrated near Avricourt and went to
Tergnier; from there to Craonne and Hurtebise. It fought there from the
middle of September to the middle of October.

2. Concentrated at Laon on October 20, the 30th Division (as well as the
39th Division) arrived on the Lys on the 29th.


FLANDERS.

3. The 15th Army Corps, now a part of the 6th Army, went into action
southeast of Ypres, an area in which it remained for almost 15 months
(October, 1914-January. 1916).


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. Before our attacks of 1915, the 30th Division was attached, with the
15th Army Corps to the 4th Army. It went into action south of Ypres.

The 136th Infantry Regiment left it in April and became a part of the
115th Division (a new formation).


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. Toward the end of January, 1916, elements of the 30th Division were
transferred to Verdun to take part in the February offensive.

2. On February 24 the 15th Army Corps, which was on the western wing of
the German attacking forces, went into action on the front of Maucourt-
Warcq.

3. The regiments of the 30th Division suffered slightly during this
period, the battle having been less intense in the Woëvre. Only the
105th Infantry Regiment, in action as a reenforcement of the 3d Army
Corps, suffered very heavy losses.

4. The 30th Division was not relieved after the battles of February and
the beginning of March. It remained in the sector and, on July 11, the
99th and 143d Infantry Regiments took part in a new offensive. On August
8 the 143d Infantry Regiment attacked the works of Thiaumont and was
decimated. At this time the regiments were filled from day to day by
irregular replacements. (Between July 7 and 19 more than 136 men were
sent to the 11th Company of the 99th Infantry Regiment.)


SOMME.

5. About the end of September the 30th Division was relieved and sent to
rest in the Cambrai area. It went into line a short time afterwards, on
the Somme at Sailly Saillisel and remained there one month. It again
lost very heavily (the 143d Infantry Regiment lost half of its
effectives).

6. Relieved at the end of November, the 30th Division was sent back to
the Verdun front.


MEUSE.

7. After a rest near Dun sur Meuse, it went into line in the vicinity of
the Mort Homme, then of the Côte du Poivre and east of Louvemont (from
Dec. 15 to the end of January, 1917) without taking part there in any
important offensive or defensive engagement.


                                 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. On March 1, 1917, it went into line in the sector east of Auberive
and was still there at the time of our spring offensive in Champagne. It
underwent this attack at the beginning of May and occupied the sector
until the middle of August. During this time, between April 17–20 and
the beginning of May, 1917, the losses of the 30th Division were very
great. The effectives of the 105th Infantry Regiment were reduced to 400
men; this regiment had to be reorganized in the Argonne.


MEUSE.

2. About August 25 the 30th Division was again transferred to the Meuse
and occupied the trenches in the vicinity of Forges-Bethincourt, where
its losses were slight.


CAMBRAI.

3. About October 24 the division was relieved. The British attack on the
Cambrai front on November 20 caused it to be recalled in haste. It was
sent into line on the 23d, and remained there until about December 10.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. At rest in the Sedan area, it was sent to the Champagne front,
northwest of Auberive, about the middle of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Of the three regiments of the division, one, the 105th Infantry
Regiment, is Saxon. Stationed in Alsace since 1871, it has represented
Saxony in the occupation of the Reichsland, and continues to draw its
recruits from Saxony. The other two, Prussian, are composed mostly of
Westphalians.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 30th Division is a good division and well commanded.

The morale, which is good in the 99th and 143d Infantry Regiments, would
seem to be mediocre in the 105th Infantry Regiment (Saxon) in November,
1917.

This last regiment, very much exhausted on April 17, 1917, was accused
by the other regiments of having given way. It was withdrawn from the
division for a month.


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The middle of January the 30th Division relieved the 28th Reserve
Division near Ville sur Tourbe; it was relieved about the 20th of March
by the 52d Reserve Division, entrained near Vouziers and traveled via
Hirson and Marle to the area northwest of Laon.


MONTDIDIER.

2. On the 27th it left and marched via Achery-Vendeuil-Jussy-Flavy le
Meldeux, Freniches-Libermont-Solente-Gruny, reaching Framicourt on the
12th of April, and entered line the following day south of Cantigny
(west of Montdidier). It was withdrawn on May 16.

3. The division had suffered casualties amounting to 30 per cent of its
total effectives, and so when it was withdrawn, it moved to the region
south of Roye to refit. Here each company received between 40 and 50
1919-class recruits, after which the division was trained. On June 12 it
reinforced the front near Courcelles (south of Montdidier). It suffered
heavy losses in the fighting that followed, and was withdrawn about the
22d.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. During the night of June 28–29 the division relieved the 1st Bavarian
Division astride the Souain-Sommey road. It seems to have been “leap-
frogged” by the 2d Bavarian Division on the 15th—the opening day of the
Champagne offensive—but it relieved the 2d Bavarian Division on the
19th. It was relieved by the 22d Division on August 10, and went to rest
in the Lens area.


CAMBRAI.

5. On the 23d of September it left and moved to the Cambrai area, where
it arrived the following day. On the 27th it reenforced the battle front
south of Villers Guislain (south of Cambrai). It was pushed back
steadily in the ensuing weeks, and was withdrawn about the 28th of
October, southeast of Englefontaine (south of Quesnoy), and went to rest
in Maubeuge.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Until this year the 30th had always been considered a first-class
division. During 1918, however, it was not used nearly so much as other
shock units. The fact that, although it was in line only a fortnight
after more than a month’s rest, it was not used in the attack of July 15
in Champagne, but was put back into line as soon as it was seen that the
offensive there was a failure, is significant. It would seem that the
German High Command considered it as only a second-class division.




                    30th Bavarian Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │84 Ldw.  │70 Res.  │5 Bav.   │2 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │2 Bav.
              │         │         │  Ers.   │  Ers.   │  Ers.   │  Ers.
              │5 Bav.   │7 and 8  │         │4 Bav.   │         │4 Bav.
              │  Ers.   │  Brig.  │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.
              │         │  Res.   │         │         │         │
              │         │  Bn.    │         │         │         │
              │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.  │10 Bav.  │11 Bav.
              │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Res.   │  Ers.   │  Res.
              │         │14 Bav.  │         │14 Bav.  │         │14 Bav.
              │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.   │         │  Res.
              │         │         │84 Ldw.  │70 Res.  │84 Ldw.  │70 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │9 Res. Hus.        │9 Res. Hus.        │9 Res. Hus.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │1st Frs. Abt. 13,  │239 F. A. Rgt.     │239 F. A. Rgt.
              │  31, and 80 F.    │                   │
              │A. Regts.          │                   │252 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │1 Mountain F. A.
              │                   │                   │  Abt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│4 Co. 15 Pions.    │4 Co. 15 Pions.    │2 Ldw. Co. 15 Corps
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │2 Ldw. Co. 15 Corps│2 Ldw. Co. 15 Corps│249 Pion. Co.
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.           │
              │                   │                   │88 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │230 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │30 Res. Cyc. Co.   │30 Res. Cyc. Co.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │1st Ldst. Btn.     │                   │1 Ldst. Btn.
              │  Kempton.         │                   │  Passau, 1st Bav.
              │                   │                   │  Corps No. 5.
              │1st Bav. Corps No. │                   │1 Ldst. Btn.
              │  13.              │                   │  Mindelheim, 1
              │                   │                   │  Bav. Corps No.
              │                   │                   │  14.
              │                   │                   │1st Ldst. Btn.
              │                   │                   │  Neustadt, 2 Bav.
              │                   │                   │  Corps No. 4.
              │                   │                   │1 Ldst. Btn.
              │                   │                   │  Eisenach, 11
              │                   │                   │  Corps No. 12.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Bav.   │8 Bav.   │5 Bav.   │8 Bav.
              │  Ers.   │  Ldw.   │  Ers.   │  Ldw.
              │         │15 Bav.  │         │15 Bav.
              │         │  Ldw.   │         │  Ldw.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │4 Bav.   │         │4 Bav.
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2d Sq. 9 Res. Hus. │1 Sq. 1 Bav. Res.
              │                   │  Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │8 Bav. F. A. Rgt.  │4 Bav. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (Elements).      │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│22 Bav. Pion. Btn. │22 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │13 Bav. Res. Pion. │ 13 Bav. Res. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │5 Bav. Ldw. Pion.  │ 5 Bav. Ldw. Pion.
              │  Co.              │  Co.
              │230 T. M. Co.      │ 22 Bav.
              │                   │  Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │430 Bav. Tel.      │430 Signal Command:
              │  Detch.           │
              │                   │ 430 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │23 Bav. Ambulance  │23 Bav. Ambulance
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │  Co.
              │5 Bav. Field       │5 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │30 Bav. Vet.       │36 Bav. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │54 Ldst. Foot Art. │
              │  Vtn.             │
              │                   │
              │2d Btry/5 Bav. F.  │
              │  A. Rgt.          │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │4 Btry/5 Bav. F. A.│
              │  Regt.            │
              │                   │
              │9 Btry/5 Bav. F. A.│
              │  Rgt.             │
              │                   │
              │1 Ldst. Btn.       │
              │  Bruchsal, 14     │
              │  Corps No. 3.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                               (Bavaria.)


                                 1914.


ALSACE.

1. The 30th Bavarian Reserve Division, constituted in August, 1914, half
of Prussian and half of Bavarian troops, operated in the Vosges
beginning with August 17, and entered St. Dié on the 27th.

In 1915, with the 39th Reserve Division, formed after it, it made up the
Eberhardt Corps, since then the 15th Reserve Corps. These 2 divisions
comprised a total of 25 battalions, reserve units, Landwehr or Ersatz,
Bavarian for the most part, to which were subordinated Landsturm
Battalions.

They were scattered, after the retirement of the first part of
September, 1914, among the valleys of the Plaine and the Liepvrette
(Ste. Marie aux Mines).

The predominance of Bavarian troops in these Divisions had the effect of
causing both to be officially called Bavarian. As a matter of fact, they
were afterwards almost exclusively filled by Bavarian contingents.


                                 1915.

1. In 1915 the 30th Bavarian Reserve Division continued to occupy the
same sector of the Vosges, south of the valley of the Plaine. It
remained there until May, 1917. The 39th Bavarian Reserve Division was
at its left, holding the lines as far as Ste. Marie aux Mines.

2. In the spring of 1915, the Brigade Ersatz Battalions of the divisions
were grouped into regiments and became the 2d and 4th Bavarian Ersatz
Regiments, forming the 5th Bavarian Ersatz Brigade.

3. The two Brigades of the 30th Bavarian Reserve Division took an active
part in the battles of La Fontenelle in June and July, 1915.


                                 1916.

1. Vosges sector (south of the Valley of the Plaine, Senones, Le Ban-de-
Sapt).

2. In October, 1916, the 11th and 14th Bavarian Reserve Regiments went
to the 1st Bavarian Landwehr Division and to the 9th Bavarian Reserve
Division.

The 30th Bavarian Reserve Division received, in November, the 8th
Bavarian Landwehr Regiment from the 1st Bavarian Landwehr Division, and
in December the 15th Bavarian Landwehr Regiment, taken from the 39th
Bavarian Division, which received the 2d Bavarian Ersatz Regiment in
exchange.


                                 1917.


LORRAINE.

1. In April, 1917, the 30th Bavarian Reserve Division was relieved from
the Vosges sector, which it had occupied since its formation, and sent
into line on the Lorraine front (sector of the Seille).

2. At the end of October, it was transferred to Upper Alsace (north of
the Rhone-Rhine Canal), where it relieved the 3d Reserve Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 30th Bavarian Reserve Division is a sector division, as it has
occupied the front either in Lorraine or Alsace since its formation. Its
offensive value is mediocre.

In the 8th Bavarian Landwehr and the 4th Bavarian Ersatz Regiments, the
average age of the men is 38 years. The men of the machine gun companies
are younger, according to the ordinary rule. In the 15th Bavarian
Landwehr Regiment the majority of the men are more than 30 years old.

Each battalion of the 8th Bavarian Landwehr Regiment possesses an
assault troop composed of young men averaging 24 years of age.

There is also a Divisional Assault Company.


                                 1918.


HAUTE ALSACE.

1. The division remained in line north of the Rhine-Rhone Canal until
the armistice was signed.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division possesses very little fighting value. The men are, for the
most part, old, and the fathers of several children. Then, too, a great
many are those—untrained Landsturm—who usually, for physical defects,
were not inducted into the army when their classes were called to the
colors; these men complain of the hard work. Moreover, Bavarians came to
believe that Prussia was “using” them. It was found necessary to
establish shock detachments with each battalion, and these do all of the
necessary patrolling.




                             31st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │32.      │70.      │32.      │70.      │32.      │70.
              │         │174.     │         │174.     │         │174.
              │62.      │60.      │62.      │137.     │         │166.
              │         │137.     │         │166.     │         │
              │         │166.     │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │7 Uhlan Rgt.       │                   │5 Sqn. 7 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │31 Brig.:          │31 Brig.:          │31 Brig.:
              │ 31 F. A. Rgt.     │ 31 F. A. Rgt.     │ 31 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 67 F. A. Rgt.     │ 67 F. A. Rgt.     │ 67 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  27.              │  27.
              │                   │ Field Co. 27.     │ 1 and 2 27 Pion.
              │                   │  Pion.            │
              │                   │ 31 Pont. Engs.    │ 31 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 31 Tel. Detch.    │ 31 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 31 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │Field Recruit Depot
              │                   │                   │  31 Div.
              │                   │                   │153 Cyclist Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │32.      │70.      │32.      │70.
              │         │174.     │         │166.
              │         │166.     │         │174.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │5 Sqn. 7 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │31 Art. Command:   │31 Art. Command:
              │ 31 F. A. Rgt.     │ 31 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 44 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 1005 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1011 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1012 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│136 Pion. Btn.:    │93 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Co. 27 Pion.    │ 1 Co. 27 Pion.
              │                   │
              │ 31 T. M. Co.      │ 3 Co. 32 Res.
              │                   │  Pion.
              │ 505 Searchlight   │ 31 T. M. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 31 Tel. Detch.    │ 40 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │31 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 31 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 116 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │262 Ambulance Co.  │262 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │326 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │333 Field Hospital.
              │                   │161 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │564 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │24 M. G. S. S.
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │2 and 3d Abt. 44 F.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │121 Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                   │1 Abt. 44 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │2 Abt. 6 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │1 Abt. 74 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │134 Art.
              │                   │  Observation
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │75 Sound Ranging
              │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │134 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │105 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │256 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │(Elements attached
              │                   │  May 15, 1918.
              │                   │  German document.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (21st Corps District—Lorraine, part of Lower Alsace, and southern
                    portion of the Rhine Province.)


                                 1914.

Upon mobilization, the 31st Division, with the 42d Division, constituted
the 21st Army Corps.


LORRAINE.

1. At the beginning of the war the 31st Division was a part of the 6th
Army (Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria). In August, 1914, it was on the
Lorraine frontier; on the 12th of August at Chateau Salins, Rechicourt.
It fought at Dieuze on August 20, where the 174th Infantry Regiment lost
half of its effectives. The division was at Luneville on the 23d,
marched upon Rehainviller, Gerbeviller on the 24th; at Rozelieure Essey
on the 26th; in the vicinity of Moyen-Domptail at the beginning of
September; it withdrew to Dieuze about September 11.


SOMME.

2. Transferred to the vicinity of St. Quentin-Vermand, about September
18, the division occupied the vicinity of Fouquescourt on September 26
and 27; attacked in the direction of Bouchoir on October 6. At the end
of October the division took over the front of Fouquescourt-Chaulnes and
kept it until the end of January, 1915. At this date the losses of the
174th Infantry Regiment, since the beginning of the war, amounted to 81
officers and 3,521 men. (Official List of Casualties.)


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. About January 25, 1915, the 31st Division left the Somme for the
Eastern Front, leaving the 60th Infantry Regiment in France, and
detrained at Tilsit.

2. Concentrated in Eastern Prussia, at the beginning of February, it was
a part of the Hindenburg Army.

3. On February 14 it left the region of Augustowo to advance to the
east. It reached Sopockin on the 20th and took up its position with the
21st Army Corps on the line Sopockin-Chatbine (north of Grodno). On the
9th of March, in a counterattack of the Russians, it suffered heavy
losses.

4. From March 29 to April 24 it took part in the battles in the vicinity
Kalwaria-Mariampol.

5. At the end of April it was withdrawn from the front and reorganized.
From the time of its arrival in Russia until April 10, the first
battalion of the 166th Infantry Regiment had lost 17 officers and 1,022
men, the 1st Company alone losing 5 officers and 336 men.

6. At the end of July the division again occupied the lines near
Mariampol.


VILNA.

7. In the month of August it took part in the offensive upon Vilna. It
advanced to Kovno on August 19, to Vilna at the end of September, and
reached the area Smorgoni-Soly, where it stopped in October.

8. The division was relieved on October 6. It went back into line about
October 24, in the sector of Postawy-Lake Narotch.


NAROTCH.

1. The 31st Division occupied the vicinity of Lake Narotch until its
departure for the Western Front in December, 1917.

2. At the end of March, 1916, it opposed the Russian offensive in the
vicinity of this lake; it lost very heavily.


                                 1917.


BELGIUM.

1. On December 5, 1917, it was relieved from the Russian front, and
after a few days rest at Vilna entrained for Belgium on December 16.
(Itinerary: Wirballen-Koenigsberg-Elbing-Dirschau-Ramberg (?) Aix la
Chapelle-Verviers.) It detrained about the 21st, in the vicinity of
Ghent and took up its position at the end of January, 1918 south of the
Ypres-Roulers line where it alternated with the 12th Reserve Division.


                              RECRUITING.

The 31st Division is recruited mostly from the vicinity of Sarrebrucken
and St. Wendel in the Rhine Province. Most of the replacements are
furnished by Westphalia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 31st Division was on the Russian front from February, 1915 to
December 1917. The quality is mediocre.


                                 1918.


YPRES.

1. From January 19 to February 4 the division held the Moorslede sector
(south of Ypres-Roulers railway). The division rested until the 14th in
the vicinity of Lendelede. It relieved the 12th Reserve Division on the
14th in its old sector at Moorslede which it held until March 3, and
again from March 21 until April 4.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

2. About April 4 the division was withdrawn and marched to the Messines
front. The route lay through Menin, Werwicq, Comines, Warneton. It was
engaged on April 10 to 12 in the Bois de Ploegsteert. For its fighting
in this area the division was mentioned by the German communique of
April 13. From the 12th to the 17th, it was in second line. It fought
south and southwest of Kemmel from April 18 to 24 when it passed into
close support until the 26th. The division’s losses were large in this
severe engagement. The 3d Battalion of the 174th Regiment is known to
have lost from 60 to 70 per cent of its effectives.

3. When relieved in the Kemmel area, the division rested north of
Tourcoing until May 6, undergoing reconstitution. It returned to line
north of Kemmel on the night of May 6–7, relieving the Alpine Corps. It
suffered heavily from the French attack of May 21, losing many
prisoners. It was relieved on May 24, and rested in the Courtrai-Menin
area until June 15. It was engaged in the sector south of Ypres from
June 15 until July 27.


WOEVRE.

4. Following its arduous service on the Ypres front, the division was
moved to a quiet sector on the Woevre. It was moved from Belgium by way
of Brussels, Namur, Charleville, Sedan to Mars la Tour from where it
marched to the front and took over the St. Mihiel sector on July 29,
which it held until September 3.


BATTLE OF ST. MIHIEL.

5. The division was resting in the area north of Dampvitoux when the
American attack was made on the St. Mihiel salient. It was brought into
line north of Thiaucourt on the 14th and held this sector until October
28.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

6. On the 31st, the division was engaged at Imecourt (northeast of
Grandpre) and took part in the final combats in that area. It was still
in line on November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. In spite of its relatively low
quality it appears to have been used as an attack division in the Lys
offensive. The losses in the spring and the presence of numerous
Lorrainers in its composition lowered the value of the division after
May, 1918.




                             32d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │63.      │102.     │63.      │102.     │64.      │102.
              │         │103.     │         │103.     │         │177.
              │64.      │177.     │64.      │177.     │         │103.
              │         │178.     │         │178.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │18 Hus. Rgt.       │                   │20 Hus. Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Squadrons).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │32 Brig.:          │32 Brig.:          │32 Brig.:
              │ 28 F. A. Rgt.     │ 28 F. A. Rgt.     │ 28 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 64 F. A. Rgt.     │ 64 F. A. Rgt.     │ 64 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. No. 12:
   Liaisons.  │                   │  12:              │
              │                   │ Field Co. 12 Pion.│ 2 Co. 12 Pion.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 32 Pont. Engs.    │ 32 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 32 Tel. Detch.    │ 32 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 32 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │115 Labor Btn.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │63.      │102.     │63.      │102.
              │         │177.     │         │103.
              │         │103.     │         │177.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.│4 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │32 Art. Command:   │32 Art. Command:
              │ 64 F. A. Rgt.     │ 64 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 80 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 943 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1063 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1266 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│140 Pion. Btn.:    │140 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 and 5 Cos. 12   │ 2 Co. 12 Pions.
              │  Pion.            │
              │ 32 T. M. Co.      │ 5 Co. 12 Pions.
              │ 32 Tel. Detch.    │ 3 Res. Co. 12
              │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │ 32 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 220 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │32 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 32 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 20 (Saxon)
              │                   │  Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │28 Ambulance Co.   │28 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │308 Field Hospital.│308 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │116 Field Hospital.
              │                   │32 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │565 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │61 M. G.           │
              │  Sharpshooter     │
              │  Detachment.      │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (12th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM-MARNE.

1. Upon the declaration of war the 32d Division, with the 23d Division,
formed the 12th Army Corps (1st Saxon Army Corps). On the night of
August 2, 1914, its 64th Brigade entrained for the frontier north of
Luxemburg to act as covering troops. The 32d Division was concentrated
there on the 10th and entered Belgium on the 13th. In August, it marched
with the 3d Army (von Hausen), fought on the right bank of the Meuse on
August 23 near Dinant, entered France, went into action on the 28th at
Signy l’Abbaye, and from there went down to Chalons. It took part in the
battle of the Marne to the left of the Guard at Lenharree on the extreme
right flank of the 6th Army and retired by way of Chalons, Mourmelon,
Betheniville to the northwest of Rheims.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Reattached to the 7th Army (Von Heeringen), it took part in the
attacks in the vicinity of Rheims (northwest).

3. When the front became stabilized it retained the sector of Berry au
Bac-Craonne and remained there until the month of July, 1915.


                                 1915.


AISNE.

1. Sector Berry au Bac-Craonne. (During this period the losses of the
division were very small.) In April, 1915, the 178th Infantry Regiment
was taken from the 32d Division and assigned to the 123d Division (a new
formation).


                                 1916.

1. Retained in the same calm sector and having taken part in no
important affair since October, 1914, the 32d Division retained its
combat value intact at the end of June, 1916.


SOMME.

2. During the first days of the Franco-British offensive on the Somme
the 32d Division sent one battalion from reserve there, which went into
action from July 4 to July 7 in the vicinity of Belloy.

3. Toward the end of July two of its regiments (102d and 103d Infantry
Regiments) helped to form (with elements from the 23d Division) the
provisional Franke Division, which fought on the Somme until September
10 (Deniecourt-Vermandovillers). The losses were very heavy.

4. On the 4th of September the 177th Infantry Regiment was sent up in
its turn, but was in action only a few days in the vicinity of
Vermandovillers from September 4 to 10. Its losses were enormous (1,600
men in 6 days).

5. The Franke Division was withdrawn on September 10 and dissolved.


ARGONNE.

6. The 32d Division, reformed (102d, 103d, 177th Infantry Regiments) and
reorganized, was sent north of Rheims and then to the Argonne (Four de
Paris and Avocourt wood).


SOMME.

7. Relieved at the beginning of November, it entrained on the 3d and 4th
near Grandpre, detrained at Hirson, and on November 15 began to occupy
the sector between Bouchavesnes and northeast of Clery.


                                 1917.

1. The 32d Division was retained in the Bouchavesnes sector until the
time of the German retirement in March, 1917.

2. It left the Somme front at the end of March.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. After a period of rest in the vicinity of Sissonne, the division went
into action in the sector of Mont sans Nom (4 kilometers west of
Vaudesincourt on Apr. 17 and 18). Having lost heavily, the 3 regiments
were withdrawn on the 19th.

4. On May 5 the division again went into line west of Tahure.


FLANDERS.

5. About June 10 it was relieved, and after a few days of rest entrained
at Machault for Flanders. There it went into line near the Ypres-Menin
road.

6. At the beginning of September it was withdrawn from the Ypres front
and sent to rest, then took over the sector Warneton-Messines and was
not relieved until the middle of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 32d Division is exclusively Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In June, 1917, the morale of the division was very low because of the
losses suffered at Mont Haut.

However, during the division’s stay in the Tahure sector from May to
June, 1917, there were only two desertions.

Besides, Gen. von Der Decken is considered an energetic commander and it
is very probable that under his influence the morale has become more
satisfactory (September, 1917).


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The division was relieved on January 15 by the 49th Reserve Division
and rested near Tournai until the beginning of March. It was railed to
Wambrechies and entered the line northwest of Lille about March 1. About
the 4th of April it was moved south and on April 9 was engaged at
Fleurbaix. It was withdrawn to rest on the 16th to Armentieres and
returned to line on the 18th, relieving the 117th Division. It was in
line until May 8, during which time it suffered heavy losses. A
replacement of 450 men was received on April 17.

2. Relieved by the 35th Division, it rested in rear of the Lys front
until May 26, when it took over the sector west of Merville and held it
until the end of June.


WOEVRE.

3. It was relieved about July 1 and railed to Lorraine, detraining near
Spincourt on July 4. About this time, the division received a draft of
1500 men. It was in line at Eix-Bezonveaux from July 15 to October 1, a
very quiet sector. The troops were marched to the rear on that date and
rested in the Eton-Loison area for two days. On the 3d the division
marched to Penard-Tilly, where it rested until the 5th, and on that
night marched to Breville. It came into line on October 9 on the right
bank of the Meuse, and was engaged in the Bois de Moirey region until
October 24. Losses were heavy, some companies being reduced to 15 men.
On November 3 the division reappeared in its former sector of Bezonvaux,
relieving the 106th A. H. D. It held this sector until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It did well on the Lys in April,
but after that was not seriously engaged except for a few days in
October, when it was brought up to resist an American attack east of the
Meuse. In the fighting it did not distinguish itself. The morale of the
division was low in the latter half of 1918.




                             33d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │66.      │98.      │66.      │98.      │66.      │98.
              │         │130.     │         │130.     │         │130.
              │67.      │135.     │67.      │135.     │67.      │135.
              │         │144.     │         │144.     │         │144.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │12 Jag. z. Pf.     │                   │4 Sqn. 12 Jag. z.
              │                   │                   │  Pf.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │33 Brig.:          │33 Brig.:          │33 Brig.:
              │ 33 Rgt.           │ 33 Rgt.           │ 33 Rgt.
              │ 34 Rgt.           │ 34 Rgt.           │ 34 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  16:              │  16:
              │                   │ Field Co. 16 Pion.│ 1 Co. 16 Pion.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 33 Tel. Detch.    │ Field Co. 20 Pion.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 33 Pont. Engs.    │ 33 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 33 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 33 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │66.      │98.      │66.      │98.
              │         │135.     │         │130.
              │         │130.     │         │135.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 12 Jag. z.  │4 Sqn. 12 Horse
              │  Pf.              │  Jag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │33 Art. Command:   │33 Art. Command:
              │ 283 Rgt.          │ 283 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 76 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 883 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1372 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1373 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│132 Pion. Btn.:    │16 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 and 5 Cos. 16   │ 5 Co. 16 Pions.
              │  Pion.            │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 16     │ 1 Res. Co. 16
              │  Pion.            │  Pion.
              │ 33 T. M. Co.      │ 34 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ (16) Searchlight  │33 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 33 Tel. Detch.    │ 33 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 74 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │42 Ambulance Co.   │42 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │280, 282 Field     │282 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │33 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (16th Corps District—Lorraine.)


                                 1914.

At the beginning of the war the 33d Division, with the 34th Division,
formed the 16th Army Corps (Metz). Reservists began arriving on July 29
(Soldbuecher).

1. At the outbreak of hostilities the 33d Division was a part of the 5th
Army (German Crown Prince). It invaded France by way of Audun le Roman,
went around by the north of Verdun, crossed the Meuse at Givry on
September 1 and advanced as far as Rambluzin and Heippes (20 kilometers
south of Verdun).


ARGONNE.

2. After the battle of the Marne it took up its position in the Argonne.
Its advance had been costly. On September 24 the new commander of the
98th Infantry Regiment found it reduced 13 officers and 982 men
(document).


                                 1915.


ARGONNE.

1. The 33d Division remained without interruption in the Argonne from
September, 1914, to about the middle of August, 1916.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. About August 10, 1916, the division was relieved from the Argonne
and, after a short rest behind the front, was sent into the line at
Verdun, east of Fleury.

2. In this sector, the division lost rather heavily. It remained there
until the middle of September, at which time it took its place in the
sector Vauquois, giving the 144th Infantry Regiment to the 223d
Division, a new formation.


ARGONNE.

3. During this latter period, which extended up to the middle of
December, the division was reorganized and absorbed the 4th Battalion,
suppressed, on October 31, in the 27th Landwehr Regiment. At the same
time, the 4th Battalions which the regiments of the division possessed,
were broken up.


SOMME.

4. Transferred to the Somme about December 15, it there occupied the
sector east of Beaumont-Hamel and did not leave it until February 8,
1917. During these two months, its losses were rather serious.


                                 1917.


ARGONNE.

1. Sent to rest in the Sedan area, the 33d Division went back into its
old sector Vauquois at the end of February, 1917. No important event
marks its stay in the Argonne after that time.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. On May 3, it was relieved and transferred to Champagne. It marched as
far as Pont Faverger and went into line at Cornillet and Mont Blond. It
took part in the battle on this front and suffered some losses (172
prisoners from the 130th Infantry Regiment on May 20).


ARGONNE.

3. Withdrawn from this region at the end of May, it was again sent to
the Argonne (Boureuilles-Vauquois), about June 7.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. At the end of September it came out of the Argonne, and about October
4 went to the area of Tahure, where it remained in line until February,
1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Not being able to utilize the regional system of recruiting from annexed
Lorraine, the 33d Division is composed almost entirely of Westphalians
from the 7th Corps District.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 16th Army Corps, of which the 33d Division is a part, has always had
the reputation of being one of the best corps of the German Army.

Although the 33d Division lost very heavily during the offensive of
April and May, 1917, it still appeared strong (October, 1917).


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved on January 4 by the 28th Reserve Division
and went to rest and train in the area northwest of Sedan. On March 14
it was railed to the vicinity of Rozoy sur Serre and rested a week north
of Montcornet. From there the division proceeded by night marches via
Montcornet-Crecy sur Serre-Monceau le Neuf-Ribemont-Mezieres-Moy-ly
Fontaine-Gibercourt-Montescourt-Jussy-Flavy le Martel, where it arrived
on March 23. On the following night the division was billeted in
Villeselve and came into line astride the Ham-Noyon road on March 24.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. On the 25th the division fought its way through Noyon and on the
following days was engaged in heavy fighting about Suzoy and Mont
Renaud, which it failed to capture in spite of heavy sacrifices. It was
withdrawn on April 15.

3. The division rested from April 15 to May 24 in the vicinity of Dercy,
Mortiers, Pierrepont, and Barenton sur Serre undergoing reconstitution.
It marched to the Aisne front by Coucy les Eppes, Bruyeres, and
Chamouille.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

4. The division was engaged on May 27 in the front line of the attack
and advanced by Pancy, Courtecon, Verneuil, Pont-Arcy, Dhuizel,
Courcelles, Jouaignes (20th), Oulchy la Ville, south of Neuilly St.
Front, Dammard. In this last region losses were heavy on June 2. It was
relieved by the 78th Reserve Division on June 3.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

5. The division rested south of Soissons from June 7 to July 11, when it
marched to the Marne front by Braisne, Fere en Tardenois, Foret de Ris.
It was in reserve on the 15th on the north of the Marne, west of
Dormans. On the 17th–18th it fell back on Beuvardes and Grisolles and
was engaged the next day southeast of Neuilly St. Front. In the heavy
fighting of the following days the division was thrown back south of
Oulchy le Chateau toward Fere en Tardenois (July 21–23). The division
withdrew until the Vesle was reached when it was relieved about July 31.


VERDUN.

6. The division entrained southeast of Montcornet on August 6 and was
moved to Avocourt via Sedan-Charleville-Montmedy. It rested southeast of
Stenay until August 15. Replacements were received from the dissolved
33d Reserve Division in August. On August 21, the division entered line
near Ornes (north of Verdun) where it remained until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. It was used as an assault
division in the Somme and Aisne offensives of 1918. It was disorganized
by its losses in the Marne retreat and never recovered its offensive
value.




                         33d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │66 Res.  │67 Res.  │66 Res.  │67 Res.  │66 Res.  │67 Res.
              │         │130 Res. │         │130 Res. │         │130 Res.
              │8 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │8 Bav.   │4 Bav.   │8 Bav.   │4 Bav.
              │         │8 Bav.   │         │8 Bav.   │         │8 Bav.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Res. Hus. Rgt. (3│2 Res. Hus. Rgt.   │2 Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │4 Ers. Abts. of 33,│Ers. Abts. of 33,  │33 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  34, 69, 70 F. A. │  34, 69, 70 F. A. │
              │  Rgts.            │  Rgts. combined   │
              │                   │  into 33 Res. F.  │
              │                   │  A. Rgt.          │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │3 Pion. Btn. No.   │4 Field Co. 16
   Liaisons.  │                   │  16:              │  Pion. Btn.:
              │                   │ 1 Ers. Co. 20     │ 1 Ldw. Pion. Co 4,
              │                   │  Pion.            │  corps.
              │                   │ 1 Ldw. Pion. Co.  │ 233 T. M. Co.
              │                   │  4, Corps.        │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 33 Res. Pont.     │ 33 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │  Engs.            │
              │                   │ 33 Res. Tel.      │ 33 Res. Tel.
              │                   │  Detch.           │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │Battery of 8 Ft. A.│4 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │  R.               │  Detch.
              │                   │3 Abt. 18 Ft. A. R.│
              │                   │  (elements).      │
              │                   │2 Btry. 8 Res. Ft. │
              │                   │  A. R.            │
              │                   │1 and 2 Btries. 2  │
              │                   │  Abt. 16 Ft. A. R.│
              │                   │2 Abt. 2 Bav. Res. │
              │                   │  Ft. A. R.        │
              │                   │  (elements).      │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │     1918[18]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │66 Res.  │67 Res.  │66 Res.  │364.
              │         │130 Res. │         │67 Res.
              │         │364.     │         │130 Res.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.│
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │33 Res. F. A. Rgt. │33 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│233 Pion. Btn.:    │333 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 20     │ 333 Pion. Co.
              │  Pion.            │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 4 Pion.│ 1 Ldw. Co. 4 C.
              │                   │  Dist. Pions. (in
              │                   │  3 Pion. Btn. No.
              │                   │  16).
              │ 233 T. M. Co.     │ 14 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 14 Searchlight    │ 233 T. M. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 433 Tel. Detch.   │ 433 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │274 Ambulance Co.  │273 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │47 and 51 Field    │51 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │873 Light Mun. Col.│M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │646 Supply Depot.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │47 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 18:

  Composition at the time of dissolution September, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

                    (16th Corps District—Lorraine.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. Formed at Metz with the 8th Bavarian Brigade and the 66th Reserve
Brigade, the 33d Reserve Division was a part of the 5th Army (German
Crown Prince) at the outbreak of the war. In August, 1914, it took part
in the battles of Nomeny and went to Verdun by way of Gondrecourt,
Rouvres, Étain. On August 24 and 25 it was in action at Étain and
suffered heavily. On August 26 the 10th Company of the 8th Bavarian
Regiment had only 75 men left (notebook).

At the beginning of September, it occupied both banks of the Moselle
south of Pont à Mousson, and about September 15 the vicinity of
Thiaucourt.


WOEVRE-LES ÉPARGES.

2. At the end of September and the beginning of October it went back
into the sector South of Étain (Riaville, Bracquis). On October 8 the
8th Bavarian Brigade attacked Champlon and Fresnes; the 67th Reserve
Regiment attacked the Ville en Woëvre on October 9. After these battles,
the 33d Reserve Division took up its position on the Côtes de Meuse
(Combres, Les Éparges).

3. In November the 66th Reserve Brigade was in Flanders—on the Yser
Canal from November 16 to 24, and left for Lorraine on November 25.


                                 1915.


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

1. The 33d Reserve Division remained in line on the Côtes de Meuse until
the end of July, 1916.

2. About January 17, 1915, elements of the 66th Reserve Brigade were
sent to the Bois le Pretre and suffered heavy losses. They rejoined the
division on the Côtes at the end of January.


LES EPARGES.

3. From February to the end of April, 1915, the 33d Reserve Division
took part in the battles of Combres and of Les Éparges; it lost very
heavily there, especially in the actions of February 17 to 20. From
April 15 to May 1 no less than 140 men were sent as replacements to the
12th Company of the 67th Reserve Regiment.

4. After reorganization the 33d Reserve Division went to the calmer
sector of Vaux les Palameix, Lamorville.


CALONNE.

5. The division once more suffered heavy losses in the Calonne trench in
May, 1915.

6. On July 17, 1915, the 130th Reserve Infantry Regiment was sent in
support of an attack on Les Éparges. After this period the 33d Reserve
Division occupied the sector south of Vaux les Palameix (Chevaliers
wood, Bouchot wood) without taking part in any important engagement.


                                 1916.

1. On July 25, 1916, the division was relieved from the Côtes de Meuse
and sent to rest until August 25 in the area north of Briey. At this
time the 8th Bavarian Brigade was detached from the 33d Reserve Division
to serve in forming the 14th Bavarian Division and the 33d Reserve
Division was reorganized with three regiments, with the 66th Reserve
Brigade and the 364th Infantry Regiment (coming from the 8th Ersatz
Division).


VERDUN.

2. On August 26 the division went into line on the front north of
Verdun, southwest of the fort of Vaux. It took part in the battles from
September 2 to 9 in the Vaux Chapitre wood and suffered very heavy
losses. The 12th Company of the 67th Reserve Infantry Regiment received
at least 142 men as replacements from September 13 to 21.

3. After being reorganized the division underwent the French attack of
October 24, which again caused it considerable losses. Upon its relief
the 2d Battalion of the 130th Reserve Infantry Regiment was reduced to
45 combatants. (Notebook of an aspirant officer.)

4. Withdrawn from the front on November 1, the 33d Reserve Division was
sent to rest and to be reorganized. It had suffered so heavily that
among the reenforcements at the beginning of 1917 we find untrained men
of the Landsturm II Ban.


LORRAINE.

5. The division was then sent to Lorraine to the Blamont sector.


                                 1917.

1. The division held the Lorraine front until March 10, 1917.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

2. After a month’s rest in the vicinity of Sarreburg, the 33d Reserve
Division was transferred to Marle (Apr. 16–19). On April 21 and 22
elements of the division were distributed upon different points of the
Aisne front to replace the units exhausted by the French attack of April
16, and soon afterwards were regrouped north of Laffaux Mill. The 33d
Reserve Division suffered very heavy losses withstanding the French
attack of May 5 and counterattacking on the days following (May 5–7)
(1,000 prisoners); almost the entire 2d Battalion of the 67th Reserve
Infantry Regiment was captured.

3. Withdrawn in part from the Aisne front on May 12, the 33d Division
again had some of its units in action between the Aisne Canal and
Laffaux Mill until May 23 (German attack of May 16, where the 130th
Reserve Infantry Regiment suffered heavy losses).

4. At the end of May the 33d Reserve Division returned to the vicinity
of Sarreburg to rest and be reorganized. It received recruits not only
from the recruit depot of Beverloo, but also from the depot at Warsaw.


LORRAINE.

5. About June 10 it again took over its former sector in Lorraine
(Blamont-Leintry).


VERDUN.

6. On August 23 the division went into action on the Verdun front
(sector of Baumont-Chaume wood). It underwent the French attack of the
26th where it suffered heavily. It again had recourse to the Warsaw
recruit depot which sent it, among other reenforcements, untrained men
of the Landsturm second Ban.

7. Relieved about September 10, the 33d Reserve Division was transferred
to Galicia by way of Metz, Frankfort, Erfurt, Dresden, Breslau, Cracow.


GALICIA.

8. It was identified in Galicia at the beginning of October.


                              RECRUITING.

After the 8th Bavarian Brigade was withdrawn the 33d Reserve Division
was exclusively Prussian. Its regiments were recruited almost entirely
from the Rhine Province and Westphalia. In May, 1917, however, following
the losses suffered on the Chemin des Dames, a great number of young men
came from Western Prussia (1918 class), coming from the large depots of
Beverloo and Warsaw. At the end of August the Warsaw depot sent
untrained men from the Landsturm II Ban from the 9th and 10th Corps
Districts.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 33d Reserve Division is a good division.

At Verdun elements of the division fought vigorously and made the French
advance very difficult on October 24, 1916.

Between May 5 and May 7, 1917, the division launched very violent
counterattacks against Laffaux Mill. Elements of the 364th Infantry
Regiment succeeded in capturing the Chateau de la Motte. In the sector
of Beaumont at Verdun the 1st Battalion of the 364th Infantry Regiment
put up a very stubborn resistance to the French on August 26, 1917.

The 33d Reserve Division was very much exhausted by the attacks on the
Aisne. The reenforcement which it received on May 4, 1917, were mostly
men belonging to the 1918 class. On August 26, 1917, more than one-
fourth of the prisoners belonged to this class.

In January, 1918, it already counted among its ranks young men of the
1919 class, who had arrived on January 14.

Taking into account its recent long rest and its intensive training in
offensive warfare and the declarations of prisoners captured in March,
1918, who all declare that their division is an assault division
destined to take part in a great breaking through offensive, we must
conclude that the 33d Reserve Division has again become an organization
of high quality (Mar. 30, 1918).


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

1. The division continued to hold its sector northwest of Rheims until
the Aisne offensive in May. It advanced with the rest of the line,
having as its objective the Marne River. It progressed through Cauroy
(27th), St. Thierry (28th), and Vrigny (31st). Here the line was
stabilized. The division was withdrawn June 20.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. On June 25 the division relieved the 88th Division in the Mont Têtu
sector (Eastern Champagne). It was on the extreme left of the German
attack east of Rheims on July 15, and suffered so heavily that it was
withdrawn on July 20.

3. In mid-August the division was broken up. The 364th and 67th Reserve
Regiments were drafted to the 16th and 34th Divisions.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 33d Reserve Division was rated as fourth class. As a result of its
failure in the Aisne and Champagne offensives, it was disbanded in
August, 1918.




                             34th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │68.      │67.      │68.      │67.      │68.      │67.
              │         │145.     │         │145.     │         │145.
              │86.      │30.      │86.      │30.      │86.      │30.
              │         │173.     │         │173.     │         │173.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │16 Uhlan Rgt.      │                   │5 Sqn. 12 Jag. z.
              │                   │                   │  Pf.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │34 Brig.:          │34 Brig.:          │34 Brig.:
              │ 69 Rgt.           │ 69 Rgt.           │ 69 Rgt.
              │ 70 Rgt.           │ 70 Rgt.           │ 70 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  16:              │  16:
              │                   │ Field Co. 16 Pion.│ 2 Co. 16 Pion.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 34 Tel. Detch.    │ 34 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 34 Pont. Engs.    │ 34 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 34 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │Labor Btn. 34 Div.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │68.      │67.      │68.      │30.
              │         │30.      │         │67.
              │         │145.     │         │145.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 12 Jag. z.  │5 Sqn. 12 Horse
              │  Pf.              │  Jag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │34 Art. Command:   │34 Art. Command:
              │ 70 Rgt.           │ (?) F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 116 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 1174 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1191 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1192 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│132 Pion. Btn.:    │132 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 2 and 3 Cos. 16   │ 2 Co. 16 Pion.
              │  Pion.            │
              │ 34 T. M. Co.      │ 3 Co. 16 Pion.
              │ 259 Searchlight   │ 34 T. M. Co.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 34 Tel. Detch.    │ 193 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 34 Pont. Engs.    │34 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 34 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 18 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │41 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │281–283 Field      │281 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │283 Field Hospital.
              │                   │34 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │567 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │44 M. G. S. S. Abt.
              │                   │249 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │119 Art.
              │                   │  Observation
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │83 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │534 Carrier Pigeon
              │                   │  Loft.
              │                   │(Elements attached
              │                   │  June 6, 1918.
              │                   │  German
              │                   │  documents.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (16th Corps District—Lorraine.)


                                 1914.

Upon mobilization, the 34th Division and the 33d Division were organic
parts of the 16th Army Corps (Metz).


MEUSE.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 34th Division marched with the 5th
Army (German Crown Prince), entered France on August 21, by Audun le
Roman and by way of Nouillon Pont, and reached the Meuse, which it
crossed at Vilosnes and Sivry on September 1. It advanced as far as
Beauzée and Seraucourt.


ARGONNE.

2. After the battle of the Marne it retired to the north and took up its
position in the Argonne.


                                 1915.


ARGONNE.

1. The 54th Division remained in the Argonne without interruption from
September, 1914, until about August 15, 1916. It took part there in the
offensives of January and July, 1915, where it suffered heavy losses. On
January 18, 1915, the 30th Infantry Regiment had already lost 56
officers and 2,723 men. (Official List of Casualties.)

2. After these violent battles, it received fairly large replacements.
The division suffered no serious losses in this sector during the period
which followed these engagements until its relief on Aug. 15, 1916.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. On this date the 34th Division was transferred to the right bank of
the Meuse at Verdun.

2. It went into action in the Chiaumont sector at the end of August,
1916, and during the month of September, took part in some very severe
battles in this vicinity.

3. On September 20, its losses were very great because of our attack.
The regiments of the 34th Division again lost heavily in the course of
our offensive of October 24, which succeeded in recapturing the
Douaumont Fort and the Thiaumont Works; on that day, their resistance
was rather weak. The 67th Infantry Regiment received about 71 men for
its 8th Company in the week of October 28-November 5.


VOSGES.

4. On October 29 the 34th Division was relieved. Beginning with November
14, it occupied a calm sector in the Vosges, southwest of Senones. At
this time it received fairly large replacements. The 173d Infantry
Regiment was transferred to the 223d Division, a new formation.


                                 1917.


ARGONNE.

1. At the beginning of February, 1917, the division returned to the
Argonne. It remained there a short time. In the middle of March, it was
relieved and transferred to the region north of Rheims (beginning of
April).


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Immediately after our offensive of April 16, the 67th and 30th
Infantry Regiments went into action in the vicinity of Brimont, while
the 145th Infantry Regiment was sent to Cornillet as a reenforcement
from April 18 to 20.

3. About April 25, the 34th Division was again concentrated in the
Brimont sector, where it relieved the 43d Reserve Division.

4. About the middle of June it extended its sector to include the
stretch from the Champ du Seigneur to the Verrerie of Courcy. During the
attacks of April the division suffered very heavy losses; the 145th
Infantry Regiment lost about one-third of its effectives.


FLANDERS.

5. On July 21 the 34th Division was relieved from the Rheims front and
sent to Flanders on August 7. It remained in reserve in the vicinity of
Dadizeele until August 12. It then went into action near the Ypres-Menin
road, where it had heavy losses.


WOEVRE.

6. On August 24, it left this front for La Haye, where it went into line
southeast of Thiaucourt (vicinity of Flirey) and remained until October
31.


CAMBRAI.

7. At the beginning of November, it was in the vicinity of Cambrai. It
took part in the German counterattack of November 30.


LAONNOIS.

8. After a rest in December, the 34th Division occupied the sector of
Crandelain, on the Ailette, until January 7, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Because of the difficulty of recruiting in its own corps district
(Lorraine), the 34th Division is composed mostly of Westphalians and men
from the Rhine Province. The name of “Magdeburg” given to the 67th
Infantry Regiment has only a historic value.

The men, as a rule, belong to the classes of 1912 to 1918.

The replacements received by the division in Lorraine (September, 1917)
brought in an undetermined number of men more than 25 years of age,
especially those of the Landsturm of about 30 years of age, withdrawn
from the Russian front and trained for a while in a depot in the
interior.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 34th Division was one of the good Divisions of the German Army.
Nevertheless, at the time of our attack upon Thiamont on October 24,
1916, it had a period of genuine weakness.

Its attitude in the Brimont sector in April and May, 1917, was such that
it must still be classed among the good divisions.

At Ypres, in August, 1917, charged with the defense of one of the most
important sectors, it did not realize the hopes of the German High
Command.

According to the interrogation of a prisoner (February, 1918), the 34th
Division is a shock division destined to attack.


                                 1918.


LAON.

1. Early in January the division which had been resting near Laon,
relieved the 3d Bavarian Division near Courtecon (south of Laon);
withdrawn toward the end of February, it went to rest near Liesse
(northeast of Laon), where it remained until March 15.


PICARDY.

2. Then it marched toward the front via Marcy (west of Marle) and
Ribemont. On the 21st it entered line south of St. Quentin, took Benay,
which was its objective, crossed the canal, and took Jussy on the 23d.
It continued its advance as far as Pontoise (southeast of Noyon). It was
withdrawn on April 2, after having lost 50 per cent of its total
effectives, and went to rest in the area southeast of Roye. While here
it received 1,000 replacements.

3. On the 10th, it came back into line south of Guiscard (north of
Noyon). It was withdrawn about the 20th, the 50th Division taking over
its sector.

4. After spending about 10 days near Beaumont en Beine (southeast of
Ham) training in close and open order and in rifle practice, the
division relieved the 223d Division south of Appilly (east of Noyon) on
May 1. On the 15th, it received 15 replacements per company. It was
relieved by the 9th Bavarian Reserve Division on the 20th, and went to
rest, first in the region east of Chauny, and then in the St. Gobain
forest (south of La Fère).


AISNE.

5. After having been in reserve four days near Pernant (west of
Soissons), the division reenforced the front near Ambleny (west of
Soissons) on June 12, attacking, the same day, with the Coeuvres-Vic sur
Aisne road as its objective. It could make no headway at all, and
suffered losses of about 30 per cent of its strength. It was withdrawn
about the 6th of July.

6. On the 19th, it came back into line near Vauxbuin (southwest of
Soissons), and was withdrawn on the 22d after suffering severely; over
300 in prisoners alone. It went to rest in the Guise area; later, it
moved to the vicinity of Coucy le Château. While here, it received as a
draft the dissolved 67th Reserve Regiment (33d Reserve Division
disbanded).


AILETTE.

7. The division reenforced the front near Cuts (southeast of Noyon) on
August 15. It was withdrawn on September 25.


ST. QUENTIN.

8. It entrained the same day north of St. Gobain, and detrained in the
St. Bohain region the next day; it rested here for two days, and was
transported by truck to St. Quentin on the 28th. The following day, it
relieved the 221st Division southwest of that town. On the 30th, it was
forced to relinquish St. Quentin to the French. It continued to
withdraw, but fighting stubbornly, and was relieved on the 9th of
October near Fontaine-Uterte (northeast of St. Quentin). It rested for a
week between Avesnes and Maubeuge.


GUISE.

9. It moved to the Petit Verly-Grougis region (northwest of Guise) on
the 17th, in support of the 81st Reserve Division, but that unit being
placed hors de combat by the attack of the 18th, the 34th Division found
itself in the front line, and even lost nearly 100 prisoners. It was
relieved on the 23d after losing nearly 700 more prisoners. It then
rested about a week in the Vervins region.

10. On November 1, it returned to line near Puisieux (south of Guise),
and withdrew along the line Marly, Romery, Sommeron. It was still in
line on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 34th has always been considered as one of the best second-class
divisions. As a result, however, of its heavy losses during the spring,
it contained large numbers of boys of the 1919 class. Having been
engaged without rest from the middle of August until the end of the war,
it was reduced to the point where it has less than 1,000 effectives
left. In all probability, it would soon have been dissolved had the war
continued.




                             35th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │70.      │21.      │70.      │21.      │87.      │141.
              │         │61.      │         │61.      │         │61.
              │87.      │141.     │87.      │141.     │         │176.
              │         │176.     │         │176.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Jag. z. Pf.      │                   │5 Hus. Rgt. (2
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │35 Brig.:          │35 Brig.:          │35 Brig.:
              │ 71 Rgt.           │ 71 Rgt.           │ 71 Rgt.
              │ 81 Rgt.           │ 81 Rgt.           │ 81 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  17:              │  17:
              │                   │ Field Co. 17 Pion.│ 1 Co. 17 Pion.
              │                   │ 35 Tel. Detch.    │ 4 Co. 36 Pion.
              │                   │ 25 Pont. Engs.    │ 35 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 35 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 35 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │2 Assault Detch.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │87.      │141.     │87.      │61.
              │         │61.      │         │141.
              │         │176.     │         │176.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 5 Hus. Rgt. │2 Sqn. 5 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │35 Art. Command:   │35 Art. Command:
              │ 71 Rgt.           │ 71 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 18 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 715 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 716 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1305 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│133 Pion. Btn.:    │133 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 and 2 17 Pion.  │ 1 Co. 17 Pions.
              │ 35 T. M. Co.      │ 2 Co. 17 Pions.
              │ 35 Tel. Detch.    │ 35 T. M. Co.
              │ 36 Pont. Engs.    │ 223 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │35 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 35 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 121 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │44 Amb. Co.        │44 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │289, 293 Field     │289 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospts.          │
              │35 Vet. Hospital.  │293 Field Hospital.
              │                   │35 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │568 Light Mun. Col.│568 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                 (17th Corps District—Western Prussia.)


                                1914–15.


EAST PRUSSIA.

1. The 35th Division formed with the 36th Division the 17th Army Corps
(Danzig). It remained on the Eastern Front from the beginning of the war
until October, 1915. It took part in the battles of Gumbinnen and
Tannenberg, then in the two German offensives upon Warsaw. It
participated in the operations on the Bzura and the Narew, where it
remained until August 1, 1915.


RUSSIA.

2. It was sent to rest near Bielostok, and at the end of September,
1915, the decision was made to send it to the Western Front.

3. It entrained at Grodno about October 6, and arrived about the 10th in
the vicinity of Péronne where it was filled up. The 9th Company of the
176th Infantry Regiment received no less than 60 men between October 3
and 13.


FRANCE.

4. In the middle of October it went into the Roye sector and remained
there during the entire winter of 1915–16.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. About May 25, 1916, it went slightly to the north and occupied the
sector between the Chaulnes-Amiens railroad and the south of Soyécourt.

2. At the beginning of July, when the Somme battle began, the 35th
Division was holding the front from west of Vermandovillers to the south
of Chilly. The 176th Infantry Regiment was sent into line in the sector
of Herbécourt-Estrées on July 2 and lost 170 prisoners to the French.
This regiment lost heavily in the French attack of July 20 between
Belloy and the Ètoilé wood.

3. On September 4 and the days following the 35th Division was effecting
a relief at the time of the French offensive and suffered considerably
because of this (almost 2,000 prisoners, 39 of whom were officers).

4. It had to be retired from the front on September 8 and sent to rest
at Ham. Between October 15 and 20 it again went into line from the
southwest of Chaulnes to the southwest of Chilly.

5. According to official calculations, the 35th Division had casualties
of 6,102 men, 68 per cent of the effectives engaged, in the course of
the battle of the Somme.


                                 1917.


ST. QUENTIN.

1. The 35th Division remained in the vicinity of Chaulnes until the
German retirement. It took part in the retreat and established itself in
the Hindenburg Line south of St. Quentin at the end of March.


ARTOIS.

2. After a few days of rest in the vicinity of Guise at the beginning of
April, the division took part in the battle of Arras in the second half
of April. At this time it lost about 50 per cent of its fighting men.
The 141st Infantry Regiment received in May 135 to 140 men per company
to make up for its losses (1918 class and men liberated by the
dissolution of the 618th Infantry Regiment).


FLANDERS.

3. Sent to rest for the entire month of May in the vicinity of Lille and
filled up by replacements of 3,000 men coming from the recruit depot at
Warsaw on May 9, the 35th Division was sent into Belgium and occupied,
on May 31, the banks of the Ypres-Comines Canal. On June 7 it lost
heavily there (5,000 to 6,000 men, of whom 1,272 were prisoners).

4. Reorganized on June 11 in the vicinity of Cambrai, by replacements
mostly made up of returned convalescents and wounded, the division was
then sent into line in a calm sector north of St. Quentin, where it
remained from June 21 to October 20.


FLANDERS.

5. On October 22 and 23 it reappeared on the Flanders front in the
sector of the Houthulst wood. It had rather serious losses between
October 22 and 25.

It was relieved on January 22, 1918, and sent to rest east of Bruges.


                              RECRUITING.

The 35th Division is recruited from western Prussia with some help from
the 6th Corps District, especially in June, 1916 (important replacements
made up of miners from Silesia). There is a rather large proportion of
Poles, not only from the 17th Corps District, but also from the 5th and
6th Corps Districts.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 35th Division has taken part in numerous battles. Its quality has
been greatly weakened by the incorporation of recruits of the 1918
class, and by the increase of the Polish elements.

The 35th Division appears to be a mediocre division (July, 1917).

The morale of the 141st Infantry Regiment, 50 per cent of which are
Poles, appears poor. (November, 1917.)


                                 1918.


YPRES.

1. The division was at rest east of Bruges (Maldeghem) until about
February 17, when it was engaged in the vicinity of Merckem until March
20.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

2. It entrained at Pitthem on the 22d and moved to Carvin. It was in
reserve at Evin-Malmaison until March 27, and later in reserve south of
Lens (near Rouvroy) until April 1. It was moved to Lille and engaged
from April 8–9 to the 14th at Neuve-Chapelle, Lestrem, Locon, Neuf
Berquin. In the fighting on April 12 the division lost heavily. It was
withdrawn on April 14.


FLANDERS.

3. The division rested near Armentiers until May 5, during which period
it was reviewed by the Kaiser. It was in the sector north of Bailleul
from May 8 to July 3. At this time the company effectives of the
division seems to have been about 50 men. The division rested at Bruges
from the 5th to the 17th, when it returned to the Merckem sector and
occupied it until August 18. Considerable replacements were received in
mid-August by the division.


ARTOIS.

4. It rested near Lille (Aug. 19–24), and on August 25 was railed to
Douai. On the 26th the division occupied the Drocourt-Queant line and
fought in the area until about September 30, when it was relieved after
losing 800 prisoners.


BATTLE OF CAMBRESIS.

5. The division was reengaged on October 1 northwest of Cambrai. It
withdrew to Abancourt (9th), Hem-Lenglet (11th), Denain north of Maing,
Famars (28th), northwest of Maresches (Nov. 1). It passed to second line
about the 1st of the month, returning on November 9 near Harchies. The
division was not in line on November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was considered as a good
sector-holding division in 1918.




                         35th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Ldw.   │2 Ldw.   │5 Ldw.   │2 Ldw.   │5 Ldw.   │2 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │  (Mixed)│
              │         │9 Ldw.   │         │9 Ldw.   │         │9 Ldw.
              │(z)      │107 Ldw. │(z)      │107 Ldw. │         │107 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3d Res. Heavy      │3d Res. Heavy      │3d Res. Heavy
              │  Cavalry.         │  Cavalry.         │  Cavalry.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Ers. Abt. 35, 81 F.│35 Res. F. A. Rgt. │35 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  A. Rgt.          │                   │  833d Battery.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Pion. Btn. No.   │2 Pion. Btn. No.   │235 T. M. Co.
   Liaisons.  │  17.              │  17.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │5 Ldst. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │  9th Corps.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │167.     │420.     │167.     │420.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │421.     │         │438.
              │         │438.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sq. 4 Jag. z. Pf.│Staff, 4 Horse Jag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │2 Sqn. 4 Horse Jag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │   (z)
              │                   │
              │ 35 Res. F. A. Rgt.│
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│335 Pion. Btn.     │335 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │1 Res. Co. 17 Pion.│1 Res. Co. 17
              │                   │  Pions.
              │235 T. M. Co.      │149 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │35 Res. Searchlight│435 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │Tel. Detch.        │ 435 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │238 Ambulance Co.  │238 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │291 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │435 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │93 Brig. reenforced│
              │  by 20 and 24     │
              │  Ldst. Btns.      │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

     (420th Infantry Regiment: 1st Corps District—East Prussia. 421st
 Infantry Regiment: 2d Corps District—Pomerania. 438th Infantry Regiment:
                14th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Baden.)


                                 1914.

The 35th Reserve Division is a Landwehr division. It has always occupied
the Eastern Front.


POLAND.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 35th Reserve Division fought (Aug.
25–28) on the southern frontier of East Prussia, which it crossed. It
took part in the Polish campaign—southwest of Warsaw in October and
November, 1914, in the vicinity of Czenstochow in December.


                                 1915.


GALICIA.

1. From January to March, 1915, the division was in line south of the
Pilica. From April to June it took part in the operations in the
Carpathians, then in the vicinity of Lemberg.


RUSSIA.

2. In the middle of July it was replaced near Sokal (Galicia) by the
39th Austrian Division and went south of Grabowiec. The pursuit of the
Russians led it north of Cholm in the beginning of August, east of
Brest-Litovsk, near Kobrin in September, then to the Chtchara at the
mouth of the Oginski Canal in October.

3. It took up its position along the canal north of Logischin.


                                 1916.


OGINSKI CANAL.

1. The 35th Reserve Division remained in line along the Oginski Canal
for more than two years (Oct., 1915 to Feb., 1918).

2. About October, 1916, the 5th Landwehr Brigade (2d and 9th Landwehr
Regiments) was assigned to the 226th Division (being formed in the
Smorgoni sector). The 35th Reserve Division received two new
regiments—the 420th and 421st Infantry Regiments.


                                 1917.


OGINSKI CANAL.

1. The division was in the same sector.

In July, 1917, the 438th Infantry Regiment became a part of the 35th
Reserve Division to replace the 107th Saxon Landwehr Regiment, which had
been transferred to the 45th Landwehr Division (Saxon).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Composed of Landwehr and Landsturm elements, retained for more than two
years in a calm sector of the Russian front, later in the Ukraine, the
35th Reserve Division has only a mediocre military value.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. In March the division advanced into Ukraine, after having furnished
men to the 10th Landwehr Division, which was about to leave for the
Western Front. In this advance the division saw some fighting and
consequently suffered some losses. In April the division was identified
in the Gomel region. The division was identified in Ukraine early in
October, and so its reported presence in Flanders on September 20
appears incorrect.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             36th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │69.      │129.     │69.      │129.     │71.      │5 Gren.
              │         │175.     │         │175.     │         │175.
              │71.      │5 Gren.  │71.      │5 Gren.  │         │128.
              │         │128.     │         │128.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Hus. Rgt.        │                   │4 Sq. 5 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │36 Brig.:          │36 Brig.:          │36 Brig.:
              │ 36 Rgt.           │ 36 Rgt.           │ 36 Rgt.
              │ 72 Rgt.           │ 72 Rgt.           │ 72 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  17:              │  17:
              │                   │ Field Co. 17 Pion.│ 2 Co. 17 Pion.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 36 Tel. Detch.    │ 3 and 4 Cos. 35
              │                   │                   │  Pion.
              │                   │ 36 Pont. Engs.    │ 3 Co. 36 Pion.
              │                   │                   │ 36 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │ 36 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 36 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │71.      │5 Gren.  │71.      │5.
              │         │175.     │         │128.
              │         │128.     │         │175.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sq. 5 Hus. Rgt.  │4 Sq. 5 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │36 Art. Command:   │36 Art. Command:
              │ 36 Rgt.           │ 36 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 4 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 824 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1209 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1229 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Pion. Btn. No.   │17 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  17:              │
              │ 3 and 5 Cos. 17   │ 3 Co. 17 Pions.
              │  Pion.            │
              │ 36 T. M. Co.      │ 5 Co. 17 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 36 Tel. Detch.    │ 36 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 209 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │36 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 36 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 62 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │43 Ambulance Co.   │43 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │288, 290 Field     │288 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospts.          │
              │36 Vet. Hospital.  │290 Field Hospital.
              │                   │36 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │569 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (17th Corps District—West Prussia.)


                                 1914.

The 36th Division (with the 35th Division) was a part of the 17th Army
Corps (Danzig).


EAST PRUSSIA-RUSSIA.

1. The 17th Army Corps, which comprises the 35th and 36th Divisions, was
sent to East Prussia in August, 1914, where it belonged to the 8th Army,
soon placed under the command of Von Hindenburg. With this army it took
part in the battle of Tannenberg on August 30, and in the battle of
Loetzen on September 9, then with the 9th German Army (Mackensen), in
the battle of Radom, on October 6.

2. In the battles which mark the advance upon Warsaw and then the
retreat, the regiments of the 36th Division, and especially the 5th
Grenadier Regiment, suffered considerable losses (principally at Lodz
between Nov. 23 and Dec. 6).


                                 1915.

1. During the winter of 1914–15 the 36th Division, with the 17th Army
Corps, took part in the actions along the Bzura until June. In July it
was on the Narew, later on the right bank of the Bug, and at the
beginning of September on the Chtchara River.

2. At the end of September, 1915, at the time of the pressure exerted by
the Franco-British offensive, the 17th Army Corps entrained for the
Western Front.


FRANCE.

3. Detraining at Peronne on October 10, it was sent to rest in the
vicinity of Ham until October 16. At this date it went into line in the
Roye sector. Until the battle of the Somme it was not seriously engaged.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. Upon the outbreak of the Franco-British offensive on the Somme in
July, 1916, the 36th Division occupied the sector included between the
south of Chilly and the north of Andechy. It was not engaged as a whole
until October, the time when the battle front extended as far as the
Chaulnes-Chilly sector. Until then it had only sent detached units to
reenforce certain points south of the river.

2. About the end of September it occupied the front from north of
Fouquescourt to the Chaulnes railroad. Relieved between October 15 and
20, and sent to rest between Nesle and Ham, it had to go back into line
on October 24–25 to replace, in the sector south of Ablaincourt-Chaulnes
wood, the divisions which our attacks north of Chaulnes had exhausted.
Its regiments lost heavily during this period. The 128th Infantry
Regiment lost more than the others, especially on November 7, 10, and
11.

3. On December 8 the 36th Division left the front north of Chaulnes and
was sent north of Roye to the Fouquescourt sector.


                                 1917.


ST. QUENTIN.

1. On March 17, 1917, it was included in the retirement and withdrew to
the Hindenburg Line, where it established itself, on March 23, south of
St. Quentin.


ARTOIS.

2. After a month’s rest (Apr. 9-May 9) behind the front, the 36th
Division went into line southeast of Arras in the Guemappe sector. It
had only a few local engagements there and did not suffer any great
losses.

3. It then spent a part of June at rest in the Douai area and took up
its position on July 4 in the sector of Oppy-Gavrelle (Artois). It did
not take part in any serious engagements there.


YPRES.

4. Relieved at the end of August, it entrained at Douai on the 28th for
Courtrai and Isegsem. Sent on September 10–11 into the sector of
Poelcapelle, it had to be replaced there on the 23d because of the heavy
losses which it received from the British attack.

5. The division left Flanders on September 27 to occupy a calm sector
west of St. Quentin, where it still was at the beginning of February,
1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 36th Division is recruited from the same region as the 35th
Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 36th Division was an excellent combat division.

In the battles of the Somme and of Arras the 36th Division gave a good
account of itself.

On the Ypres front the combat spirit of the division was less energetic
than in the preceding battles. The British Artillery, however, had
reduced its effectives by one-half.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was relieved in the sector north of St. Quentin about
February 1 and entered the sector south of St. Quentin within a few
days. It was in line when the Somme offensive came off and advanced in
the front line by Essigny le Grand, Clastres, Brouchy, Guiscard,
Campagne, Candor. From the 23d to the 25th it was in second line. On the
25th it was reengaged in the Lassigny area. The division was relieved on
April 8.

2. The division rested in close support southeast of Roye until April
20. A draft of 300 men was received about this time.

3. On April 20 the division was engaged southeast of Montdidier (Rollet)
until April 28. It was in reserve from the 28th to the beginning of May
in the vicinity of Roye. A draft of 1,000 men was received on April 29.
On May 9 the division was moved to Wasigny, where it rested until the
22d. It marched toward the Aisne front by night from May 22 to 27 via
Rozoy sur Serre, Montcornet, Liesse, Montaigu.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

4. The division had in line on the 27th only one battalion of the 128th
Regiment (near Winterberg). The rest of the division followed the
advance in reserve, passing through Villers en Prayeres, Fismes, Villers
sur Fere. It was engaged from May 29 to the middle of June at Courmont,
Fresnes (29th), Jaulgonne (31st), east of Chateau Thierry. The division
withdrew from the sector east of Chateau Thierry about June 30.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

5. It rested in the salient (near Fere en Tardenois) until July 14,
undergoing reconstitution. On that date it marched to the front and was
engaged the next day. It crossed the Marne and penetrated south of
Charteves, but was stopped and thrown back on Mezy and Fossoy. From July
20 to 22 it was in second line. Reengaged south of the Ourcq on 22d, the
division fought at Rocourt and Villeneuve sur Fere until July 27.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

6. The division rested near Laon in early August. It was brought up to
resist the British attack north of Bapaume on August 24. It was still
under strength and was unable to check the advance. It was forced to
fall back on Vaulx Vraucourt, Ecoust St. Mein (27th–30th), Pronville,
and Inchy (Sept. 2–3). The losses in prisoners amounted to 800 in this
fighting.

7. On the 16th of September the division was again in line south of La
Bassee. Beginning October 1 it retreated on Bauvin, Pont a Vendin,
Provin (16th), Attiches (18th), and toward the south of Tournai. It was
last identified at Bany on November 10.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was heavily engaged in 1918
as a follow-up division in the attacks and to hold important defensive
sectors.




                         36th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │69 Res.  │21 Res.  │69 Res.  │21 Res.  │69 Res.  │21 Res.
              │         │61 Res.  │         │61 Res.  │         │61 Res.
              │70 Res.  │5 Res.   │70 Res.  │5 Res.   │70 Res.  │5 Res.
              │         │54.      │         │54.      │         │54.
              │         │2 Res.   │         │2 Res.   │         │
              │     Jag. Btn.     │     Jag Btn.      │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Res. Hus. Rgt. (3│1 Res. Hus. Rgt.   │
              │  Sqns.).          │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │36 Res. Rgt. (6    │36 Res. Rgt. (7    │36 Res. Rgt. (7
              │  Btries.).        │  Btries.).        │  Btries.).
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Res. Co. 2, Pion.│1 Res. Co. 2, Pion.│1 Res. Co. 2, Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  No. 2.           │  No. 2.           │  No. 2.
              │                   │ 2 Co. 32 Res.     │ 236 T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Pion.            │
              │                   │ 36 Res. Pont.     │ 36 Res. Pont.
              │                   │  Engs.            │  Engs.
              │                   │ 36 Res. Tel.      │ 36 Res. Tel.
              │                   │  Detch.           │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 80 Art. Survey
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │ 24 Sound Ranging
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │217 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │69 Res.  │5 Res.   │69 Res.  │54.
              │         │61 Res.  │         │5 Res.
              │         │54.      │         │61 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sq. 2 Guard      │5 Sqn. 2 Gd. Drag.
              │  Dragoon.         │  Rgt.
              │1 and 2 Sqns. 1st  │
              │  Res. Uhlan Rgt.  │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │72 Art. Command:   │72 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 36 Res. Rgt. (9   │ 36 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).        │
              │                   │ 3 Abt. 4 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 833 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1252 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1306 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│336 Pion. Btn.     │2 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 Res. Co., 2     │1 Co. 2 Pions.
              │  Pion.            │
              │ 236 T. M. Co.     │1 Res. Co. 2 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 436 Tel. Detch.   │236 T. M. Co.
              │                   │
              │                   │45 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │436 Signal Command:
              │                   │
              │                   │ 436 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 119 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │515 Ambulance Co.  │515 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │398 Field Hospital.│10 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │12 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │138 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (17th Corps District—Western Prussia and the eastern part of Pomerania.)


                                 1914.


EAST PRUSSIA.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 36th Reserve Division constituting,
with the 1st Reserve Division, the 1st Reserve Corps, was engaged in
East Prussia in the vicinity of Gumbinnen-Angerburg.


BZURA.

2. Assigned to the 9th German Army (Mackensen), it fought on November 6
on the left bank of the Vistula and on the Bzura at the beginning of
December.


                                 1915.

1. At the beginning of 1915 the 36th Reserve Division took part in the
engagements on the line Bzura-Rawka-Bolimov (Jan. 4 and Feb. 5).


PRASNYSZ.

2. On February 13 the division entrained, with the entire 1st Reserve
Corps, to reenforce the right wing of the Germany Army, which was
pushing back the Russians from East Prussia. Detraining at Ostrolenka,
it attacked in the vicinity of Mlawa, then near Prasnysz (April), where
the Russian counterattacks caused it to suffer heavy losses.


COURLAND.

3. In May, it took part in the Hindenburg offensive in Courland. First
occupying the sector of Jurburg, north of Niemen, it reached Ponieviej
in July and from there pushed on to the vicinity of Dvinsk. The division
suffered heavily during this period. On October 15, the 61st Reserve
Infantry Regiment had an average of only 80 men per company (letter).


FRIEDRICHSTADT.

4. In December, the 36th Reserve Division occupied the sector of
Friedrichstadt, southeast of Riga.


                                 1916.

1. The division remained in its Courland sector (Friedrichstadt) until
September 24, 1916.


GALICIA.

2. At the end of September and the beginning of October, it entrained at
Libau and was transferred to Galicia. The 54th Infantry Regiment was
engaged on October 3 east of Brzezany to oppose the advance of the
Russians. The rest of the division rejoined the rest of the 54th
Infantry Regiment on October 19, and remained in this area.


                                 1917.

1. About the end of May, 1917, the 36th Reserve Division was relieved
from the sector south of Brzezany and entrained near Rohatyn (Galicia)
for the Western Front. Itinerary: Lemberg-Cracow-Oppeln-Munich-
Karlsruhe.


LORRAINE.

2. Detraining in Lorraine on the 1st of June, the division received
training until June 24. At this date, it took over a calm sector in Haye
for a fortnight.


ARTOIS.

3. Sent to the vicinity of Lens in July, the 36th Reserve Division
occupied the sector of Mericourt until the beginning of October.


FLANDERS.

4. About October 20, it went into line east of Ypres (north of
Becelaere).


                              RECRUITING.

The 36th Reserve Division is recruited from West Prussia and the eastern
part of Pomerania. It contained a large number of Alsace-Lorrainers
during its stay on the Western Front.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In Russia the 36th Reserve Division took part in several major
operations.

It did not come to the Western Front until June, 1917.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The division was relieved in the Foret de Holthust on April 4 by the
1st Landwehr Division, and marched via Amersveld to Cortemarch, where it
entrained and arrived at Courtrai on April 5. It left Courtrai on the
8th and marched toward Armentieres. On the 10th the division followed up
the German advance in support of an assault division, and on the 11th
came into action north of Armentieres. Losses were severe and the
division retired about April 13 to rest. It returned in the Ploegsteert
area on April 17 and went to rest in the Roulers area. On May 11, the
division came back to line for the third time north of Hinges.

2. It was withdrawn about May 25, rested behind the front until June 11,
when it relieved the 235th Division northwest of Bethune, which sector
it held until about June 22.


LENS.

3. On June 26 the division entered line in Artois area, southeast of
Loos. It held this quiet sector until October 2.


BELGIUM.

4. On the night of October 4–5 the division relieved the 16th Bavarian
Division southwest of Roulers. From then until about November 4, the
division fought first in the Roulers area, and after October 15, at
Thielt (17th), Deynze (26th), Ecke (Nov. 2). It was withdrawn from line
about November 4 and did not reenter.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was heavily engaged on the Lys
in the spring without achieving much success. Thereafter the division
was employed on the defensive.




                             37th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │73.      │147.     │73.      │147.     │73.      │147.
              │         │151.     │         │151.     │         │151.
              │75.      │146.     │75.      │146.     │         │150.
              │         │150.     │         │150.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │11 Drag. Rgt.      │                   │11 Drag. Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Squadrons).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │37 Brig.:          │37 Brig.:          │37 Brig.:
              │ 73 Rgt.           │ 73 Rgt.           │ 73 Rgt.
              │ 82 Rgt.           │ 82 Rgt.           │ 82 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1 Pion. Btn. No.   │1 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  26:              │  26:
              │                   │ Field Co. 26 Pion.│ 1 Co. 26 Pion.
              │                   │ 37 Tel. Detch.    │ 37 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 37 Pont. Engs.    │ 37 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 37 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │73.      │147.     │73.      │147.
              │         │151.     │         │150.
              │         │150.     │         │151.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sq. 10 Jag. z.   │3 Sqn. 10 Mounted
              │  Pf.              │  Jag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │37 Art. Command:   │37 Art. Command:
              │ 73 Rgt.           │ 73 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 16 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (2, 9 and 10
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 846 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 924 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1184 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│134 Pion. Btn.:    │134 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 26 Pion.    │ 3 Co. 26 Pions.
              │ 250 Pion Co.      │ 250 Pion. Co.
              │ 37 T. M. Co.      │ 37 T. M. Co.
              │ 250 Searchlight   │ 63 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 37 Tel. Detch.    │37 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 37 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 82 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │40 Ambulance Co.   │49 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │317, 318 Field     │317 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │318 Field Hospital.
              │                   │194 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (20th Corps District—East Prussia.)


                                 1914.

Upon mobilization, the 37th Division, with the 41st Division, formed the
20th Army Corps (Allenstein).


RUSSIA.

1. At the beginning of the war the 37th Division was engaged on the
Eastern Front. It took part in the battle of Tannenberg at the end of
August, in the attempt against Warsaw in October, and in the battles on
the Rawka during the winter of 1914 and 1915.


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. In April, 1915, the 37th Division was on the Narew. In May it ceded
the 146th Infantry Regiment to the 101st Division, a new formation. The
battles lasted until the end of July on the Narew, which was crossed on
the 31st. The division was at Bielostok at the end of August, and
entered Grodno on September 2.

2. In the course of September, it advanced from Niemen to the Berezina,
and in October it occupied a sector in the vicinity of Dvinsk (Lake
Sventen) on the stabilized front. It remained there until its departure
for the Western Front in December, 1916.


                                 1916.

1. One of its regiments, the 150th Infantry Regiment, was temporarily
detached at the time of the Russian offensive of 1916 on the Stokhod and
then made a part of the 91st Division.


FRANCE.

2. After taking part in the terrible battles on the Stokhod, in the
course of which it suffered enormous losses, the 150th Infantry Regiment
was transferred to Galicia at the end of September, 1916, and then
returned to the 37th Division. The division was sent to the Western
Front on December 10, 1916. Itinerary: Cracow-Breslau-Dresden-Leipzig-
Nuremburg-Karlsruhe-Rastatt-Strassburg-Colmar-Neu Breisach.


                                 1917.


UPPER ALSACE.

1. Regrouped with its three regiments in Upper Alsace (vicinity of
Ferrette) at the end of 1916, the 37th Division spent some time at rest
and, in the middle of January, 1917, went into line in the sector which
extends from Niederlarg to the Swiss frontier.

The division occupied this sector until the month of May.

2. About May 1 it was relieved, entrained south of Mulhouse and sent to
Charleville by way of Strassburg, Sarrebruecken, and Sedan, from which
place it went to the vicinity of Gizy (6 kilometers from Sissonne).


AISNE.

3. After a week’s rest, it went into line on the Aisne at the Chemins
des Dames, in the sector of Courtecon, which it occupied until the end
of July.

4. During these two months (May 25 to the end of July), the 37th
Division did not play an important rôle. However, units of the division
carried out several local operations in the course of this period. On
July 14, units from the three regiments aided by the assault troops of
the 5th Assault Battalion, succeeded, at the expense of very heavy
losses, in reducing a salient near the Cerny sugar refinery.


ST. GOBAIN.

5. On July 31 the 37th Division was relieved, and about August 3 went
into line in the St. Gobain sector (in front of Coucy le Chateau) which
it occupied until the end of November. On October 23 it suffered losses
(Mont des Singes) from our bombardments. On the 24th the division
withdrew its units across the canal and occupied the sector included
between the Brancourt-Quincy road and Anizy.


                              RECRUITING.

The 37th Division is recruited from East and West Prussia. During its
stay on the Eastern Front it contained a large number of Alsace-
Lorrainers. Because of its circumscribed territorial extent, the 37th
Division contains an admixture of elements coming from other districts
(5th and 6th Corps Districts among others). Nevertheless, and in spite
of their official designations (from Moravia, from Ermeland), its
regiments are called “East Prussian” in the German communique of July
15, 1917.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

On July 14 and 15, 1917, the 37th Division attacked with great energy.
At that time, it seemed to be of good quality and of high morale.
However, according to statements of prisoners of the 151st Infantry
Regiment made in September, October, and November, the morale appears to
have weakened (Jan. 18, 1918).

1918.


LAON.

1. During January and early February the 37th Division and the 14th
Reserve Division relieved each other in the St. Gobain sector (north of
Soissons). It seems probable (though the fact has never been proved)
that during one of its periods out of line, the 37th Division was given
a course of training in open warfare. On February 20, the 37th relieved
the 14th Reserve in the same sector, and it was in turn relieved by the
14th Reserve about the 9th of March.


PICARDY.

2. On March 21 the division reinforced the front near Benay (south of
St. Quentin) attacking with such dash that it received special mention
by Prof. Wegener in the Koelnische Zeitung. It was withdrawn on the
30th.

3. The division rested for a few days between Champs and Folembray
(north of Soissons), and then entered line north of Thiescourt (west of
Noyon) on the 9th of April. It was withdrawn about the 20th, and went to
rest and refit in the area southeast of Avesnes.


AISNE.

4. On May 27, the first day of the battle of the Aisne, the division
attacked near Presles (south of Laon), and advanced via Braine (the
28th) as far as the Troesnes-Longpont sector (east of Villers
Cotterets). It was relieved by the 115th Division on the 4th of June,
and went to the area northeast of Braine to rest and to be thoroughly
trained.


MARNE.

5. It set out the evening of the 12th of July, and in two night marches,
reached its point of assembly in the woods north of Verneuil (northeast
of Dormans). It was planned that the 37th with three other divisions,
forming the v. Conta Group, should “leap-frog” the divisions in line,
and to sweep up the valley of the Marne, beginning with the line
Vincelles-Antheney and ending at a line passing north of Avenay and
north of Moslins. It was thought that this movement, combined with the
push of the units to the east of Rheims, would result in the fall of
that city and also of the Montagne de Rheims to the south. The division
attacked on the 15th, crossed the Marne, reached the Bois du Chataignier
(south of Mareuil-east of Dormans); and was stopped there. It delivered
its last counterattack on the 19th, and the order having been given,
crossed the Marne, and continued its retreat toward the north. It was
identified by prisoners for the last time on the 28th in the vicinity of
Champvoisy (north of Dormans). It then went to the Charleville area to
rest and refit; the 10th Landwehr Division having been disbanded, the
372d Regiment was drafted to the regiments of the 37th Division.


VERDUN.

6. During the night of the 12th–13th of August, it relieved the 231st
Division to the north of Avocourt (north of Verdun). It was relieved by
the 117th Division about the 20th of September, and moved to the
vicinity of Billy (south of Longuyon,) where it rested for about a week.


ARGONNE.

7. On September 26, it reinforced the 117th Division near Montfaucon,
where they counterattacked the same day. It was heavily engaged until
withdrawn October 1.

8. It moved some kilometres to the west, in the vicinity of Exermont, in
anticipation of the American attack of October 4, and came into line in
that region on the 5th. It was engaged in a number of minor actions,
that proved quite costly; its losses in prisoners alone was 962. It was
withdrawn on the 18th, and went to rest near Verpel (northeast of
Grandpre).

9. On November 9, the division came back into line near Abaucourt
(northeast of Verdun); it had not been withdrawn on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 37th has always been considered a first-class shock division. It did
very well in the offensives in which it took part (Somme, Aisne, Marne),
and one of its regiments, the 147th, “The Marshal von Hindenburg
Regiment” was particularly mentioned in the German Communique for its
work on October 10. It suffered such heavy losses throughout the year
that, despite numerous large drafts of replacements, the regiments were
reduced to four companies of 80 men each at the end of the war.




                             38th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │76.      │71.      │76.      │71.      │83.      │94.
              │         │95.      │         │95.      │         │95.
              │83.      │94.      │83.      │94.      │         │96.
              │         │96.      │         │96.      │         │
              │   11 Jag. Btn.    │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Cuir. Rgt. (3    │6 Cuir. Rgt. (3    │2 Sqn. 6 Cuir. Rgt.
              │  Sqns.).          │  Sqns.).          │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │38 Brig.:          │38 Brig.:          │38 Brig.:
              │ 19 Rgt.           │19 Rgt.            │ 19 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │ 55 Rgt.           │55 Rgt.            │ 55 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│3 Field Co., 1     │3 Field Co., 1     │3 Field Co., 1
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. No. 11.    │  Pion. No. 11.    │  Pion. No. 11.
              │                   │ 38 Pont. Engs.    │ 38 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 38 Tel. Detch.    │ 38 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 38 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │25 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │83.      │94.      │83.      │94.
              │         │95.      │         │95.
              │         │96.      │         │96.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 6 Cuir. Rgt.│3 Sqn. 6 Cuir. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │38 Art. Command:   │38 Art. Command:
              │ 19 Rgt. (9        │ 19 F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).        │
              │                   │ 61 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │  (Staff, 1, 2, and
              │                   │  3 Btries.).
              │                   │ 704 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 726 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1258 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│128 Pion. Btn.     │125 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 3 Co. 11 Pion.    │ 3 Co. 11 Pions.
              │ 285 Pion. Co.     │ 285 Pion. Co.
              │ 38 T. M. Co.      │ 46 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ Tel. Detch.       │38 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 38 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 118 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │27 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │108 Field Hospital.│104 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │108 Field Hospital.
              │                   │38 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │571 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                (11th Corps District—Thuringian States.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. At the outbreak of the war the 38th Division, forming the 11th Army
Corps with the 22d Division, belonged to the 3d Army (Von Hausen), which
went through the Belgian Ardennes. It halted in front of Namur until the
surrender of this place.


EAST PRUSSIA-POLAND.

2. In consequence of the invasion of East Prussia, the 38th Division as
well as the 22d Division, left Belgium about August 27. Going by way of
Aix la Chapelle, it detrained in East Prussia, where it fought from
September 9 to 11. From that place it was taken to the southern part of
Poland (Pinczow, Sept. 28; Opatow, Oct. 4). The enveloping movement of
the Russians obliged it to retire from the Lodz front with the army
group to which it was attached. It was assigned to the 9th Army
(Mackensen) in November and to the 10th Army in December.

3. During the winter of 1914 and 1915 it took part in several important
engagements on the Bzura and the Rawka, as well as on the Pilica.


                                 1915.


POLAND.

1. Returning to the 9th Army (Von Fabeck), at the beginning of 1915, the
38th Division fought in the vicinity of Rava, on March 6 and 7. It was
then separated from the 22d Division and rejoined the army detachment of
Von Gallitz, north of Warsaw. In May it transferred the 71st Infantry
Regiment to the 103d Division, a new formation.

2. During the summer offensive it took part in numerous battles from
July 13 to September 19, advanced to the southeast of Bielostok, reached
the Svislotch on September 1 and marched beyond this until September 19.


FRANCE.

3. At the end of September the 38th Division was concentrated in the
vicinity of Grodno and entrained for France on September 25. (Itinerary:
Lyck-Graudenz-Berlin-Hanover-Minden-Cologne-Aix la Chapelle-Liege-Namur-
Douai.) Detraining on October 1, it completed its reorganization.
Between August 30 and October 8 the 5th Company of the 94th Infantry
Regiment had received not less than 161 men as replacements.


OISE.

4. Sent to the south of the Oise, the 38th Division went into line in
the sector of Tracy le Val., which it held until the beginning of May,
1916, without any serious engagements.


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. On May 11, 1916, the division entrained at Tergnier and was
transferred to the Verdun front.

2. On May 13 it took over the sector of Hill 304, which it did not leave
until October 10, seriously weakened by the battles which it had
sustained for five months (losses, 52 per cent of the infantry).


SOMME.

3. Sent to the Somme on October 12, it went into action on October 12;
it went into action on October 22 at Thiepval-Grandcourt, and remained
there only three weeks, because of the severe losses which it suffered.


FLANDERS.

4. It left the front on November 13 to go to rest and to be reorganized
on the coast of Flanders, between Ostend and the Dutch frontier.

5. On December 19 it was brought back to the Somme.


                                 1917.


SOMME.

1. In January, 1917, elements of the division were sent as
reenforcements north of Courcelette and southwest of Serre.

2. On January 17 the entire 38th Division went into line in the vicinity
of Puisieux-Hébuterne, where it was relieved about March 8 without any
serious losses.

3. On March 17 the division replaced the 4th Guard Division near Beugny
Bertincourt, which had lost heavily at the beginning of its retirement
to the Hindenburg Line, and the 38th Division itself continued to
withdraw by way of Beaumetz and Doignies. It took up its position
between Demicourt and Boursies, west of Cambrai, and remained there
until the end of April.


ARTOIS.

4. After a period of rest in the Cambrai-Douai area during the first
half of May, the 38th Division took over the sector east of Arras (north
of the Scarpe), on May 16. It left this front on May 31, after having
been greatly weakened on the 16th, during the counterattacks on the
village of Rouex (800 men were sent to make up these losses from the
dissolved 624th Infantry Regiment).


FLANDERS.

5. The division remained at rest at Douai, until June 8; at this time,
it was transferred to the vicinity of Gheluwe and sent into reserve to
reenforce finally the Messines front.

6. On July 27, before the British attack, the 38th Division went into
line east of Ypres (Hooge). It suffered heavy losses on July 31, the day
of the attack, and also the three days preceding.

7. Relieved on August 1, it was sent to Antwerp for rest and
reorganization (August).


ARTOIS.

8. On September 2, it took over the sector of Monchy le Preux, south of
the Scarpe, where it again lost heavily from artillery fire.


FLANDERS.

9. Withdrawn from the front on November 2, the 38th Division after a
week’s rest in the vicinity of Douai, again took over the lines north of
Ypres (Staden) from November 19 to November 25, then north of
Passchendaele where on December 3, a British attack inflicted heavy
losses upon it.

10. The division was relieved on November 19 and sent to rest in the
vicinity of Bruges.


                              RECRUITING.

The 38th Division is recruited from the small Thuringian States. At the
beginning of 1917, it included a rather large number of men from Baden,
almost all of whom have been withdrawn.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 38th Division is a good division.

As a rule it gave a good account of itself in the numerous battles in
which it took part. On June 13, 1916, however, at the Mort Homme, the
94th Infantry Regiment is said to have refused to go over the top
(letter).

The heavy losses which it suffered at the end of 1917 in the course of
the attack upon Ypres, were made up by the replacements composed, for
the most part, of the 1918 class.

This element did not have a good effect upon the morale of the division.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The division remained in Passchendaele area until its relief by the
58th Division about April 5. It rested in the Lille area until the night
of April 15–16 when it entered the line at Meteren to reenforce the
battle line. It was withdrawn about May 8.

2. The division rested at Provin after May 12. It entered line north of
Givenchy on May 21 and held that sector until July 5, when it was
relieved by the 1st Guard Reserve Division. It rested at Lille until
August 6, when it was alerted and railed to Cambrai, remaining there
until August 9. The division moved from Cambrai by motor trucks on
August 10 and came into line on the battle front near Lihons on the same
day.


SOMME.

3. Until September 22, the division was engaged in resisting the allied
advance. It held a sector south of Chaulnes until August 20, when it
retired to the St. Christ area (22d). After the 8th of September the
division was falling back in a northeasterly direction by Péronne toward
Le Catelet. It was withdrawn from line near Hargicourt on September 22.


CAMBRAI.

4. After a rest of only one week, the division was brought back to
reenforce the Cambrai battle front at Rumilly (Oct. 1). It was heavily
engaged until October 16 when it went to reserve in the Cambrai area.
Since August 11 the division had lost more than 2,000 prisoners.


BELGIUM.

5. On October 29, the division returned to line northeast of Roubaix. It
remained in line until the armistice. The last identification was at
Renaix on November 8.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. Its worth as a defensive
division was proved by the extent to which it was used in the last three
months of the war.




                        38th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │38 Ldw.  │77 Ldw.  │38 Ldw.  │77 Ldw.  │38 Ldw.  │77 Ldw.
              │(Mixed). │78 Ldw.  │(Mixed). │78 Ldw.  │(mixed). │78 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │                   │1st Mobile Ers.
              │                   │                   │Abt. 59 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │38 Ldw.  │79 Res.  │38 Ldw.  │425.
              │         │85 Ldw.  │         │79 Res.
              │         │77 Ldw.  │         │77 Ldw.
              │         │78 Ldw.  │         │78 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │2 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │145 Art. Command:  │255 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │255 Ldw. Rgt.      │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│438 Pion. Btn.     │438 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │5 Ldst. Btn., 9    │ 2 Landst. Co., 2
              │  Army Corps.      │  C. Dist. Pions.
              │338 T. M. Co.      │ 5 Landst. Co., 9
              │                   │  C. Dist. Pions.
              │538 Tel. Detch.    │ 338 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 243 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │538 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 538 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 9 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │557 Ambulance Co.  │557 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │109 Res. Field     │109 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │12 Ldw. Field      │12 Ldw. Field
              │  Hospt.           │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │538 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

         (38th Landwehr Division: 10th Corps District—Hanover.)


                                 1914.

The grouping of the 38th Landwehr Brigade (77th and 78th Landwehr
Regiments) and of a mixed regiment, 79th Reserve Infantry Regiment,
formed the 38th Landwehr Division in April, 1917.

1. The 38th Landwehr Brigade remained independent until it was assigned
to the 38th Landwehr Division.


FLANDERS.

2. Arriving at Liége on October 21, 1914, the 38th Brigade remained
there about two months. Transferred to Flanders on October 27, it held
the sector north of the Passchendaele Canal (Nieuport) until the
beginning of November.

3. After occupying the front of Ypres near Becelaere, the brigade came
into line before Passchendaele at the end of December.


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. In April, 1915, the 38th Landwehr Brigade took part in the second
battle of Ypres near Zonnebeke.

2. On May 18 it was transferred from Roulers to La Bassée (Festubert) to
reenforce the 7th Army Corps.

3. After a rest at Lille it went into line south of the Lys
(Frelinghien-Houplines) at the end of August.


                                 1916.


ARTOIS.

1. Relieved from the north of Armentieres in March, 1916, the 38th
Landwehr Brigade was sent south of Arras (sector Wailly-Blaireville).


FLANDERS.

2. In the middle of September it returned to the Armentieres front (from
the Armentières-Lille railroad to Aubers). It occupied this sector for a
year and a half.


                                 1917.

1. In 1917 sector south of Armentières.

In April, 1917, the 38th Landwehr Brigade was transformed into the 38th
Landwehr Division by the addition of a third regiment, the 79th Reserve-
85th Landwehr, a composite regiment (1st and 2d Battalions of the 85th
Landwehr Regiment, four companies of the 79th Reserve Regiment, the
eight others having entered into the composition of the 440th Reserve
Regiment of the 183d Division).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 38th Landwehr Division, formed of fairly old men, constitutes an
organization of the third class. It held an honorable position in the
battles of Ypres in 1914 and 1915, but, as a rule, its rôle was limited
to occupying calm sectors. (Belgian Summary of Information, February,
1918.)


                                 1918.


FLANDERS.

1. The 38th Landwehr Division was relieved on January 16 in the sector
south of Armentieres by the 187th Division and went to rest in the
region east of Bruges.

2. After a week’s rest it relieved the 8th Bavarian Reserve Division
north of Dixmude on January 22. It was relieved by the 214th Division on
February 20.

3. On March 3 it relieved the 2d Naval Division east of Ramscappelle
(north of Bruges) in the sector just north of the one it previously
occupied.

4. About the 10th of May the division side slipped toward the south, and
in so doing relieved the 19th Reserve Division.

5. About the middle of October it side slipped southward. It was still
in line on the 11th of November, although it was forced with the rest of
the German line in Flanders, to withdraw considerably.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 38th Landwehr is rated as a fourth-class division. It could be and
was used only to hold a quiet sector. Most of the men were nearly 40
years of age, and so it was found necessary to have a divisional
“Stosstrupp” for purposes of patrolling.

On November 1 the Franco-American forces in Belgium started an offensive
in conjunction with the British 2d Army farther to the south. On the
same day, according to the Belgium communique, “The Belgian Army carried
out successful minor operations along the drainage canal,” and the
German communique said, “The 57th (13th Reserve Division) and the 79th
Reserve (38th Landwehr Division) Infantry Regiments distinguished
themselves in the course of this fighting.”




                             39th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │61.      │126.     │61.      │126.     │61.      │126.
              │         │132.     │         │132.     │         │132.
              │82.      │171.     │82.      │171.     │         │172.
              │         │172.     │         │172.     │         │
              │    8 Jag. Btn.    │         │         │         │
              │   14 Jag. Btn.    │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │14 Drag. Rgt.      │                   │H. Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (2 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │39 Brig.:          │39 Brig.:          │39 Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 66 Rgt.           │ 66 Rgt.           │ 66 Rgt.
              │ 80 Rgt.           │ 80 Rgt.           │ 80 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 and 3 Field Cos. │2 and 3 Field Cos. │2 and 3 Cos. 1
   Liaisons.  │  1 Pion. Btn. No. │  1 Pion. Btn. No. │  Pion. Btn. No.
              │  15.              │  15.              │  15. Btn. No. 15.
              │                   │39 Pont. Engs.     │39 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │39 Tel. Detch.     │39 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │39 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │61.      │126.     │61.      │126.
              │         │132.     │         │132.
              │         │172.     │         │172.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 and 2 Sqns. 8    │5 Sqn. 9 Drag. Rgt.
              │  Res. Hus. Rgt.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │39 Artillery       │39 Art. Command:
              │  Command:         │
              │ 80 Rgt.           │80 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 406 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 869 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1324 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1325 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│131 Pion. Btn.     │136 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │                   │
              │2 and 3 Cos. 15    │ 2 Co. 15 Pions.
              │  Pions.           │
              │39 T. M. Co.       │ 3 Co. 15 Pions.
              │Tel. Detch.        │ 39 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 58 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │39 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 39 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 84 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │38 Ambulance Co.   │38 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │270, 271, 272 Field│270 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │272 Field Hospital.
              │                   │39 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │572 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (15th Corps District—Alsace.)


                                 1914.


ALSACE AND THE VOSGES.

1. Upon mobilization, the 39th Division and the 30th Division formed the
5th Army Corps (Strassburg).

At the beginning of the campaign the 39th Division was a part of the 7th
Army (Von Herringen). In the first days of August it fought in the pass
of the Bonhomme. On the 9th it went into Cernay and Mulhouse and was
transferred to Dabo (Vosges) on August 19. On August 20 it took part in
the battle of Albreschwiller and crossed the frontier on the 31st. It
advanced to a point between the Meurthe and the Mortagne and then
retreated fighting.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Entraining on September 9, it was transferred to the northwest of
Rheims, where it fought between Craonne and Ailles until October.


FLANDERS.

3. At the end of October it became a part of the 6th Army (Crown Prince
of Bavaria), of which the 15th Army Corps formed the right wing (north
of Lille) until the summer of 1915.


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. Before our attacks of 1915 it was attached to the 4th Army (Duke of
Wurttemberg), south of Ypres. At this time the 15th Army Corps became
the left wing of the 4th Army. In April the 39th Division gave the 171st
Infantry Regiment to the 115th Division, a new formation.

2. The 39th Division was retained in the vicinity of Ypres until the
month of February, 1916. One of its regiments, the 172d Infantry
Regiment, suffered heavy losses there on September 25 (its 8th Company
received at least 111 men as replacements between September 28 and
October 16).


                                 1916.


VERDUN.

1. At the beginning of 1916 various elements of the 15th Army Corps were
transferred to the vicinity of Verdun and concentrated on the right bank
of the Meuse, in the area Piennes-Etain-Ornel-Senon.

2. At the beginning of the German offensive on February 24, the 39th
Division suffered relatively few losses, the battle being less intense
in the Woevre. But little by little all its units were engaged. On March
8, the 132d Infantry Regiment took part in the attacks upon Douaumont,
and on the 18th upon the Caillette wood. Its losses were enormous. On
July 11 the 126th Infantry Regiment was in action with two regiments of
the 30th Division. Almost all its battalions went successively to the
active sectors in the vicinity of Vaux (Aug. 18). At Verdun the division
lost 69 per cent of its infantry.


SOMME.

3. On October 20 the 39th Division was relieved from the Verdun front
and transferred to the Somme. On the 29th it occupied the sector of
Sailly Saillisel. In the attack of Sailly Saillisel by the French troops
the three regiments of the division were all put into line
simultaneously and acted especially with the assault troops. In these
battles the losses of the division were very great (an average of 80 men
per company). In the 126th Infantry Regiment, the 4th Company received
at least 82 men as replacements between November 16 and 23; the 3d
Company, 106 men.


VERDUN.

4. Withdrawn from the Somme, about November 11, the 39th Division was
again sent to Verdun. Between December 8 and December 12 it went into
the sector between the Louvemont road and the Chaufour wood and there
sustained our attack of December 15. It was relieved on the 20th, very
much exhausted, and went for reorganization near Vouziers.


                                 1917.


ARGONNE.

1. About January 10, 1917, the division went into line in the sector of
Ville sur Tourbe (Argonne). It was withdrawn at the beginning of March.
In the course of this month, it was engaged in Champagne, in the attack
of March 27 at Cernay en Dormois. It remained in the sector of Massiges
until the beginning of May.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. It then went to the vicinity of Rheims (Loivre-Berry au Bac sector)
from May 11 to the beginning of July.


ARTOIS.

3. Sent to rest near Asfeld, it then went into line west of Fontaine les
Croisilles (middle of July). Withdrawn from the Arras front, it occupied
the Loos sector in September.


FLANDERS.

4. At the end of October, it went to Flanders, Passchendaele sector,
then Becelaere sector.


ARTOIS.

5. At the end of November, it was again in Artois, north of La Bassee
Canal, a position which it was still occupying February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 171st and 172d Infantry Regiments are recruited in the Rhine
District, in the widest sense of the word (Grand Duchy of Baden, Rhenish
Hesse, Rhine Province), and from Westphalia.

The 126th Infantry Regiment, in Alsace since 1871, represents the
participation of Wurttemberg in the guard of the Reichsland. Besides its
maintenance by the younger recruiting classes, at the end of 1916 it
took some of the best elements from the 123d, 125th, and 126th Landwehr
Regiments (young Landsturm classes, then having at least 20 to 22 months
of service).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In spite of its relatively high losses, the 39th Division did well on
the Somme (October to November, 1916). During its second engagement at
Verdun, the Division was much less brilliant. Its resistance was weak
(December, 1916).


                                 1918.


LA BASSEE.

1. During the night of February 25–26 the 39th Division was relieved by
the 44th Reserve Division and went to rest near Sequedin (west of
Lille), where it is presumed to have been trained in open warfare.


PICARDY.

2. About the middle of March, when the Germans were concentrating their
reserves on the Cambrai-St. Quentin front, the 39th Division left the
Lille area for the Cambrai front. On the 21st of March, when the initial
attack was delivered, the 39th Division was in reserve to the 20th
Division and only came into action on the evening of that day, at
Beaumetz (west of Cambrai). Encountering fighting of the severest kind,
the division had to be withdrawn to reserve by the evening of the 23d.

3. The division reappeared in line on the 28th and continued to make
slow progress until it reached the area south of Hebuterne (west of
Bapaume). It was relieved on the 6th of April by the 26th Division and
went to rest in the Cambrai area.


LYS.

4. It left this area about the 12th and marched by stages to the Lys
battle front, arriving on the 17th in the Estaires area (west of Lille).
The German attacks in this area had been successfully held up by the
British by this time and the division was not immediately required. On
the 30th it came into line northwest of Merville (west of Lille) and
relieved the 12th Reserve Division. The division was not heavily engaged
in this sector; it was relieved by the 44th Reserve Division on May 26
and went to rest in the vicinity of Lille.

5. On the 3d of July it relieved the 48th Reserve Division in the Vieux
Berquin sector (east of Hazebrouck), and was relieved by the 187th
Division during the night of July 13–14. It went to the Haubourdin area
(southwest of Lille) and there received training as an assault division.


ARRAS.

6. During the night of August 2–3 it relieved the 185th Division south
of Neuville-Vitasse (south of Arras). In the heavy fighting that
followed the division lost over 1,300 prisoners and was driven back as
far as Cherisy, where it was withdrawn on the 30th and went to rest near
Aniches (east of Douai).


CAMBRAI.

7. On September 18 the division reenforced the front near Ecourt-St.
Quentin (northwest of Cambrai). It was driven back as far as Palluel,
where it was relieved by the 58th Division on the 28th.


YPRES.

9. The division entrained at Roulers and detrained at Menin, entering
line east of Gheluvelt (north of Menin) all on the same day. About the
25th of October it was withdrawn from line near Vichte (east of
Courtrai) to which point it had been driven back. It rested then for
about a week in the region of Audenarde.

10. During the night of October 31-November 1 the division relieved the
23d Reserve Division in the Nukerke sector (south of Audenarde); it was
identified in line there on the 9th and was probably still there on the
11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 39th is rated as a second-class division. With the exception of a
statement in the German communique of October 2, that the 132d Regiment
had displayed “unusual fighting ability” in the operations north of
Menin, there is nothing to show that the division had distinguished
itself in any way in the fighting during 1918.




                    39th Bavarian Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav. Ers.   │1 Bav. Ers.   │1 Bav. Ers.   │1 Bav. Ers.
              │              │3 Bav. Ers.   │              │3 Bav. Ers.
              │              │81 Ldw.       │9 Bav. Ers.   │5 Bav. Ers.
              │52 Ldw.       │80 Ldw.       │              │15 Bav. Ldw.
              │              │29 Ers.       │              │
              │         8 Jag. Btn.         │              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │1 Sqn. 2 Chev. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ers. Abt. 51 Rgt.          │10 Bav. Res. Rgt.
              │                             │5 Mountain Gun Abt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │2 Ers. Co. 1 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │410 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │1 Ldst. Btn. Duren.          │8 Jag. Btn. (2d Cyc. Co.).
              │8th Corps No. 18.            │1 Ldst. Btn. Rosenheim (1
              │                             │  Bav. Corps No. 4).
              │                             │Ldst. Btn. Landshut (1 Bav.
              │                             │  Corps No. 7).
              │                             │Ldst. Btn. Esslingen (13
              │                             │  Corps No. 18).
              │                             │Ldst. Btn. Passau 2 (1 Bav.
              │                             │  Corps No. 6).
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │1 Bav. Ers.   │1 Bav. Ers.   │1 Bav. Ers.   │1 Bav. Ers.
              │              │2 Bav. Ers.   │              │2 Bav. Ers.
              │              │5 Bav. Ers.   │              │5 Bav. Ers.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 2 Chev. Rgt.          │1 Sqn. 2 Bav. Light Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Artillery Command:           │11 Bav. Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 10 Bav. Res. Rgt.           │111 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                             │112 Bav. Light Am. Col.
              │                             │165 Bav. Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│23 Bav. Pion. Btn.:          │23 Bav. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 20 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.      │ 20 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 21 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.      │ 21 Bav. Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 410 T. M. Co.               │ 23 Bav. Searchlight Section.
              │ 9 Bav. Searchlight Section. │ 9 Bav. Searchlight Section.
              │ 430 Bav. Tel. Detch.        │439 Bav. Signal Command:
              │                             │ 439 Bav. Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 105 Bav. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │524 Ambulance Co.            │20 Bav. Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │2 Bav. Field Hospital.       │2 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │24 Bav. Vet. Hospital.       │51 Bav. Field Hospital.
              │227 Vet. Hospital.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │40, 41, and 49 Bav. Light    │
              │  Mun. Cols.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │1 Ldst. Btn.                 │
              │Ldst. Btn. Mosbach I (14     │
              │  Corps No. 1).              │
              │Ldst. Btn. Passau II (1 Bav. │
              │  Corps No. 6).              │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                               (Bavaria.)


                                 1915.


ALSACE.

1. The 39th Bavarian Reserve Division was formed in February, 1915, on
the Alsace front in the vicinity of Ste. Marie aux Mines. (See 30th
Bavarian Reserve Division.)

It then comprised the 52d Landwehr Brigade, consisting of the 80th
Landwehr Regiment and 29th Ersatz Regiment (since become the 61st), and
the 1st Bavarian Ersatz Brigade (81st Landwehr Regiment, 3d and 1st
Bavarian Ersatz Regiments). After October, 1915, we find them officially
designated “Bavarian.”

2. During 1915 and until the beginning of November, 1916, the 39th
Bavarian Reserve Division occupied the sector included between the Ban
de Sapt and Ste. Marie aux Mines. The elements of the division took part
in several local attacks in this region (south of Lusse in February,
1915; at La Fontenelle in June and July, 1915).


                                 1916.


ALSACE.

1. 1916 same sector of Alsace (Ban de Sapt and Ste. Marie aux Mines).

2. In March, 1916, the composition of the 39th Bavarian Reserve Division
was modified—the 81st Landwehr Regiment was replaced by the 15th
Bavarian Landwehr Regiment, coming from the 1st Bavarian Landwehr
Division. In July the division comprised the 1st Bavarian Ersatz Brigade
(1st and 3d Bavarian Ersatz Regiments) and the 9th Bavarian Ersatz
Brigade (the 15th Bavarian Landwehr Regiment and the 5th Bavarian Ersatz
Regiment, the latter having been formed in July).

3. In October the 3d Bavarian Ersatz Regiment was assigned to the 9th
Bavarian Reserve Division and the 29th Ersatz Regiment to the 223d
Division, both being new formations. From that time on the 39th Bavarian
Reserve Division was entirely Bavarian.

In November the 15th Bavarian Landwehr Regiment went over to the 30th
Bavarian Reserve Division, which sent the 2d Bavarian Ersatz Regiment in
its place to the 39th Bavarian Reserve Division.


VERDUN.

4. Relieved from its sector in the Vosges about November 6, 1916, the
39th Bavarian Reserve Division was sent to the Verdun front in the
vicinity of Vaux. It underwent the French attack of December 15, during
which certain of its units (5th Bavarian Ersatz Regiment) suffered
heavily. It was withdrawn on December 17.


                                 1917.


ALSACE.

1. In the middle of January, 1917, the 39th Bavarian Reserve Division
was sent back to its former sector in the vicinity of Ste. Marie aux
Mines (Wisembach, Lusse, Provenchères) which it occupied from then on
without changing.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Except in December, 1916, at Verdun, the 39th Bavarian Reserve Division
has always occupied the same sector of the Vosges. Its combat value
appears mediocre.

The average age of the men in the 1st and 5th Bavarian Ersatz Regiments
is between 30 and 40 years (April to July, 1918).

In February and March, 1918, all the younger elements (20 to 26 years)
were withdrawn from the division and sent to active and reserve
regiments.


                                 1918.


ALSACE.

1. The 39th Bavarian Reserve Division was still in its sector in Alsace,
northwest of Ste. Marie aux Mines, on the 11th of November.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

It is rated as a fourth-class division. Most of the men are old, the
younger men having been combed out in February and March to be sent to
other organizations, and although the companies are large—the average
ration strength seems to be 200 men—the division has very little combat
value.




                             40th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │88.      │104.     │88.      │104.     │88.      │104.
              │         │181.     │         │181.     │         │181.
              │89.      │133.     │89.      │133.     │         │134.
              │         │134.     │         │134.     │         │
              │   13 Jag. Btn.    │   13 Jag. Btn.    │   13 Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │19 Hus. Rgt.       │19 Hus. Rgt.       │19 Hus. Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │40 Brig.:          │40 Brig.:          │40 Brig.:
              │                   │                   │
              │ 32 Rgt.           │ 32 Rgt.           │ 32 Rgt.
              │ 68 Rgt.           │ 68 Rgt.           │ 68 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 and 2 Field Cos. │1 and 2 Field Cos. │1 and 2 Cos. 1
   Liaisons.  │  1 Pions. No. 32. │  1 Pion. No. 22.  │  Pion. No. 22.
              │                   │40 Pont. Engs.     │ 40 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │40 Tel. Detch.     │ 40 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │ 40 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │88.      │104.     │88.      │104.
              │         │181.     │         │134.
              │         │134.     │         │181.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.│2 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │40 Artillery       │40 Art. Command:
              │  Command:         │
              │ 32 Rgt.           │ 32 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 403 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 877 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 960 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1408 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│141 Pion. Btn.:    │141 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 1 and 3 Cos. 22   │ 3 Co. 22 Pions.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 40 T. M. Co.      │ 54 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 310 Searchlight.  │ 40 T. M. Co.
              │ 40 Tel. Detch.    │ 131 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │40 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 40 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 171 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │48 Saxon Ambulance │48 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│  Co.              │
              │306, 309 Field     │306 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospitals.       │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │309 Field Hospital.
              │                   │40 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM-MARNE.

1. The 40th Division (4th Saxon) formed, with the 24th Division (2d
Saxon), the 19th Army Corps, which, at the outbreak of the war, was a
part of the 3d Army (Von Hausen). Detraining north of Trèves August
10–12, the division entered the north of Luxemburg on the 13th, Belgium
on the 18th. It crossed the Meuse on the 23d above Dinant, and entered
France by way of Fumay. It fought on August 30 at Chesnois, reached
Semide on September 1, Somme Py on September 2, Châlons on September 4.
On liaison with the right wing of the 4th Army, it took part in the
battle of the Marne west of Vitry le François. After the battle it
retired to Souain.


FLANDERS.

2. At the beginning of October the 19th Army Corps was transferred to
Lille. It belonged to the 6th Army (Crown Prince of Bavaria). Attacked
by the British troops, it was forced back upon the line between
Ploegsteert wood and Grenier wood.

At the end of October the 9th Company of the 107th Infantry Regiment
(24th Division) had only 38 men left (letter).


                                 1915.

1. In 1915 and until August 1916 the two divisions of the 19th Army
Corps were retained in the zone of Ploegsteert and Grenier wood.

2. Elements of the 40th Division were sent as reenforcements in the
battles of Neuve Chapelle (March 1915), of Festubert (May to June 1915)
and upon the occasion of the Franco-British offensives in Artois (La
Bassee-Souchez, June to October 1915). In March 1915, the 40th Division
was definitely reduced to three regiments, having given the 133d
Infantry Regiment to the 24th Division.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. On August 8, 1916, the 40th Division took part in the battle of the
Somme in the region north of Pozières. It was in violent battles and was
withdrawn, very much exhausted.


ARTOIS.

2. At the end of August, it went from the Somme front to the sector of
Neuve Chapelle-La Bassée Canal, where it remained for six weeks.


SOMME.

3. About the middle of October, it returned to the Somme (sector north
of Le Sars-Butte de Warlencourt) for a second period of three weeks
during which its losses were again very heavy (the total losses of the
40th Division in August and October on the Somme were 6,127 men).

On October 30, the 7th Company of the 104th Infantry Regiment received
at least 75 men as replacements (1917 class) who had had only three
months of service.

4. Relieved from the Somme, the Division went into the sector of St.
Eloi-Messines about November 11.


                                 1917.

1. The division left the Messines front about March 26, before the
beginning of the British offensive at Arras, and remained at rest in the
area of Renaix.


FLANDERS.

2. It returned to line on April 23 in the same sector, and was subjected
to the artillery preparation for the battle of Messines, which caused it
extremely heavy losses. The 104th Infantry Regiment lost 224 men as
prisoners.

On June 7, the first day of the attack, it was withdrawn from the front
and sent to rest in the vicinity of Bruges and Thielt until July 19.

3. On July 22 it went into line north of Ypres in the sector of
Steenstraat-Het-Sas. It suffered the bombardment in the attack of July
31.


ST. QUENTIN.

4. After a rest, in the course of which it was reorganized, it spent
several weeks in the sector of Itancourt, in the vicinity of St.
Quentin. During the months of August and September it received 2,300 men
as replacements. A large number came from the Russian front (244th
Reserve Infantry Regiment, 350th Landwehr Regiment, the 19th Landsturm
Battalion from the garrison of Posen; besides these, Saxons were
withdrawn from the 428th Infantry Regiment and the 8th Landsturm).


FLANDERS.

5. On October 12 the 40th Division was transferred to Flanders for a
second time. From October 17 to 27 it occupied the sector of Langewaade-
Zevecoten, northeast of Bixschoote, and there underwent the attack of
October 27, which again caused it heavy losses.


RUSSIA.

6. The division was then sent to Russia, where it arrived at the end of
November. It was there assigned to the 10th Army and took up its
position south of Smorgoni, where it still was at the beginning of
January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 40th Division is purely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The attitude of the division has generally been passive (especially
during the attack of July 31, 1917, north of Ypres).

In the 104th Infantry Regiment (July 22–28) the men scattered under
fire, sometimes with their noncommissioned officers, and fled to a
distance of 8 kilometers behind the front.

The same thing happened for the period October 17–27. In the 134th
Infantry Regiment, which was considered the best regiment of the
division, one-half of the 6th Company left the front line on October 24.

Only the assault detachment offered any energetic resistance on October
27, 1917.


                                 1918.


RUSSIA.

1. The 40th Division was identified in the region of Lake Narotch-Niemen
for the last time on the 15th of January. It then went into reserve in
the vicinity of Vilna.


FRANCE.

2. The division was not identified between the 4th of February, when it
was stated as being “on the Eastern front,” and the 20th of March, when
it was in Lorraine. It very probably came from the East about the end of
February.


WOEVRE.

3. On April 15 it relieved the 4th Bavarian Division near Regnieville
(west of Pont à Mousson). During this time whenever units were out of
line they were intensively trained. It was withdrawn on June 1, its
place being taken by the 183d Division.


MARNE.

4. The division entrained at Jaulny the following day and traveled via
Rembercourt-Waville-Onville-Chambley-Mars la Tour-Jarny-Conflans-
Montmedy-Sedan-Mézières-Rethel, detraining at Asfeld la Ville on the 3d.
On the 16th it relieved the 2d Guard Division near Troësnes. This sector
was a quiet one until the beginning of the Allied counteroffensive of
July 18. The 40th Division was caught in this drive and was driven
northward. On the 24th it was relieved by the Bavarian Ersatz Division
and went to rest near Oisy le Verger (northwest of Cambrai).


ARRAS.

5. On the 22d of August the division entered line near Courcelles le
Comte (south of Arras), counterattacking the same day. It was withdrawn
on the 31st.


YPRES.

6. After a short rest near Roubaix, it relieved the 236th Division
southeast of Ypres on September 10. After losing nearly 1,300 prisoners,
the division was withdrawn from line near Wervicq, October 8, and went
to the Courtrai area, where it rested six days.

7. On the 15th it reenforced the front near Gulleghem (northeast of
Menin). It was withdrawn from line in the Vichte sector (east of
Courtrai), about the 26th.

8. On November 8 the division returned to line near Avelghem (northeast
of Roubaix), and was still in line on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

Until 1918 the 40th (Saxon) Division had been considered as being a
second-class unit. It was soon noticed that practically all Saxon troops
were not fighting as well as before, and this was particularly true of
the 40th Division, for although its men were young and the number of
effectives high, it was used in none of the German offensives. It must
be considered a third-class division.




                             41st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │72.      │18.      │72.      │18.      │74.      │18.
              │         │59.      │         │59.      │         │148.
              │74.      │148.     │74.      │148.     │         │152.
              │         │152.     │         │152.     │   9 Ldst. Btn.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │10 Dragoon Rgt.    │                   │10 Drag. Rgt. (3
              │                   │                   │  Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │41 Brig.:          │41 Brig.:          │41 Brig.:
              │ 35 Rgt.           │ 35 Rgt.           │ 35 Rgt.
              │ 79 Rgt.           │ 79 Rgt.           │ 79 Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Field Co. 1 Pion.│2 Field Co. 1 Pion.│2 Field Co. 1 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  No. 26.          │  No. 26.          │  No. 26.
              │                   │41 Pont. Engs.     │41 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │41 Tel. Detch.     │41 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │41 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │41 Cyc. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │74.      │18.      │74.      │18.
              │         │148.     │         │148.
              │         │152.     │         │152.
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sq. 10 Dragoons. │4 Sqn. 10 Drag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │41 Art. Command:   │41 Art. Command:
              │ 79 Rgt.           │ 79 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 15 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (5, 7, and 8
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 835 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1235 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1236 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│135 Pion. Btn.     │26 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │1 and 2 Cos. 26    │ 1 Co. 26 Pions.
              │  Pion.            │
              │41 T. M. Co.       │ 2 Co. 26 Pions.
              │Tel. Detch.        │ 41 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 37 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │41 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 41 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 96 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │261 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │316, 321, 323d     │316 Field Hospital.
              │  Field Hospitals. │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │323 Field Hospital.
              │                   │145 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │Light Mun. Col.    │574 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │10 Btry. 7 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │41 Ft. A. Btry.
              │                   │65 Carrier Pigeon
              │                   │  Loft.
              │                   │574 Carrier Pigeon
              │                   │  Loft.
              │                   │72 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │219 Reconnaissance
              │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │8, 29, and 245 M.
              │                   │  T. Col.
              │                   │140 Art.
              │                   │  Observation
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │(Elements attached
              │                   │  Aug. 18, 1918.
              │                   │  German document.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

         (20th Corps District—Eastern portion of West Prussia.)


                                 1914.

At the outbreak of the war the 41st Division and the 37th Division
formed the 20th Army Corps.


RUSSIA.

1. At the beginning of hostilities the 41st Division was engaged against
Russia, first in East Prussia, then in Poland, beginning with October.
It was at Lodz at the beginning of December, at Skiernewice on the 20th,
and fought on the Rawka in January, 1915.


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. In February, 1915, transferred north of the Vistula, it operated
until summer between Prasnysz and the valley of Bobr-Narew. From there
it was taken to the northern frontier of East Prussia in July and
advanced as far as Mitau, from there to Jakobstadt.


                                 1916.


RUSSIA.

1. Until October, 1916, the division occupied the same sector on the
Dvina, between Friedrichstadt and Jakobstadt. It underwent a Russian
offensive in March, 1916, and took part in an attack on May 10. In these
two actions it suffered serious losses.


ROUMANIA.

2. On October 21, the 41st Division, destined to take part in the
Roumanian campaign, entrained southeast of Friedrichstadt, traveled by
way of Mitau, Grodno, Warsaw, Oppeln, Budapest, Temesvar, and detrained
on November 5 at Pay, south of Hatszeg. It went into action in the
vicinity of Jiu and advanced almost without fighting. It entered
Bucarest on December 6. On the 7th it again took up the pursuit of the
Roumanians. On reaching the Sereth the 41st Division encountered the
Russians. It remained in line until February 8, 1917. The losses of the
division, slight in the battles with the Roumanians, were greater in the
Russian attacks.


                                 1917.


FRANCE.

1. Between February 8 and February 15 the 41st Division entrained at
Zilibia for the Western Front. (Itinerary: Bucarest-Salzburg-Munich-Ulm-
Augsburg-Thionville.) It detrained in Lorraine (Arsweiler, Ruxweiler,
Audun le Roman) on February 20.

2. After a month of rest and training in Lorraine, during which it was
reorganized (the 148th Infantry Regiment received 600 men as
replacements), the division went into line, at the beginning of May, at
Bois le Prêtre.

3. Between May 6 and May 9 it was transferred by way of Sedan to Rethel,
from which place it marched to the vicinity of Sissonne.


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

4. Sent into line in the sector of Hurtebise for a very short stay (May
25–26 to May 28–29), it went into action on the 21st in the vicinity of
Chevreux. It took part there in the attack of June 3 upon Californie
Plateau, in the course of which its losses were serious (50 to 60 men
per company in the 152d Regiment, heavy losses in the 148th Infantry
Regiment).

5. The 42d Division remained in the sector of Chevreux until June 25.
About July 3 it went to the east of the Butte du Mesnil. It remained in
this sector, without any notable occurrences, until the beginning of
November.


FLANDERS.

6. On November 12 it was in the vicinity of Staden, Houthulst wood,
where it alternated with the 38th Division. Relieved on January 14,
1918, it went to rest near Bruges.


                              RECRUITING.

The 41st Division is recruited principally from West Prussia. As the
region is not very large and has a relatively small population, the 41st
Division borrows from other districts (especially the 6th Corps
District). It contained a large number of Alsace-Lorrainers during its
stay on the Russian front.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 41st Division, coming from the Russo-Roumanian front, where it had
remained until the beginning of February, 1917, appears to have only a
mediocre military value.

In the course of the attack of June 3, 1917, on the Californie Plateau,
the retreat of the 148th Infantry Regiment was carried out in a state of
extreme confusion.

During its stay on the Champagne front the 41st Division showed no
offensive activity. (July 3-November, 1917.)


                                 1918.


FLANDERS.

1. The 41st Division was relieved in the sector north of Ypres by the
38th Division toward the end of January, and went to rest near Bruges.
While here the artillery received new guns, and it seems probable that
the division was put through a course of training.

2. During the night of February 25–26 the division relieved the 2d Guard
Reserve Division south of Westroosebeke (northeast of Ypres). About the
4th of March it was relieved by the 38th Division and went to rest in
the Turcoing area.


ARRAS.

3. On the 26th of March the division was identified near Oppy (northeast
of Arras). Here it was heavily engaged, and the attack which it
attempted broke down through heavy casualties.


ALBERT.

4. The division was identified in the same area on the 28th, but not
afterwards, and so it was very likely withdrawn during the next day or
two. Early in April the division moved up in support of the 21st Reserve
Division in the Beaumont-Hamel region (north of Albert), and during the
night of the 7th–8th it relieved the 1st Guard Reserve Division a little
farther to the north in the Puisieux sector (east of Hébuterne). On the
14th of April the division extended its front to the south so as to
relieve the 24th Division. On the 11th of June it was relieved by the
26th Reserve Division and went to rest and refit in the Douai area.

5. On the 9th of July it relieved the 108th Division east of Villers-
Bretonneux (east of Amiens). Here it was caught in the Allied drive of
August 8, and after losing over 1,700 prisoners was withdrawn on the
10th.

6. After resting a fortnight immediately behind the front, it came back
into line near Cappy (southeast of Bray) on the 25th. In the fighting
that followed the division lost more than 800 prisoners, and even more
killed and wounded. It was relieved early in September and went to rest
and to be reconstituted near Château Salins (northeast of Nancy). On
September 8 it received as a draft what was left of the dissolved 18th
Reserve Regiment (225th Division disbanded).


ARGONNE.

7. Leaving Metz on October 6 and traveling via St. Juvin, the division
reenforced the front near Sommerance (east of Grandpré) on the 9th to
meet the American push of the 8th. It was withdrawn on the 31st after
having suffered very heavy losses.

8. It rested a day or two immediately in rear of the front, and on the
3d it was thrown in near Nouart (southwest of Stenay), the Americans
having attacked again on the 1st. It was again withdrawn on the 8th, and
did not come back into line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 41st has been considered a second-class division. With the exception
of its engagements in the spring near Albert and in the Argonne in
October and November, it has not done a great deal of fighting during
the year; during this fighting, however, it suffered very severely, so
that when it was withdrawn on the 8th of November its companies did not
have an average combatant strength of 25. On June 6 the commanding
general issued an order indicating an increase in the number of
instances in which subordinates emphatically refused to accompany their
units into line and in which officers neglected to enforce obedience to
orders, and insisting that the evil be remedied even though the men had
to be shot.




                             42d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │59.      │97.      │59.      │97.      │65.      │17.
              │         │138.     │         │138.     │         │131.
              │65.      │17.      │65.      │17.      │         │138.
              │         │131.     │         │131.     │         │
              │         │         │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │7 Uhlan Rgt.       │1 Sqn. 7 Uhlan Rgt.│1 Sqn. 7 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │42 Brig.:          │42 Brig.:          │42 Brig.:
              │8 F. A. Rgt.       │8 F. A. Rgt.       │ 8 F. A. Rgt.
              │15 F. A. Rgt.      │15 F. A. Rgt.      │ 15 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│3 Field Co. (1     │3 and 5 Field Cos. │3 and 5 Field Cos.
   Liaisons.  │  Pion. Btn. No.   │  (1 Pion. Btn. No.│  (1 Pion. Btn. No.
              │  27).             │  27).             │  27).
              │                   │42 Pont. Engs.     │42 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │42 Tel. Detch.     │42 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │42 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │65.      │17.      │65.      │17.
              │         │131.     │         │131.
              │         │138.     │         │138.
              │ Gd. Res. Jag. Btn.│         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.│1 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │42 Art. Command:   │42 Art. Command:
              │ 15 F. A. Rgt.     │ 15 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 2 Abt. 15 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (4, 11, and
              │                   │  12 Btries.).
              │                   │ 804 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1044 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 11045 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(1/27 or 136 Pion. │27 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.):           │
              │                   │
              │ 3 Field Co. 27    │ 3 Co. 27 Pions.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 5 Field Co. 27    │ 5 Co. 27 Pions.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 42 T. M. Co.      │ 42 T. M. Co.
              │ 229 Searchlight   │ 14 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 345 Searchlight   │42 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ Tel. Detch.       │ 42 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 147 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │263 Ambulance Co.  │263 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │269 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │368 Field Hospital.
              │                   │162 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │575 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (21st Corps District—Lorraine.)


                                 1914.


LORRAINE.

1. Upon mobilization, the 42d Division and the 31st Division formed the
21st Army Corps.

It was a part of the 6th Army (Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria), and fought,
at the beginning of August, 1914, across the Lorraine frontier, in the
vicinity of Château Salins, Dieuze, Rechicourt (Aug. 5–12). Engaged on
the 20th northeast of Dieuze, the 42d Division reached Lunéville on the
22d and attacked Rehainviller and Gerbeviller on the 24th. These days
had been very costly. On August 26 the 121st Infantry Regiment was
reduced to 31 officers and 1,562 men. (Official Document.)

2. At the beginning of September it was sent to reenforce the 2d
Bavarian Corps. On September 3 it was in the vicinity of Moyen-Domptail.
It retired to Dieuze (Sept. 11–13) and entrained at Boulay on the 18th,
for Cambrai.


SOMME.

3. On September 24 it was on the Somme. It fought at Gruny, Maucourt, in
the vicinity of Chaulnes-Pressoire (end of September to beginning of
October). It took up its position on the Chaulnes front, along the road
from Amiens to St. Quentin (November-December).


                                 1915.

1. The 42d Division occupied the lines north of Chaulnes until the end
of January, 1915. On December 26, the losses of the 131st Infantry
Regiment since the beginning of the campaign amounted to 87 officers and
3,233 men. (Official List of Casualties.)

2. About January 25 the 42d Division was relieved and entrained for the
Eastern Front with the 31st Division (21st Army Corps).

3. Concentrated in East Prussia at the beginning of February, it formed
a part of the Hindenburg Army which was to force the Russians across the
frontier.

4. From the vicinity of Augustowo (Feb. 14) it advanced rapidly to the
east; it reached Sopockin on the 20th, and took up its position with the
21st Army Corps on the line Sopockin-Chtabine (north of Grodno). On
March 9 the violent Russian counterattacks caused it heavy losses.


MARIAMPOL.

5. At the beginning of March the 42d Division bore to the north; it was
at Kalwarjia on March 26; occupied the vicinity of Mariampol on April 2.
It fought in this sector from March 29 to April 24 and remained there
until August. (On Apr. 13 the losses of the first two battalions of the
131st Infantry Regiment since the 6th of February had been 1,672 men,
according to the Official Casualty List. The 7th Company had only 65 men
left on Apr. 7.)


VILNA.

6. Renewing its forward march, the division reached Vilna on August 30;
continuing toward the east, it reached Herviaty-Vorniany on September
20, then went toward Lake Narotch, vicinity of Postavy, where the front
became stable.

In the autumn the 97th Infantry Regiment was transferred to the 108th
Division, a new formation.


                                 1916.


LAKE NAROTCH.

1. The 42d Division held its positions at Lake Narotch until April,
1917.

2. At the end of March, 1916, it sustained the Russian attacks and
suffered great losses.


                                 1917.


GALICIA.

1. On April 24, 1917, the 42d Division was relieved from the sector of
Lake Narotch and entrained at Vilna for the Western Front. The activity
along the Galician front caused its itinerary to be modified, and from
Warsaw it was sent to Lemberg. In reserve first, it went into action on
July 20 in the German counteroffensive of Brzezany, which took it to the
region south of Tarnopol (Grjimalov, July 31).


RIGA.

2. Withdrawn from the Galician front at the beginning of August, it
entrained at Lemberg on the 24th, and was transferred to Neugut (between
Mitau and Jakobstadt) on August 27. It took part in the advance to Riga;
one of its regiments crossed the Dvina, in the vicinity of Uxkull, on
September 1.


OESEL ISLAND.

3. At the end of September it was sent to Libau, where important forces
were being concentrated for the occupation of the islands in the Baltic.
On October 12 the 131st Infantry Regiment landed on the Oesel Island,
which it occupied until November 1. The 138th Infantry Regiment remained
at Moon until October 25. At the beginning of November the 42d Division
was transferred to the vicinity of Kovel. At the end of November it took
over a calm sector in the vicinity of Kachovka.


FRANCE.

4. Entraining at Kovel on December 23, it arrived in France on December
28. (Itinerary: Warsaw-Thorn-Posen-Leipzig-Dortmund-Cologne-Herbestal-
Brussels. It detrained at Ascq on the 28th.)

5. After a stay in the vicinity of Lille, it relieved the 4th Division
east of Armentières on January 23, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

As the regional system of recruiting could not furnish dependable
elements, the 42d Division is principally recruited from Westphalia and
the Rhine Province. The Alsace-Lorrainers were fairly numerous, however,
during the stay of the division on the Russian front.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 42d Division occupied the Eastern Front from February, 1915, until
the end of December, 1917.

In the offensive operations in which the 42d Division took part in 1917
the successes appear to have been fairly easy. The greater part of the
time it has not had to sustain any serious action and its losses have
been comparatively slight.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The division held the Armentieres sector until it was relieved about
March 22 by the 32d Division. On April 9 it reenforced the battle front
near Merris. It was engaged in heavy fighting, and between April 9 and
16 the losses of the division amounted to 50 per cent of the strength.
On April 17 it was relieved by the 12th Division.

2. The division came in on the quiet Lens sector on April 25–26,
relieving the 220th Division. It held the sector until June 25, when it
was relieved by the 36th Reserve Division and moved to the region
southwest of Soissons, where on June 30 it relieved the 14th Division.
It suffered from the French attack of July 18, losing 1,400 prisoners.
It was withdrawn about July 22.

3. The division rested nearly a month undergoing reconstitution by
elements from the dissolved 211th Division. The 390th Regiment was
completely merged with the 42d Division. From Laon the division moved to
Rethel.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. From its entry into the Champagne line on August 22 in relief of the
28th Division until October 1 it was engaged in resisting the French
offensive operations in Champagne, during which period it lost about
2,000 prisoners. The division was withdrawn on October 1. After two
weeks in the second line the division returned to line about October 14
near Olizy. It continued in line until the armistice. After November 3
the division was opposite the left flank of the American front.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was used as an attack division
in the Lys offensive, but thereafter was employed solely on the
defensive. The division had a good composition with a large percentage
of men of the younger classes.




                         43d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │85 Res.  │201 Res. │85 Res.  │201 Res. │85 Res.  │201 Res.
              │         │202 Res. │         │202 Res. │         │202 Res.
              │86 Res.  │203 Res. │86 Res.  │203 Res. │86 Res.  │203 Res.
              │         │204 Res. │         │204 Res. │         │204 Res.
              │ 15 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 15 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 15 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │43 Res. Cav. Detch.│43 Res. Cav. Detch.│43 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │43 Res. F. A. Rgt. │43 Res. F. A. Rgt. │43 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│43 Res. Pion. Co.  │43 Res. Pion. Co.  │43 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │43 Res. Pont. Engs.│243 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │43 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │43 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │     1918[19]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │85 Res.  │201 Res. │85 Res.  │201 Res.
              │         │202 Res. │         │202 Res.
              │         │203 Res. │         │203 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │43 Res. Cav. Detch.│43 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │2 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.│
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │(?) Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 43 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 43 Res. F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│343 Pion. Btn.:    │343 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 43 Res. Pion. Co. │ 4 Co. 2 Pion. Btn.
              │                   │  No. 17.
              │ 4 Field Co. 17    │ 1 Res. Co. 23
              │  Pion. Btn.       │  Pions.
              │ 243 T. M. Co.     │ 43 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 443 Tel. Detch.   │ 243 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 443 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │525 Ambulance Co.  │525 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │72 Res. Field      │72 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │73 Res. Field      │237 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │730 T. M. Col.     │730 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 19:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, September, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (From all of the Prussian territory, by selection, in the same manner as
                               the guard.)


                                 1914.

1. The 43d Reserve Division (first series of reserve divisions engaged
in October, 1914) formed at this time, with the 44th Reserve Division,
the 22d Reserve Corps. It was formed from the regimental recruit depots
of the guard, and has preserved from that time a selective system of
recruiting from the whole of the Prussian territory.

2. Going into training at the camp of Doeberitz at the beginning of
September, the 43d Reserve Division entrained on October 13 for Belgium,
and on the 19th it began fighting in the vicinity of Dixmude, Merckem,
Bixschoote, etc. It was in action there until the end of November.


YSER.

3. After the battle of the Yser the elements of the division occupied
different parts of the front between Ypres and Nieuport.


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. At the beginning of January, 1915, the 86th Reserve Brigade was in
line at Westende.

2. About the end of February the 43d Reserve Division was reconcentrated
and then sent to rest in the vicinity of Menin-Roulers until April 25.


ARTOIS.

3. In May elements of the division were holding the sector Bixschoote-
Boesinghe (North of the Ypres salient). Another part of the division was
sent as a reenforcement north of Arras (Souchez) to oppose the French
offensive. The 202d Reserve Infantry Regiment lost 76 officers and 1,320
men at Notre Dame de Lorette (Official List of Casualties).


RUSSIA.

4. About the beginning of July the 86th Reserve Brigade was transferred
to Russia and took part in the offensive of Mackensen in Poland. Between
May 15 and September 29 the 204th Reserve Infantry Regiment listed as
casualties 63 officers and 3,511 men. (Official List of Casualties.)


CHAMPAGNE-SERBIA.

5. The 85th Reserve Brigade, sent to Lorraine (Xivray), then to Woevre
(July to September), took part in the battle of Champagne (end of
September), and then rejoined the rest of the division in Serbia, where
the 43d Reserve Division took part in the campaign in October.


                                 1916.


FRANCE.

1. The division left Serbia to return to France at the end of January
and beginning of February, 1916.


VERDUN.

2. After a rest in the vicinity of Valenciennes (February-March) it was
sent to the Verdun front at the end of March, and went into action west
of the Meuse on April 10 (attacks of Bethincourt and the Mort Homme),
where it suffered heavy losses between April 10 and May 25. The 12th
Company of the 201st Reserve Infantry Regiment received not less than
185 men as replacements during the month of May. (Document.)

3. Toward the end of May the 43d Reserve Division was withdrawn from the
front and sent to rest in the Thionville area. At Verdun it had lost 50
per cent of its infantry.


RUSSIA.

4. At the middle of June it entrained at Novion Porcien and was again
sent to Russia. Itinerary: Charleville-Trèves-Cassel-Leipzig-Dresden-
Breslau-Cracow-Lemberg-Stojanow (southwest of Sokal.) The 204th Reserve
Infantry Regiment detrained on June 19.

5. On the Russian front the division was engaged west of Loutsk in the
German counteroffensive in June. (Its losses may be estimated from the
fact that the 12th Company of the 201st Reserve Infantry Regiment
received replacements of 152 men in July and August, the 3d Company at
least 145 men from July 9 to 29.)


FRANCE.

6. On November 15 the division was brought back to the Western Front.
(Itinerary Oderberg-Leipzig-Frankfort-Mayence-Thionville-Sedan-
Thourout.) Reduced to three regiments by the assignment of the 204th
Reserve Infantry Regiment to the 218th Division, a new formation, it was
at rest for almost a month in the vicinity of Rethel.


VERDUN.

7. In consequence of the French attack of December 15 north of Verdun,
the division was concentrated in the vicinity of Azannes. On December 17
it relieved the remnants of the 10th Division in the Chambrettes sector.


                                 1917.

1. The 43d Reserve Division remained at Verdun until January 31, 1917,
without being engaged in any important action. However, it suffered
rather heavy losses there.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. After a rest in Alsace, the division was sent to Champagne, where, on
February 22, it reenforced the front between Loivre and east of the
Cavaliers du Courcy. The French attack of April 16 caused it serious
losses.


ARGONNE.

3. Relieved at the end of April, and reorganized, it went back into line
in the calm sector of Vauquois about May 9; the 12th Company of the
201st Reserve Infantry Regiment was filled up by the arrival of 100 men
(1918 class; men from the 613th and 614th dissolved Infantry Regiments).

4. At the end of May the division was withdrawn from the Argonne. It was
rested and reorganized first in the Ardennes, then in the vicinity of
Laon.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

5. From July 18 to 20, it went into the sector Panthéon-Épine du
Chevregny (south of Pargny-Filain) and almost at once underwent the
artillery preparation and the French attack of July 30 which caused it
heavy losses, increased by the counterattacks which it attempted on July
31 and August 10. On July 30 the 12th Company of the 202d Reserve
Infantry Regiment had only 5 noncommissioned officers and 56 men left
(document). On August 10 the 201st Reserve Infantry Regiment was almost
completely destroyed and left 124 men as prisoners south of La Royère.

6. The 43d Reserve Division was relieved from the Chemin des Dames on
August 23 and sent to rest until the end of September in the vicinity of
Laon. It was filled up and reorganized.


LA MALMAISON.

7. Receiving training at the beginning of October in view of an
offensive which was to anticipate the expected French attack, the
elements of the 43d Reserve Division were engaged, beginning with
October 15, to reenforce weakened divisions at Vaudesson, La Malmaison,
and Bruyeres. They underwent the attack of October 23, which caused them
heavy losses (53 officers, 2,190 men, prisoners). The remnants of the
division were relieved on the Ailette on October 28.


RUSSIA.

8. The division was sent to Russia soon afterwards, where it detrained
on November 11, in the vicinity of Baranovitchi, after five days’
travel. It then relieved the 201st Division, scheduled to go to France.


                              RECRUITING.

The 43d Reserve Division was recruited, as was the guard in which it had
its origin, from the whole of the Prussian territory. The trained men
(returned, wounded, and sick), who figure in the reenforcements which it
received, had the same origin (Guard, 1st Reserve Guard Division, 261st
and 262d Reserve Guard Ersatz Divisions, Guard Landsturm Battalions,
etc.). In April, 1917, the division absorbed a part of the 613th and
614th Regiments formed from the Guard recruit depots and dissolved on
March 31.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 43d Reserve Division has always been considered a very good
organization (December, 1917).

On August 10, 1917, south of La Royère, the 201st Ersatz Regiment
attacked “with very great energy.”

In October, 1917, at La Malmaison, the 43d Reserve Division was brought
up for reenforcement as an attacking division.

Because of its recent losses (in the attack of Oct. 3) the 43d Reserve
Division needs to be completely reorganized before going into action
(December, 1917).

It is to be noted that all the recruits of the division come from the
Guard recruit depots. (After the losses suffered on Apr. 16, 1917, the
division received 3,000 men from the depots of Brandenburg.)

The human material at the disposition of the division is of high
quality.


                                 1918.

1. The division left Russia on February 9 and arrived at the Camp Alten-
Grabon near Magdeburg about the middle of February. After resting there
about five weeks the division entrained on March 18 and traveled via
Bielefeld-Gladbach-Aachen-Visé—Hasselt-Louvain-Brussels-Denderleeuw-
Audenarde-Courtrai-Tourcoing to Lille, where the regiment detrained on
the 22d, billeting at Loos. On the night of April 1–2 the 202d Reserve
Infantry Regiment marched via Emmerin and Wattignies to Herrin,
continuing on the night of April 2–3 via Chemy-Camphin-Ostricourt to
Malmaison and thence to Herrin-Lietard. On April 4 the regiment
proceeded to Noyelles-Godault, on the 5th back to Malmaison, and thence
on the 7th to Billy Berclau.


LA BASSEE CANAL.

2. The division was engaged at Festubert on April 9. The objective of
the division was to break through the enemy’s positions, force the
passage of the Lawe and the La Bassee Canals, and capture the heights of
Hinges and the town of Bethum. It was held up by British resistance at
Festubert and did not penetrate farther. On April 29 it was relieved by
the 9th Reserve Division.


SOMME.

3. After its relief, the division rested in the area south of Lille
until June 24, when it relieved the 24th Reserve Division at
Bouzencourt. Until August 8, it held the sector on the Somme. In the
fighting in August, the division lost 600 prisoners. On August 20 it
returned to line at Bray and was engaged until the end of the month. The
total number of prisoners lost by the division in these two engagements
was 1,100.

4. Early in September the division was broken up. The 203d Reserve
Regiment was turned into the Guard Ersatz Division, the 202d Reserve
Regiment to the 2d Guard Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its complete failure on the La
Bassee attack in April and its subsequently long retention in line on
the Somme prepared the way for its dissolution about the first of
September.




                         44th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │87 Res.  │205 Res. │87 Res.  │205 Res. │87 Res.  │205 Res.
              │         │206 Res. │         │206 Res. │         │206 Res.
              │88 Res.  │207 Res. │88 Res.  │207 Res. │88 Res.  │207 Res.
              │         │208 Res. │         │208 Res. │         │208 Res.
              │ 16 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 16 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 16 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │44 Res. Cav. Detch.│44 Res. Cav. Detch.│44 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │44 Res. F. A. Rgt. │44 Res. F. A. Rgt. │44 Reg. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.)      │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│44 Pion. Co.       │44 Res. Pont. Co.  │44 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │44 Res. Pion. Engs.│5 Field Co. 29
              │                   │                   │  Pion. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │244 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │44 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │44 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │87 Res.  │205 Res. │87 Res.  │205 Res.
              │         │206 Res. │         │206 Res.
              │         │208 Res. │         │208 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │44 Res. Cav. Detch.│4 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │44 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │ 44 Res. F. A. Rgt.│2 Abt. 21 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (4 and 6
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │706 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │828 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1322 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│344 Pion. Btn.:    │344 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 44 Res. Pion. Co. │ 5 Co. 29 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 5 Field Co. 29    │ 44 Res. Pion. Co.
              │  Pion. Btn.       │
              │ 244 T. M. Co.     │ 244 T. M. Co.
              │ 306 Searchlight   │ 21 Searchlight
              │  Sect.            │  Section.
              │ 444 Tel. Detch.   │ 250 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │444 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 444 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 86 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │526 Ambulance Co.  │526 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │73 Res. Field      │71 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │238 Vet. Hospital. │75 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │238 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │731 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (3d Corps District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1914.


YSER.

1. The 44th Reserve Division, formed between August and October, 1914,
like the other division of the 22d Reserve Corps (43d Reserve Division),
was trained at Jueterbog Camp and entrained on October 12. Detraining at
Termonde, it was in action at Dixmude and at Bixschoote in October and
November and lost very heavily. On November 9 the 3d Battalion of the
205th Reserve Infantry Regiment was reduced to 153 men. (Notebook.)

2. After the battle of the Yser, it occupied several sectors north of
Ypres.


                                 1915.


NIEUPORT.

1. The 44th Reserve Division remained on the Flanders front until the
month of June, 1915.

2. On June 7 the division was relieved from the Lombartzyde-Nieuport
sector and transferred to the Eastern Front.


RUSSIA.

3. Arriving in Russia in the middle of June, it took part in the
Mackensen offensive—battles of pursuit on the Galician frontier (June
22-July 16); battle of Krasnostaw (July 19–28) and of Biskupice (July,
29–30); battles up to the Bug (July 31 to Aug. 19); taking of Brest-
Litovsk on August 26.


SERBIA.

4. In October it was sent to Serbia and went through the entire
campaign.

5. At the end of December, it was sent to rest in Hungary.


                                 1916.


FRANCE.

1. At the end of January, 1916, the 44th Reserve Division entrained for
France. (Itinerary: Inddis-Budapest-Vienna-Rosenheim-Cologne-Charleroi.)
It detrained at Landrecies-Valenciennes on February 6. It did some work
on the Somme front (the 306th Reserve Infantry Regiment near Peronne;
the 208th Reserve Infantry Regiment remained at Mesle until Mar. 14) and
then entrained at Landrecies on March 24.


VERDUN (MORT-HOMME).

2. Concentrated in the vicinity of Buzancy, at the end of March, the
division went to the left bank of the Meuse. On April 11 the 86th
Reserve Brigade went into line in the Mort-Homme sector. The 44th
Reserve Division was in action beginning with April 25, and suffered
very heavy losses (April-May).

3. On June 5 the 44th Reserve Division was withdrawn from the front,
reorganized, and sent to rest in the vicinity of Sedan (replacements
from the 3d and 5th Corps Districts).


SOMME.

4. Transferred to the Somme (July 2 and 3), the division sent some of
its elements into action on the Estrees-Belloy front on July 4. It
underwent the French attacks between these two villages (July 6–10) and
launched a violent counterattack on the 7th and 8th. These engagements
caused it severe losses (9 officers and 522 men as prisoners).


LASSIGNY.

5. Relieved on July 10, it spent a few days at rest, and on July 20
entered the line in the sector of Lassigny-Beuvraignes.

Between June 1 and July 15 the 205th Reserve Infantry Regiment, after it
had received men from the Beverloo depot, had received at least 145 men
for its 5th Company, 167 for its 8th; on July 14 the 1st Company of the
206th Infantry Regiment received at least 128 men; some (1917 class) had
only been in the service since May 5.


SOMME.

6. Sent to rest in the middle of September, the 44th Reserve Division
again went into action on the Somme (Berny en Santerre-Genermont),
between October 9 and October 28, and again lost very heavily.

7. It then came back into the Lassigny sector, where it was reorganized
(reinforcements of 300 to 400 men per regiment). It transferred the
207th Reserve Infantry Regiment to the 228th Division, a new
organization.


                                 1917.


LASSIGNY (RETREAT).

1. In March, 1917, the 44th Reserve Division took part in the German
retreat and left the lines at Lassigny to take up its position between
La Fère and Moy (Mar. 25).


LA MALMAISON (WOËVRE).

2. Sent into the reserve of the army at the end of March in the vicinity
of Marle St. Gobert, the division was concentrated on April 15 in the
vicinity of Monampteuil-Filain (Apr. 20). On the 21st, on both banks of
the Oise-Aisne Canal, it relieved the remnants of the division decimated
by the French offensive of April 16 and at La Malmaison received the new
attack of May 5. Very much exhausted (1,670 prisoners), it was replaced
at once (night of May 5–6) and transferred to the Woëvre first and then
to the Côtes de Meuse northeast of St. Mihiel, where the division took
over the sector of Chevaliers after being reorganized. It was withdrawn
October 25.


FLANDERS.

3. On November 10 it went into line in Flanders, north of Passchendaele.


ARTOIS.

Relieved at the end of the month, it was sent to the sector of Neuve
Chapelle. It was still there March 19, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 44th Reserve Division was mixed at the time of its formation (one
regiment from Hanover), but has since become purely Brandenburg by its
reduction to three regiments. However, this does not prevent the
occasional introduction of extraneous elements—for example, in July,
1916 (urgent call for available reserve at Beverloo). The 1917 class
then made its appearance on July 12, 1916 (in the 208th Reserve Infantry
Regiment); the 1918 class on April 13, 1917 (in the 205th Reserve
Infantry Regiment).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 44th Reserve Division has been designated an assault division.

The 44th Reserve Division has not shown any great military value in the
course of the battles which it went into north of the Aisne. Certain
elements, however, fought well. One must note that the combat effectives
of the division were very much reduced by the artillery preparation
before the attack of May 5, 1917.

After the battle of the Aisne, the division made up for its losses with
elements from the field recruit depots and two replacements, one coming
from Warsaw (1917 class), and the other from the 5th Corps District
(mostly returned wounded).


                                 1918.


LA BASSEE CANAL.

1. About April 1st, the division was retired to the second line, from
which it returned on the night of April 12–13 to attack near Locon on
the 13th. It held a sector in that region until its relief by the 220th
Division on May 6–7.

2. The division rested at Courrieres for three weeks. On May 26 it
relieved the 39th Division west of Vieux Berqum. Here it remained until
July 4, when it was relieved by the 207th Division.


SOMME.

3. The division moved to the area northwest of Tournai early in July.
There it rested and received drafts until its return to line northeast
of Martinpuich on August 26. The division fell back on Flers (27th),
Beaulencourt (1st), Villers au Flos (2d), Ruyaulcourt (3d), southwest of
Havrincourt (7th). It was withdrawn from line on September 10 after
losing 700 prisoners.

4. It was out of line for four weeks and unconfirmed reports indicated
its presence at Metz. However, it again appeared in line on the Cambrai-
St. Quentin front on October 10, north of Montay. It fought around Le
Cateau until the end of the month when it was withdrawn from line north
of Robersart. About the fourth of November the division was back in line
at Locquignol and in the closing days of the war it fell back to
Maubeuge.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as first class. It was not used in any of the
major offensives of 1918.




                        44th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1916             │            1917
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │Rosenberg.    │93 Ldw.       │44 Ldw.       │81 Ldw.
              │              │382 Ldw.      │              │93 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │382 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │Art. Command:
              │                             │ 270 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │(444) Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │ 411 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │ 544 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │274 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │360 Field Hospital.
              │                             │Vet. Hospital.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1918             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │44 Ldw.       │81 Ldw.       │     (?)      │81 Ldw.
              │              │93 Ldw.       │              │93 Ldw.
              │              │382 Ldw.      │              │382 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.          │3 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │134 Art. Command:            │134 Art. Command:
              │ 4, 5, 6, and 8 Abtl. 254    │ 61 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Ldw. F. A. Rgt.            │
              │ 828 and 837 F. A. Btries.   │ 822 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1268 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1321 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(444) Pion. Btn.:            │444 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Landst. Co. 7 C. Dist.    │ 4 Landst. Co. 7 C. Dist.
              │  Pions.                     │  Pions.
              │ 4 Landst. Co. 7 C. Dist.    │ 244 Searchlight Section.
              │  Pions.                     │
              │ 411 T. M. Co.               │544 Signal Command:
              │ 544 Tel. Detch.             │ 544 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 63 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │274 Ambulance Co.            │274 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │268 Field Hospital.          │360 Field Hospital.
              │360 Field Hospital.          │
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (81st Landwehr Regiment: 18th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Hesse and
 Hesse—Nassau. 93d Landwehr Regiment: 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony.
         382d Landwehr Regiment: 7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1916.


LORRAINE.

1. The 44th Landwehr Division was formed in April, 1917, by the grouping
of the 44th Landwehr Brigade (93d and 382d Landwehr Regiments) and the
81st Landwehr Regiment. The latter regiment had been successively
attached to the 39th Reserve Division (area of St. Dié until the spring
of 1916), to the Bavarian Ersatz Division (near Verdun until the end of
1916) and finally to the 54th Division (Flirey).

2. The 44th Landwehr Brigade, called the Rosenberg Brigade until July,
1916, united in December, 1915, on the left bank of the Moselle, the 1st
Landwehr Ersatz Regiment, afterwards the 382d Landwehr Regiment
(formerly attached to the Norroy Brigade) and the 93d Landwehr, former
Von Gundlach Regiment of the Graudenz Corps, formed from two of the six
surplus Landwehr battalions of the 4th Corps District and of the 38th
Landwehr Brigade Ersatz Battalion (Hanover), identified Jeandelize in
June, 1915. It was attached to the 8th Ersatz Division at the beginning
of 1916.

3. The 44th Landwehr Brigade held the Moselle front on the left bank of
the river until it was transformed into the 44th Landwehr Division.


                                 1917.


BOIS LE PRÊTRE.

1. The formation of the 44th Landwehr Division in April, 1917, had no
effect upon the position of the elements which entered into its
composition. They continued to hold the left bank of the Moselle (Bois
le Prêtre) until October, 1917.

2. In this sector the 44th Landwehr Division gave signs of its presence
only by a few unimportant raids.


UPPER ALSACE.

3. On October 13, 1917, the 44th Landwehr Division was relieved from
Bois le Prêtre, entrained on the 16th at Arnaville, Pagny, Bayonville,
and was transferred to Alsace, detraining at Sierentz and Bartenheim.
During the night of the 18th–19th it went into line on both banks of the
Rhône-Rhine Canal.

On November 7 the division suffered some losses at Schoenholz.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Composed for the most part of elderly men accustomed to holding calm
sectors, the 44th Landwehr Division is the antithesis of an attack
division. However, it knows how to organize and maintain a position and
there is reason to believe that it would do well on the defensive.

Each of its regiments possesses an assault troop.


                                 1918.

1. The division held the Altkirch sector throughout 1918 until the
armistice. The sector remained absolutely quiet.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                         45th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │89 Res.  │209 Res. │89 Res.  │209 Res. │89 Res.  │209 Res.
              │         │212 Res. │         │212 Res. │         │212 Res.
              │90 Res.  │210 Res. │90 Res.  │210 Res. │90 Res.  │210 Res.
              │         │211 Res. │         │211 Res. │         │211 Res.
              │ 17 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 17 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 17 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │45 Res. Cav. Detch.│45 Res. Cav. Detch.│45 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │45 Res. F. A. Regt.│45 Res. F. A. Rgt. │45 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│45 Pion. Co.       │45 Res. Pion. Co.  │45 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │45 Res. Pont. Engs.│90 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │245 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │45 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │45 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │90 Res.  │210 Res. │90 Res.  │210 Res.
              │         │211 Res. │         │211 Res.
              │         │212 Res. │         │212 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │45 Res. Cav. Detch.│45 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │45 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │ 45 Res. F. A. Rgt.│1 Abt. 20 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (1, 2, and 4
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │773 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │839 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1210 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│II/21 or 345 Pion. │345 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │  Btn.:            │
              │ 6 Co. 21 Pions.   │ 6 Co. 21 Pions.
              │ 45 Res. Pion. Co. │ 45 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 245 T. M. Co.     │ 245 T. M. Co.
              │ 294 Searchlight   │ — Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 23 Res.           │445 Signal Command:
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Section.         │
              │ 445 Tel. Detch.   │ 445 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 141 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │527 Ambulance Co.  │527 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │75 Res. Field      │76 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │76 Res. Field      │77 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │77 Res. Field      │445 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │732 M. T. Col.     │732 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (2d Corps District—Pomerania.)


                                 1914.

1. The 45th Reserve Division (forming the 23d Reserve Corps with the
46th Reserve Division) belongs to the series of divisions formed between
August and October, 1914. It received its training at the Jueterbog
Camp, entrained on October 12, and detrained at Alost in Belgium.


YSER.

2. On October 21, 1914, the 45th Reserve Division was engaged in the
battle of the Yser in the vicinity of Noordschoote-Steenstraat, and
suffered serious losses in the course of the battles, which were
prolonged until November (from Oct. 15 to Nov. 11 52 officers and 1,669
men in the 212th Reserve Infantry Regiment, according to the Official
List of Casualties).

3. In December elements of the division were in line in the vicinity of
Bixschoote.


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. The division remained in Belgium and in the vicinity of Armentières
during the entire year of 1915 and the first half of 1916.

2. On April 22, 1915, it attacked in the Steenstraat sector and occupied
the village of Lizerne, which counter attacks obliged it to abandon.


                                 1916.


FLANDERS.

1. The 45th Reserve Division continued to occupy the zone north of Ypres
(Steenstraat-Boesinghe) until March 3, 1916. The 209th and 212th Reserve
Infantry Regiments were temporarily detached (from the end of January to
the beginning of March) and assigned to the 26th Division in the
Becelaere sector.


MESSINES.

2. On March 12 the division took over the sector of Messines, south of
Ypres. Until the month of September it did not take part in any
important action.


SOMME.

3. At the beginning of September it was withdrawn from Flanders, sent to
the Somme, and engaged in the sector of Thiepval-Martinpuich (Sept. 9 to
24). On September 15 it withstood the British attack between Courcelette
and Thiepval, where it lost very heavily.


OISE.

4. After a short rest in the vicinity of Bapaume the division was sent
to the Noyon area. It transferred the 209th Reserve Infantry Regiment to
the 207th Division, a new formation. At the beginning of October it went
into line on the left bank of the Oise at Tracy le Val. In the interval,
in order to fill up its regiments, it had to borrow from the Landsturm
battalions of the 2d Corps District (men of the Landsturm 2d Btn.,
trained and untrained from the classes 1892 to 1894).


                                 1917.

1. January 22, 1917, the 45th Reserve Division left the sector of Tracy
le Val for the Sissonne Camp, and received training there for three
weeks. Its regiments had been practically re-formed. Between September
24, 1916, and February 21, 1917, the 210th Reserve Infantry Regiment had
received 79 noncommissioned officers and 1,522 men.

2. On February 12 it went into the sector Osly-Courtil-Chevillecourt,
west of Soissons. In March it retired in the direction of Coucy le
Château; it was put in reserve (Mar. 20 to Apr. 10) in the area north of
Laon.


AISNE-CHEMIN DES DAMES.

3. On April 10, in anticipation of the French attack, the elements of
the division were concentrated near Filain. On the 7th the 210th Reserve
Infantry Regiment was in action south of the Ailette Canal (east of
Vauxaillon). The other regiments were sent west of the Oise-Aisne Canal
toward Braye en Laonnois. All the units underwent the attack of April
16, and were relieved between April 20 and 22, having suffered very
heavy losses.

4. Concentrated and reorganized north of Laon (Crecy sur Serre), the
division again went into action near the Oise-Aisne Canal (Froidmont
Farm-Malval Farm, on May 3). Its losses were again very severe during
the new French attack of May 5. It was withdrawn from the front on the
6th.


VERDUN.

5. Transferred to the vicinity of Conflans and reorganized, the division
went into line on the Côtes de Meuse (Calonne les Éparges) on May 27.

6. After three months in the sector on the Côtes, the 45th Reserve
Division entrained at Conflans (Sept. 26) for Flanders.


FLANDERS.

7. On September 22 it went into position in the Zonnebeke sector as a
counterattacking division. Elements of the division were engaged on
October 1 (Polygon wood), on the 4th (Zonnebeke), and from the 9th to
the 12th as reinforcements on the Passchendaele front. After the British
attack of October 12 the division, very much exhausted by these battles,
was relieved.


VERDUN.

Transferred to the rear of the Côtes de Meuse, sent into line on the
heights northeast of St. Mihiel in November; it was sent to the vicinity
of Bohain in December.


                              RECRUITING.

Mixed at the time of its formation (1 Hanseatic Regiment), the 45th
Reserve Division was recruited almost entirely from Pomerania, in theory
at least, after its reduction to three regiments. Like the other units
recruited from this province (4th Division), at the end of 1915 and
several times since then, it has received a relatively large proportion
of elderly men (1892 to 1894 classes, trained and untrained).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 45th Reserve Division fought well on the Somme. It put up a vigorous
defense on the Aisne in the course of its two engagements of April 16
and May 6, 1917.

The Pomeranians, who formed the greater part of its effectives, have a
military reputation to sustain. However, according to the statements of
prisoners, when the 212th Reserve Infantry Regiment came from the Verdun
front to Flanders it refused to attack on September 30, 1917. (British
Summary of Information, Oct. 4.)


                                 1918.


ST. QUENTIN.

1. Toward the end of January the division relieved the 36th Division
near Faye (north of St. Quentin), the latter division side slipping
toward the south. It remained here and took part in the initial attack
of the Somme offensive; it was withdrawn about the 24th of March. It was
not entirely withdrawn on that date, however, for besides still having
some elements in line, the rest of the division was in close support as
a “follow up” division. In this fighting it lost heavily.


MONTDIDIER.

2. A few days later it went to rest in the Montdidier area. Early in
April it entered line near Assainvillers (east of Montdidier), where it
was identified on the 6th, and was relieved by the 206th Division on the
18th, going to rest and refit in the region of Vouziers.


AISNE.

3. On the 1st of June the division was in reserve northeast of Fère en
Tardenois, and on the 3d it reinforced the front near Chaudun (southwest
of Soissons); it was relieved by the 23d Division and went to rest near
Oulchy le Château (west of Fère en Tardenois).


MARNE.

4. The allied counteroffensive having started on July 18, the division
was hurried into line near Montron (east of La Ferté Milon) to meet it.
Here it was heavily engaged and suffered severe losses. It was relieved
by the 26th Division on July 27.

5. It did not have an opportunity to rest, however, for it relieved the
201st Division north of Fère en Tardenois two days later. It was
relieved on August 3, and went to rest in the Maubeuge region. It was
identified here on the 23d, but a few days afterwards, the Germans
fearing an American attack in Alsace, it was dispatched to the vicinity
of Muelheim, where it arrived prior to September 3.


CHAMPAGNE-ARGONNE.

6. The division entrained on the 24th for Flanders, but was ordered to
detrain when it reached St. Morel (south of Vouziers) on the 26th and
remained there until midnight. Then the 212th Reserve Regiment entered
line in the Aire valley near Baulny, while the remainder of the division
moved farther to the west and entered line to the north of Fontaine en
Dormois (northeast of Suippes). On October 8 these elements came to the
east and the division was in line as a whole northwest of Châtel
Chéhéry. It was withdrawn on the 25th and went to rest in Lorraine in
the vicinity of Conflans (southwest of Briey).

7. On the 4th of November it came back into line near Woël (northeast of
St. Mihiel); it was still here on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 45th Reserve has been considered a second-class division. Heavily
engaged on the Somme (three times), on the Aisne, against the Allied
counteroffensive, and in the battle of the Meuse-Argonne, it has done a
great deal of heavy fighting during 1918, without, however, ever
particularly distinguishing itself. It suffered exceedingly heavy
losses. Early in September, the 212th Regiment received as a draft the
397th Regiment of the disbanded 222d Division. About the 16th of October
it received a very large draft of replacements among which were a
considerable number of elements of decidedly Bolshevistic tendencies.
Men deserted to the rear, to the enemy, and quite a few were punished
for insubordination to officers, and some for refusing to fight. The
morale of the whole division was very low.




                        45th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │45 Ldw.      │107 Ldw.     │45 Ldw.      │107 Ldw.
              │             │133 Ldw.     │             │133 Ldw.
              │             │350 Ldw.     │             │350 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │            (?)            │4 Sqn. Gd. (Saxon) Cav.
              │                           │  Rgt.
              │                           │23 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │498 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 408 F. A. Rgt.            │1027 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1043 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(445) Pion. Btn.:          │183 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 4 Res. Co. 22 Pions.      │4 Landst. Co. 9 C. Dist.
              │                           │  Pions.
              │ 345 T. M. Co.             │221 Searchlight Section.
              │ 545 Tel. Detch.           │545 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 545 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.              │639 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │355 Field Hospital.        │355 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │45 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │562 M. T. Col.             │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1917.

1. The 45th Landwehr Division was formed on the Eastern Front in April,
1917. The 107th Landwehr Regiment was taken from the 35th Reserve
Division; the 133d Landwehr Regiment from the 92d Division; and the
350th Landwehr from the 91st Division, after having been a part of the
88th Division.


VOLHYNIA.

2. Until February, 1917, the 45th Landwehr Division occupied a sector in
Volhynia, near the Kovel-Rovno railroad.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 45th Landwehr Division has been on the Eastern Front since its
formation. It appears to have only a mediocre offensive value.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. In February, 1918, the division advanced toward Kiev. A man of the
133 Landwehr Regiment wrote from the Wolczek Camp (southeast of Kovel)
on the 15th of March: “Our regiment continues its march forward. It is
said to have suffered heavy losses. We are fighting against the
Bolsheviks; the Ukrainians are on our side.” Divisional headquarters
were at Poltava in April.

2. In May the three regiments of the division were in the vicinity of
Kharkov. The division was again identified here on October 13.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                         46th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │91 Res.  │213 Res. │91 Res.  │213 Res. │91 Res.  │213 Res.
              │         │214 Res. │         │214 Res. │         │214 Res.
              │92 Res.  │215 Res. │92 Res.  │215 Res. │92 Res.  │215 Res.
              │         │216 Res. │         │216 Res. │         │216 Res.
              │ 18 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 18 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 18 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │46 Res. Cav. Detch.│46 Res. Cav. Detch.│46 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │46 Res. F. A. Rgt. │46 Res. F. A. Rgt. │46 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│46 Res. Pion. Co.  │46 Res. Pion. Co.  │46 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │46 Res. Pont. Engs.│1 Res. Co. 25
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │                   │246 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │46 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │46 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │60 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │3 Balloon Sqn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │     1918[20]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │92 Res.  │214 Res. │92 Res.  │214 Res.
              │         │215 Res. │         │215 Res.
              │         │216 Res. │         │216 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │46 Res. Cav. Detch.│46 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │(?) Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 46 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 46 Res. F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(346) Pion. Btn.:  │46 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 46 Res. Pion. Co. │1 Ldw. Co. 3 Bav.
              │                   │  C. Dist. Pions.
              │ 246 T. M. Co. (23 │23 Res. Searchlight
              │  Res. Searchlight │  Section.
              │  Section).        │
              │ 446 Tel. Detch.   │246 T. M. Co.
              │                   │446 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │528 Ambulance Co.  │528 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │335 Field Hospital.│335 Field Hospital.
              │78 Res. Field      │Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │733 M. T. Col.     │733 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │214 Res. Rgt. T. M.│
              │  Co. (Doc.).      │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 20:

  Composition at the time of its dissolution, August, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (9th Corps District—Hanseatic Cities and Grand Duchies of Mecklenburg.)


                                 1914.


YSER.

1. The 46th Reserve Division (belonging to the 23d Reserve Corps with
the 45th Division), formed between August and October, 1914, was trained
at the Lockstedt Camp, and entrained for Belgium on October 12. It went
into action in the battle of the Yser between Dixmude and Bixschoote on
October 21, 1914.


FLANDERS.

2. After these battles, which lasted until about November 15, and in the
course of which it suffered heavy losses, the division remained in
Flanders and occupied the area of Bixschoote. On November 21 only 1
officer remained in the 3d Battalion of the 214th Reserve Infantry
Regiment (letter); the 11th Company, which started with 253 men, had
only 90 left.


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. Between April 22 and April 27, 1915, the 46th Reserve Division, which
was still holding the front north of Ypres, took part in the battles
launched around Lizerne, Het-Sas, Steenstraat.

2. During the rest of the year 1915 and until March, 1916, the 46th
Reserve Division (as well as the 45th Reserve Division) held the lines
between Dixmude and Ypres, without any important action, with periods of
rest in the vicinity of Bruges and Thourout.


                                 1916.


ST. ELOI-WYTSCHAETE.

1. Relieved north of Ypres at the end of February, 1916, the 46th
Reserve Division was transferred to Werwicq, from which place on March
14 it went to the sector of St. Eloi, near Messines.

2. The division lost very heavily in this sector, at the beginning of
April. After a short period of rest it took over the same line from May
to September.


SOMME.

3. At the beginning of September it left the area south of Ypres to go
to the Somme. It went into action on September 8 between Vermandovillers
and the Chaulnes railroad and suffered rather heavy losses, especially
during the French attack of September 17; the 2d Battalion of the 214th
Reserve Infantry Regiment was almost completely destroyed (letter).

4. Sent behind the front for a short time, about October 8, in the
vicinity of Ham, it came back into line on October 17–20 minus the 213th
Reserve Infantry Regiment, which was transferred to the 207th Division,
a new organization. It supported the attacks of the 21st, between
Ablaincourt and Chaulnes wood, where certain of its units lost very
heavily. After launching a counterattack on the 22d the division was
relieved on October 24–25.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. In November and December the reorganized division took over the
sector east of Rheims.


                                 1917.

1. In January, 1917, the 46th Reserve Division was at rest in Lorraine.
On January 28 it entrained at Lorquin and was transferred to the Oise,
by way of Sarreburg, Thionville, Luxemburg, Namur, Maubeuge, St.
Quentin, Tergnier, Chauny.


MOULIN SOUS TOUVENT.

2. On January 30 it went into the sector of Moulin sous Touvent-
Autreches, which it left about March 18 to retire to Barisis, Folembray,
and the lower Coucy wood.


FORÊT DE ST. GOBAIN.

3. Established in the St. Gobain sector in April and May, it was
relieved on May 20 and sent to rest in the area of Marle and Vervins. It
was reorganized there (the 216th Reserve Infantry Regiment received 500
men from the depot of the 76th Reserve Infantry Regiment at Hamburg).


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

4. On June 13 the division went into line on the Chemin des Dames, took
part in the German attack of June 22 at the Épine de Chevregny-Royère
Farm, and in the attack of July 8 on the front Panthéon-Froidmont. In
these two actions it had heavy losses. It made up for these in part by
men taken from the 94th Division in Russia.

5. Withdrawn from the Laon front on July 24, the division was sent to
rest and to be reorganized in the area of Montmédy.

6. On August 12 it was transferred to Spincourt and placed in reserve on
the right bank of the Meuse during the French attack of August 20.


VERDUN.

7. Engaged on August 22 at the Fosse wood-Chaume wood, it lost heavily
by the attack of August 26 and by its counterattack upon Beaumont.

8. Relieved at once, it was reorganized and sent to rest in the vicinity
of Sedan-Longuyon from August 26 to the end of September.


MEUSE.

9. The 46th Reserve Division reappeared from October 3 to November 10 in
the sector of Fosse wood-Chaume wood, where some elements launched an
attack on November 9 and suffered heavy losses.

10. The division was at rest in the vicinity of Longwy from November 10
to December 15.


LORRAINE.

11. About December 17 it took over the sector west of Nomeny (Cheminot-
Eply) in Lorraine. It was still there at the beginning of April, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Composed at the beginning of equal contingents from the 9th and 10th
Corps Districts (Schleswig-Holstein, Hanseatic cities, and Mecklenburg;
Hanover, Brunswick, Oldenburg), the division, since its reduction to
three regiments, is filled up from the Hanseatic cities and the Grand
Duchies of Mecklenburg. It has ceased, therefore, to be Prussian, a
thing which has a certain practical interest in its designation in
communiques, etc., and has not been able to develop any regional
sentiment or cohesion. It is to be noted that the reinforcements of 1917
have been rather mixed (Poles, men from the 2d, 3d, and 5th Corps
Districts), partly because of their being taken from the Russian front,
and, during its recent stay in Lorraine, from the neighboring depot of
the 99th Infantry Regiment.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 46th Reserve Division may be considered a good division.

The attack of July 8, 1917, was carried out energetically. The assault
troops attacked with “extraordinary fury.”

The division fought bravely at Verdun in August, 1917.

Weakened by battles and by an epidemic of dysentery (October-November),
it was sent to Lorraine for rest and reorganization.

The division received intensive training and it would seem that in spite
of new, untrained recruits it will quickly regain its value.


                                 1918.


NOYON.

1. The division was relieved about April 25 in Lorraine and transferred
to the Montdidier area, where it was at rest until June 10. On that day
it reenforced the Montdidier-Noyon battle front northeast of Gournay. In
the course of the attacks the division suffered considerable losses.
About July 2 it was relieved. It rested in rear of the Noyon front.


SOISSONS.

2. On July 20 the division reenforced the battle front near Buzancy,
south of Soissons. It lasted but one week and was then withdrawn.

3. The effectives of the division was very low, due to the failure to
receive drafts. Early in August the division was disbanded. The 214th
Reserve Regiment was transferred to the 4th Division, the 216th Reserve
Regiment to the 18th Reserve Division, and the 215th Reserve Regiment
was turned into the 4th Ersatz Division. The divisional commander, Maj.
Gen. Wasielewski, was retired.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. Although it was not heavily
engaged in 1918, its effective strength was allowed to dwindle to a very
low level and dissolution followed.




                        46th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │         1918[21]
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │46 Ldw.      │101 Ldw.     │             │101 Ldw.
              │             │103 Ldw.     │             │(?)
              │             │105 Ldw.     │             │105 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 17 Uhlan Rgt.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │246 F. A. Rgt. (Rgt.
              │                           │  Staff).
              │ 246 F. A. Rgt.            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(446) Pion. Btn.:          │546 Signal Command:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 346 T. M. Co.             │ 346 Tel. Detch. (Except
              │                           │  1st Zug.)
              │ 546 Tel. Detch.           │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │638 Ambulance Co.          │638 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │315 Field Hospital.        │46 Vet. Hospital.
              │46 Vet. Hospital.          │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                 │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────

Footnote 21:

  The elements below are those grouped under the Division Postal Sector
  (728). Other units of the 46th Landwehr Division, operating in other
  divisional sectors, are carried as attached to such divisions.


                                HISTORY.

                     (12th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1917.

The 46th Landwehr Division, composed of the 101st and 103d Landwehr
Regiments (taken from the 14th Landwehr Division) and of the 33d
Landsturm Battalion (taken from the 3d Reserve Division), was formed on
the Eastern Front about May, 1917.


SMORGONI.

1. It occupied the sector of Smorgoni-Lake Narotch until the beginning
of 1918.

2. About the month of September, 1917, it received a new regiment, the
105th Landwehr, formed in 1917, at the time of the withdrawal of the
Saxon battalions from the Prussian regiments of which they had been a
part (345th and 374th Infantry Regiments). In December a great number of
the young men were taken from the division to reenforce the 40th
Division (Saxon) before its departure for France.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The use made of the 46th Landwehr Division allows us to form an
appreciation of its value; it held a calm sector on the Russian front in
1917; occupied the Ukraine in 1918.


                                 1918.


VOLHYNIA.

1. In January the division was on the Volhynian front, next to the 10th
Landwehr Division.


UKRAINE.

2. In February it moved into the Ukraine, leaving behind elements whose
duty it was to gather the matériel which had been abandoned in the
Russian positions.

3. About the middle of March the division held the sector north of
Mohilev. The 103d Landwehr Regiment was along the Berezina in April. The
101st Landwehr Regiment was reported in the vicinity of Minsk early in
May. The whole division was identified in the Minsk region the end of
the month, and also toward the end of September.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                         47th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │93 Res.  │217 Res. │93 Res.  │217 Res. │93 Res.  │217 Res.
              │         │218 Res. │         │218 Res. │         │218 Res.
              │94 Res.  │219 Res. │94 Res.  │219 Res. │94 Res.  │219 Res.
              │         │220 Res. │         │220 Res. │         │220 Res.
              │         │         │         │         │         │13
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Landst.
              │         │         │         │         │         │  (Wurtt.).
              │ 19 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 19 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 19 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │47 Res. Cav. Detch.│47 Res. Cav. Detch.│47 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │47 Res. F. A. Rgt. │47 Res. F. A. Rgt. │47 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│47 Res. Pion. Co.  │47 Res. Pion. Co.  │47 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │47 Res. Pont. Engs.│91 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │247 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │47 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │47 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │839 F. A. Btry.
              │                   │                   │84 Anti-Aircraft
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │80 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │     1918[22]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │94 Res.  │217 Res. │94 Res.  │218 Res.
              │         │219 Res. │         │219 Res.
              │         │220 Res. │         │220 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Sqn. 4 Horse Jag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │47 Art. Command:   │47 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 47 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 47 Res. F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(347) Pion. Btn.:  │47 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 47 Res. Pion. Co. │91 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 91 Res. Pion. Co. │42 Res. Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 247 T. M. Co.     │247 T. M. Co.
              │ 335 Searchlight   │447 Tel. Detch.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 42 Res.           │147 Wireless Detch.
              │  Searchlight      │
              │  Section.         │
              │ 447 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │529 Ambulance Co.  │529 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │78 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │199 Vet. Hospital. │81 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │82 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │199 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.         │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 22:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, July, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

                    (7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1914.


WOEVRE.

1. The 47th Reserve Division, formed between August and October, 1914,
and composing the 24th Reserve Corps with the 48th Reserve Division, was
concentrated in the vicinity of Metz about October 20, sent to the
Woevre, south of Etain, on the 26th, went into action at Magnaville on
the 31st, and at Maucourt on November 6 to 11.


RUSSIA.

2. On November 23 the 47th Reserve Division entrained for the Eastern
Front.


DUNAJEC.

3. Detraining in the vicinity of Cracow at the beginning of December, it
went into action on the Dunajec (Neu-Sandec) west of Tarnow on the 8th,
where it suffered serious check on December 20.


                                 1915.

1. On January 10, 1915, the 47th Reserve Division was identified on the
Dunajec-Gorlice front.


GALICIA.

2. From the end of January to the month of April it occupied the front
west of Tarnow, near the Tarnow-Cracow railroad.


POLAND.

3. It took part in the spring and summer offensive of 1915. On July 2 it
was on the right bank of the Vistula, in the vicinity of Janow. From
July 20 to August 9 it took part in the advance from the Wysnica to the
Wieprz, reached the Bug on October 19, the Jaselda on September 8, and
fought along this last river until the 12th. On the 13th it was at
Slonim.

4. At the end of September it went to the vicinity of Baranovitchi. On
October 19 it held the lines near Lipsk.


                                 1916.


RUSSIA.

1. The 47th Reserve Division remained in the sector of Lipsk-
Baranovitchi during the entire year of 1916 and until May, 1917, when it
entrained for France. On July 23 the 217th Reserve Infantry Regiment was
withdrawn from the division to aid in the formation of the 225th
Division.


                                 1917.


FRANCE.

1. At the beginning of May, 1917, the 47th Reserve Division was
transferred to the Western Front. (Itinerary of the 219th Reserve
Infantry Regiment: Entrained on May 3 at Baranovitchi, Warsaw, Lodz,
Lissa, Glogau, Leipzig, Erfurt, Frankfort, Metz; detrained at
Bouillonville, near Thiaucourt, on May 7.)


AISNE.

2. After a stay in the Woevre, at Bois le Prêtre, until the beginning of
June, and a short rest near Marle, the 47th Reserve Division went into
line north of Braye en Laonnois (west of the Épine de Chevregny) on June
20. It took part in the attacks launched in this sector and suffered
heavy losses from June 22 to July 8. Some of its elements were engaged
in the French attack of October 23, after which they retired to the
village of Chevregny.

3. The 47th Reserve Division was relieved at the end of October.


FORÊT DE ST. GOBAIN.

4. After a rest in the villages of the Serre valley, it took over the
sector of Septvaux in the Forêt de St. Gobain about November 20.


                              RECRUITING.

Mixed at the time of its formation, the division has become entirely
Westphalian since its reduction to three regiments. The levies from the
Russian front in the course of 1917, however, introduced outside
elements (men from the 1st, 2d, and 3d Corps District in May, coming
from the 406th, 420th, and 421st Infantry Regiments). Thirteen prisoners
(220th Reserve Infantry Regiment) captured on October 1, 1917, north of
Braye en Laonnois, came from the following Provinces in Germany: 4 from
Westphalia, 2 from Hanover, 3 from East Prussia, 1 from the Rhine
Province, 1 from Oldenburg, 1 from Silesia, and 1 from Pomerania.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 47th Reserve Division is a mediocre division more fitted for defense
than attack, but still capable of effort after rest and reorganization.
It had won some reputation in the offensive at Poland and Courland.

Its effectives include a large proportion of Poles.

In the sector of Chevregny, Froidmont (June-July), it gave a good
account of itself, although sanitary conditions were very defective
(Dec. 1, 1917).


                                 1918.

1. About the beginning of February the division was relieved by the 3d
Bavarian Division and went to train near Vervins.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was engaged in the Somme offensive on March 21 near Tergnier and
participated in the attack until the 25th. It was reengaged on April 1
southwest of Lassigny and held that sector until May 2, when it was
relieved by the extension of the 206th Division.

3. The division entrained at Ham on May 6 and moved to St. Quentin area.
From May 27 onward it followed up the advance behind the 113th Division,
and finally relieved that division on June 1 near Vierzy. It was
relieved on June 20.


MARNE.

4. This division, although greatly weakened, was returned to line
without having been reconstructed, in the vicinity of Longpont. At this
time the division had not more than 40 to 50 rifles to a company. It
again suffered heavy losses, and about July 27 was retired to rest.

5. The division was dissolved at Mainbresson on June 30. The 218th
Reserve Regiment was formed into one battalion, which became the 3d
Battalion of the 53d Reserve Infantry Regiment. The 219th Reserve
Regiment was drafted to the 159th Regiment.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. Its dissolution was occasioned
by its low effective strength following its losses and failure to
receive drafts.




                        47th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │47 Ldw.  │104 Ldw. │47 Ldw.  │104 Ldw. │47 Mixed │104 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │  Ldw.   │
              │         │106 Ldw. │         │106 Ldw. │         │106 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │Ldw. Sqn. 18 Uhlan
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │Sqn. 21 Uhlan Rgt.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │19 C. Dist. Landst.│19 C. Dist. Landst.│19 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │  F. A. Btry.      │  F. A. Btry.      │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │                   │
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │                   │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │47 Ldw.  │100 Ldw. │47 Ldw.  │100 Ldw.
              │         │  Gren.  │         │
              │         │104 Ldw. │         │104 Ldw.
              │         │106 Ldw. │         │106 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.│Staff, 20 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │2 Ldw. Sqn. 19 C.  │2 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.
              │  Dist. Cav.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:      │19 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (except 3d Abt).
              │ 19 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.│
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│447 Pion. Btn.:    │6 Co. 22 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 6 Co. 22 Pions.   │547 Signal Command:
              │ 1 Res. Co. 22     │ 547 Tel. Detch.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 347 T. M. Co.     │
              │ Tel. Detch.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │562 Ambulance Co.  │562 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │24 Ldw. Field      │24 Ldw. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │547 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │104 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │136 Labor Btn.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                 (12th and 19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.

The 47th Landwehr Division came from the 47th Landwehr Brigade (104th
and 106th Landwehr Regiments) which was independent at first under the
command of Lieut. Gen. Mueller, and was made a division in the autumn of
1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. Detraining at Bourcy (northeast of Bastogne) on August 18, 1914, the
47th Landwehr Brigade arrived on the Champagne front immediately after
the battle of the Marne.

2. On September 14, 1914, the brigade was in line in the vicinity of
Moronvilliers. It remained in Champagne until the beginning of 1917.


                                 1915.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. About the month of May, 1915, it left the sector Prosne Moronvilliers
for the north of Rheims, from Loivre to the Rheims-Witry road.

2. Reenforced by the 113th Infantry Regiment, later by the 29th Reserve
Infantry Regiment, it formed the Mueller Division in October.

3. At the end of September one battalion of the 104th Landwehr Regiment
was sent as a reenforcement into action south of Ste. Marie à Py to help
out the 133d Reserve Infantry Regiment during the French offensive.


                                 1916.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 47th Landwehr Brigade continued to occupy the Rheims sector
(Courcy-Betheny) during 1916.

2. In the month of July it was made a division (47th Landwehr Division)
and received a 3d Regiment, the 391st Infantry Regiment (Saxon).


                                 1917.


OISE LA FÈRE.

1. Withdrawn from the Rheims front about February 23, 1917, the 47th
Landwehr Division was sent into line west of La Fère during the
retirement of the German Army to the Hindenburg Line (Quessy-Travecy,
Mar. 23). It remained in the sector at La Fère until May 16.


RUSSIA.

2. In the middle of May the division was transferred to the Eastern
Front, where it occupied the sector Goroditche-Tsirin. It exchanged with
the 219th Division, the 391st Infantry Regiment for the 100th Landwehr
Grenadier Regiment.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 47th Landwehr Division is a mediocre division. Its retention on the
Russian front is a sufficient indication of its value.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. In February the 47th Landwehr Division left the Tsirin region and
took part in the advance into the Ukraine. On the 27th of April it was
between Gomel and Briansk; on the 5th of June, in the Kiev region. It
was identified in the same region several times subsequently, the last
date of identification being September 30.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                         48th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │95 Res.  │221 Res. │95 Res.  │221 Res. │95 Res.  │221 Res.
              │         │222 Res. │         │222 Res. │         │222 Res.
              │96 Res.  │223 Res. │96 Res.  │223 Res. │96 Res.  │223 Res.
              │         │224 Res. │         │224 Res. │         │224 Res.
              │ 20 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 20 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 20 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │48 Res. Cav. Detch.│48 Res. Cav. Detch.│48 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │48 Res. F. A. Rgt. │48 Res. F. A. Rgt. │48 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│48 Res. Pion. Co.  │48 Res. Pion. Co.  │48 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │48 Res. Pont. Engs.│274 Pion. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │(?) 2 Ldw. Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Co. 6 C. Dist.
              │                   │                   │248 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │48 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │48 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │96 Res.  │221 Res. │96 Res.  │221 Res.
              │         │222 Res. │         │222 Res.
              │         │223 Res. │         │223 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 1 Drag. Rgt.│5 Sqn. 1 Gd. Drag.
              │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │48 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │ 48 Res. F. A. Rgt.│1 Abt. 23 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (1 and 3
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │752 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │954 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │1382 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(348) Pion. Btn.:  │348 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 48 Res. Pion. Co. │ 1 Res. Co. 26
              │                   │  Pions.
              │ 1 Res. Co. 26     │ 48 Res. Pion. Co.
              │  Pion. Btn.       │
              │ 248 T. M. Co.     │ 248 T. M. Co.
              │ 448 Tel. Detch.   │ 214 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │448 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 448 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 69 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │530 Ambulance Co.  │530 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │79 Res. Field      │102 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │79 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │448 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │587 M. T. Col.     │735 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (18th Corps District—Hesse—Nassau and the Grand Duchy of Hesse.)


                                 1914.

The 48th Reserve Division (belonging to the 24th Reserve Corps with the
47th Reserve Division) was formed between August and October, 1914, and
trained at the Oberhofen Camp.


ARTOIS.

1. Concentrated near Metz in the middle of October, the 48th Reserve
Division was transferred on the 25th to the area between Armentières and
La Bassée (Fromelles), while the 47th Reserve Division was sent to the
Woevre.

2. On November 1 the division held the line at Neuve Chapelle. Some
elements were sent farther north, west of Wytschaete, in the middle of
November.


RUSSIA.

3. At the end of November the 48th Reserve Division left the Western
Front for Russia.


POLAND.

4. On December 3 it was identified in Poland in the vicinity of Kalisch.
It then made a part of the X Army and fought west of the Rawka, near
Warsaw, at the end of December.


                                 1915.

1. The 48th Reserve Division was engaged in Poland (Rawka) until January
28, 1915.


CARPATHIANS.

2. On February 2 elements of the division fought in the Carpathians,
southeast of Beskides. It was then assigned to the German Army of the
South (Von Linsingen) and was opposed to the Russians in the vicinity of
the Uzsok Ridge (February-May).


GALICIA.

3. Taking part in the spring and summer offensive of 1915, it marched to
Halicz in May; crossed the Dniester in the middle of June; advanced to
Brzezany-Tarnopol and was on the Zlota-Lipa at the end of July. One of
its regiments, the 224th Reserve Infantry Regiment, was renewed several
times; the list of losses from August to October show casualties of 70
officers and 4,712 men, 3,100 of whom were reported as missing. The
greater part of these were Alsace-Lorrainers who had succeeded in
deserting.

4. When the offensive was resumed in October and November the 48th
Reserve Division formed a part of the Bothmer Army and progressed from
the Zlota-Lipa as far as the Stripa.


                                 1916.

1. The 48th Reserve Division was retained at the Stripa, west of
Tarnapol, during the winter and spring of 1916; it was still in this
sector at the time of the Russian attack (Broussilow offensive, June to
September).


ROUMANIA.

2. In the beginning of October the division went into action with the
Falkenheim Army against Roumania, and fought in the vicinity of
Hermannstadt, then at Préoéal in November.


GALICIA.

3. It then left the Transylvanian front and went to eastern Galicia,
where it was a part of the Bothmer Army. It took up its position between
Brzezan, and the Dniester.


                                 1917.

1. At the beginning of 1917 the 224th Reserve Infantry Regiment left the
division and was transferred to the 215th Division, in process of
reorganization.


FRANCE.

2. The 48th Reserve Division was relieved from its sector in May, 1917,
and transferred to the Western Front (Itinerary: Lemberg-Jaroslav-
Cracow-Oppeln-Breslau-Leipzig-Erfurt-Gotha-Eisenach-Frankfort-Worms-
Sarrebruecken-Thionville-Montmedy-Dun sur Meuse). It rested in the
vicinity of Stenay from May 27 to June 28.


VERDUN.

3. It was first behind the Verdun front, on the left bank of the Meuse.
Toward the end of June it sustained the artillery preparation for the
French offensive of July 17, and sent some of its elements in as
reenforcements (Hill 304-Morthomme) on the day of the attack.

4. Sent to rest and reorganized in the Stenay area at the end of July.
By an important draft of men of the 1918 class, it went back into the
same sector (Hill 304-Corbeaux wood) on August 20, at the time of the
new French attack, and lost heavily reenforcing and relieving units of
the 6th Reserve Division.

5. Withdrawn from the front on August 24, it was employed on various
works until September 3 and then sent into the area of Damvillers.

6. On September 12 it went into line north of Hill 344, which it left at
the end of the month to go to rest in the vicinity of Morhange.


LORRAINE-ALSACE.

7. After holding the lines in Lorraine (middle of October to the middle
of November) northeast of Arracourt, the 48th Reserve Division was sent
to Alsace and went to rest for two months in the vicinity of Enisheim.


                              RECRUITING.

Mixed upon formation (1 Thuringian Regiment), the division became, in
theory, a Hessian Division. The Alsace-Lorrainers were very numerous
during its stay on the Russian front, whence the desertions en masse
from the 224th Infantry Regiment in the summer of 1915.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

At the end of June, 1917, the 48th Reserve Division, coming from the
Russian front, went into line at Hill 304, after a month’s rest near
Stenay. But as the men were not accustomed to the activity of the
western front and were unable to sustain artillery fire for a long time,
they could only be kept in this sector for a few days.

During the French attack of August 20 the 48th Reserve Division played
only a passive rôle.

The 48th Reserve Division must be classed among the mediocre divisions
(December, 1917).


                                 1918.

1. About March 1 the division was relieved by the 22d Reserve Division
and went into reserve in Alsace. It left that sector about April 1 and
came into line on the 14th southwest of Vieux Berquin. It was engaged in
that locality until its relief on the night of May 26–27 by the 32d
Division.


VIEUX BERQUIN.

2. The division rested in the Lille area until June 28, when it returned
to its former sector at Vieux Berquin. Its stay here was short. On July
3 it was relieved by the 39th Division and entrained at Laventie the
next day for Douai.


SCARPE.

3. On the night of July 6–7 the division relieved the 187th Division
southwest of Gavrelle. Throughout August and September the division held
this sector. It was relieved north of the Scarpe on the night of October
5–6 and moved south.

4. The division was used to reenforce the Cambrai-St. Quentin front near
Cambrai on October 7. Thereafter almost until the day of the armistice
the division was engaged in opposing the British advance. The direction
of its retreat was through Awoingt (10th), Saulzoir (13th), Montrecourt
(14th), north of Haussy (17th), Vendegies (24th), Maresches (Nov. 1),
Jenlain (4th). The division received drafts from the dissolved 118th
Reserve Regiment (25th Reserve Division) in late October. It was
withdrawn from line about November 5.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. In 1918 it was engaged entirely
in defensive sectors and performed with credit.




                        48th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │38       │1 Landst.│38       │1 Landst.│38
              │         │  Landst.│         │  Landst.│         │  Landst.
              │         │39       │         │40       │         │40
              │         │  Landst.│         │  Landst.│         │  Landst.
              │         │47       │         │47       │         │47
              │         │  Landst.│         │  Landst.│         │  Landst.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │3 Sqn. 14 Uhlan
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │1 Sqn. Gd. Res.
              │                   │                   │  Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │        (?)        │Art. Command:      │264 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 264 F. A. Rgt.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │1/28 Pion. Btn.:   │224 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 1 Landst. Co. 3 C.│ 1 Ldw. Co. Gd. C.
              │                   │  Dist. Pions.     │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │ 455 T. M. Co.     │ 1 Landst. Co. 3 C.
              │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │ 590 Tel. Detch.   │ 210 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │548 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 548 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 67 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │Ambulance Co.      │602 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │80 Res. Field      │51 Field Hospital.
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │80 Res. Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │                   │570 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │800 M. T. Col.     │800 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │2 Ratisbonne       │
              │                   │  Landst. Inf. Btn.│
              │                   │  (3 Bav. C. Dist. │
              │                   │  Btn. No. 14).    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (38th Landsturm: Brandenburg and Alsace. 40th Landsturm: Prussian
  Saxony, Westphalia and the Rhine Province. 47th Landsturm: Hesse and
                              Thuringia.)


                                 1917.


LORRAINE.

1. The 48th Landwehr Division appears to have been formed on the
Lorraine front in September, 1917, by the grouping of three new
regiments—the 38th Landsturm, the 39th Landsturm (Wurttemberg), and the
47th Landsturm—the elements of which had previously been employed behind
the front or in calm sectors.

2. In September, 1917, the 48th Landwehr Division occupied the sector of
Avricourt (Leintrey-Gondrexon, Embermenil).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 48th Landwehr Division is composed of troops of mediocre value.

The average age of the men is 40 years. A certain number of young
soldiers of the 1918 class are to be found in most of the units. Sent
into these Landsturm divisions because of their reduced physical
fitness, they left them for active or reserve units as soon as they
became hardened.

There is a divisional assault company which has never shown any
offensive activity (July, 1918).


                                 1918.

1. The division continued to hold the Delme sector until the armistice.
Nothing occurred to disturb the tranquility of that part of the front.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. The average age of its
effectives was near 40 years. At no time did the division take part in
any fighting.




                         49th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │97 Res.  │225 Res. │97 Res.  │225 Res. │97 Res.  │225 Res.
              │         │226 Res. │         │226 Res. │         │226 Res.
              │98 Res.  │227 Res. │98 Res.  │227 Res. │         │228 Res.
              │         │228 Res. │         │228 Res. │         │
              │ 21 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 21 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 21 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │49 Res. Cav. Detch.│49 Res. Cav. Detch.│49 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │49 Res. F. A. Rgt. │49 Res. F. A. Rgt. │49 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.)      │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│49 Res. Pion. Co.  │49 Res. Pion. Co.  │49 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaison.   │                   │                   │
              │                   │49 Res. Pont. Engs.│249 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │49 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │49 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │97 Res.  │225 Res. │97 Res.  │225 Res.
              │         │226 Res. │         │226 Res.
              │         │228 Res. │         │228 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │49 Res. Cav. Detch.│2 Sqn. (?) Drag.
              │  (?)              │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) 49 Art.        │49 Art. Command:
              │  Command:         │
              │ 49 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 49 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 1 Abt. 25 Ft. A.
              │                   │  Rgt. (1, 2, and 4
              │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 788 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 972 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1,318 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(349) Pion. Btn.:  │349 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaison.   │                   │
              │ 49 Res. Pion. Co. │ 43 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 4      │ 49 Res. Pion. Co.
              │  Pions.           │
              │ 249 T. M. Co.     │ 249 T. M. Co.
              │ 449 Tel. Detch.   │ 188 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │                   │449 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 449 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 110 Wireless
              │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │531 Ambulance Co.  │531 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │85 Res. Field      │83 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │155 Vet. Hospital. │85 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │155 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │49 Res. Cyclist Co.│
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

      (4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony and part of Thuringia.)


                                 1914.


EAST PRUSSIA.

1. The 49th Reserve Division, forming the 25th Reserve Corps with the
50th Reserve Division, was formed between August and October, 1914,
trained at the Warthe Camp, and sent to East Prussia on October 14,
1914, as a part of the 8th Army (Von Hindenburg).


POLAND.

2. It took part in the offensive in Poland between the Vistula and the
Warta at the end of October, escaped from the enveloping movement
attempted by the Russians before Lodz (Nov. 25), and fought on the front
of the Bzura, Rawka, Bolimow, where it was repulsed in December.


                                 1915.


POLAND.

1. At the beginning of January, 1915, the 49th Reserve Division was
again engaged on the Bzura and remained in this area until the summer of
the same year. In June it transferred the 227th Reserve Infantry
Regiment to the 107th Division, a new formation.

2. Advancing in August with the Hindenburg offensive, it entered Warsaw
on August 7, took part in the pursuit of the Russians in the sector of
Skierniewicz, and stopped near Baranovitchi (Tsirin).


                                 1916.

1. The 49th Reserve Division was still occupying the sector north of
Baranovitchi when the Russian offensive broke out in this region in
July, 1916. At this time elements of the division were sent to reenforce
the 35th Austrian Division between Baranovitchi and the north of Pripet.
This latter division was relieved a short time afterwards by the 49th
Reserve Division.


GALICIA.

2. Sent into Galicia, the division held the lines southwest of Brody at
the beginning of October. At this time the 225th Reserve Infantry
Regiment was sent to Roumania.


CARPATHIANS.

3. Made up only of the 226th and 228th Reserve Infantry Regiments, the
49th Reserve Division opposed the Russians on the Narajowka, then, at
the beginning of December and until January, 1917, fought in the
Carpathians in the vicinity of Worochta.


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA.

1. In January, 1917, the 49th Reserve Division rejoined the 225th
Reserve Infantry Regiment (Roumania) in the valley of Uz.

2. In the middle of January it was transferred to the Western Front.
(Itinerary: Szekely-Udvarhely-Goborin-Budapest-Oderberg-Oppeln-Breslau-
Goerlitz-Dresden-Leipzig-Halle-Liege-Mons-St. Ghislain, detraining on
Jan. 22.)


FRANCE.

3. After a rest of two months in the vicinity of Mons, then in the
vicinity of Lille, the 49th Reserve Division went into line east of
Armentières, south of Frelinghien on March 20.


ARTOIS.

4. Relieved at the end of April, it was engaged almost at once in the
sector of Fontaine les Croisilles, Bullecourt (southeast of Arras),
where it suffered very heavily from May 1 to May 21. On June 16, after
reorganization, the ranks of the 228th Reserve Infantry Regiment
contained more than two-fifths new recruits; more than one-fifth of the
men belonged to the 1918 class.


FLANDERS.

5. Sent to rest and to be reorganized during the month of June in the
vicinity of Tournai-Audenarde, it went into line at the end of June in
the sector of Steenstraat-Bixschoote (north of Ypres), and suffered
heavy losses during the artillery preparation which preceded the Franco-
British attack of July 21. On July 28 it was withdrawn from the front
before the attack.


ARTOIS.

6. The 49th Reserve Division rested and was reorganized in the month of
August between Lille and Tournai, and in September took over its old
Artois sector (Croisilles-Bullecourt), from which place it was relieved
at the end of October.

7. After occupying the sector south of the Ypres-Menin road until
November 21, it went into action about November 26 in the same sector of
Croisilles-Bullecourt (Cambrai attack).

8. At the end of December, the 49th Reserve Division was resting in the
Tourcoing area.


                              RECRUITING.

Formed at the beginning by contingents from the 5th and 6th Corps
Districts (Posen and Silesia) the Division, beginning with the summer of
1915, received most of its reenforcements from the 4th Corps District.
At the present time it is entirely Saxo-Thuringian.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 49th Reserve Division is considered a good division.

It fought well in Artois in May 1917. North of Ypres it suffered heavily
by the Franco-British bombardment at the end of July, 1917. It is to be
noted that under artillery fire units in the first line scattered and
fled. The remnants of the advanced elements deserted (30 men).

On July 25, 1917, the 226th Reserve Infantry Regiment received
replacements of 500 to 700 men, principally of the 1918 class.


                                 1918.


MESSINES.

1. About April 6 the division temporarily withdrew to reserve. It
returned on the 11th and carried out a divisional attack on Messines. It
was engaged until about April 25.


YPRES.

2. Two days later the division relieved the 13th Reserve Division south
of Ypres, which in turn relieved it about May 2. It remained in rear of
the front while resting and was engaged east of Bixschoote on May 10.
Here the division remained until June 14, when the 29th Division
relieved it. The division rested in the Bruges area until July 10, when
it returned to its former sector northeast of Ypres. It held this sector
until about August 27, when the 11th Bavarian Division relieved it.

3. The division entrained at Hooglede August 27 and traveled to
Courtrai, where it halted one day. On August 28 it moved to Iwuy, from
where it marched to Lallaing (near Douai) two days later. On September 1
the division came into line near Fremicourt. It was engaged until about
September 16.


SCARPE-SOMME.

4. The division rested in the Cambrai area until September 27, where it
was identified in line west of Gaincourt. It again retired from the
front about October 1 and rested in the Eswars area. On the Scarpe-Somme
front in September the division lost 1,100 prisoners.

5. On the night of October 11–12 the division was again in line at
Courcelles les Lens. After holding this rather quiet sector for a week
the division moved north and on October 29 appeared on the Ypres front
at Anseghem in relief of the 7th Cavalry Division. It continued in line
until the armistice. The last identification was west of Audenarde on
November 2.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was used as a holding
division in important sectors on the British front during 1918.




                             50th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.


 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │100.          │39 Fus.       │100.          │39 Fus.
              │              │53.           │              │53.
              │              │158.          │              │158.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. mounted Jag. Rgt.     │1 Sqn. 16 Uhlan Rgt.
              │3 Sqn. mounted Jag. Rgt.     │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │50 Brig.:                    │50 Brig.:
              │ 99 F. A. Rgt. (6 Batteries).│ 99 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 100 F. A. Rgt. (6 Batteries,│ 100 F. A. Rgt.
              │  3 are Hows.).              │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│99 Pion. Co.                 │99 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │100 Pion. Co.                │100 Pion. Co.
              │                             │4 Co. 23 Pions.
              │                             │1 T. M. Co.
              │                             │50 T. M. Co.
              │                             │50 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │50 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │50 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │1 Ldw. 7 C. Dist. Pion Co.   │80 Antiaircraft Section.
              │                             │2 Res. Co. 2 Pion. Btn. No.
              │                             │  27.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │100.          │39 Fus.       │100.          │39 Fus.
              │              │53.           │              │53.
              │              │158.          │              │158.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 16 Uhlan Rgt.         │1 Sqn. 16 Uhlan Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │50 Art. Command:             │50 Art. Command:
              │ 99 F. A. Rgt. (9 Batteries).│ 99 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 95 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │
              │                             │ 1178 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1179 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1204 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│50 Pion Btn.:                │50 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 99 Pion. Co.                │ 99 Pion. Co.
              │ 100 Pion. Co.               │ 100 Pion. Co.
              │ 50 T. M. Co.                │ 50 T. M. Co.
              │ 99 Searchlight Section.     │50 Signal Command:
              │ 50 Tel. Detch.              │ 50 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 13 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │50 Ambulance Co.             │50 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │337 Field Hospital.          │337 Field Hospital.
              │338 Field Hospital.          │338 Field Hospital.
              │340 Field Hospital.          │132 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1915.

The 50th Division (one of the new divisions in the 50 to 58 series) was
formed in March, 1915, by taking three regiments from the three
divisions of the 7th Corps and 7th Reserve Corps (the 13th Division
giving the 158th Infantry, the 14th Division the 53d, and the 14th
Reserve Division the 39th Fusileer Division), all Westphalian Regiments.

1. At the end of March, 1915, the 158th and 53d Infantry Regiments were
identified at Hirson (Aisne), while the 39th Fusileer Regiment was still
between Perthes and Tahure. In April the division was concentrated and
was identified in Champagne, May 14 (area south of Somme-Py).


CHAMPAGNE.

2. From June to October it occupied the sector of Tahure (north of
Perthes and Mesnil les Hurlus). It there underwent the French offensive
of the end of September, which caused it very heavy losses—infantry, 130
officers and 7,849 men casualties; the 100th Company of Pioneers lost 5
officers and 135 men.

3. Sent to rest and reorganized in the vicinity of Vouziers and of
Juniville (end of October to the end of November), it reappeared on
November 7 north of Prosnes (east of Reims).


                                 1916.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. In April, 1916, the division left the sector of Prosnes-Prunay, for
the front northeast of Verdun (Ornes).


VERDUN-VAUX.

2. Going into action, at the beginning of May, north of Vaux, it took
part in the attacks launched upon the line Caillette wood-Damloup (June
1 to June 3), which ended in the capture of the fort of Vaux by the
158th Infantry Regiment on June 4.

3. Very much exhausted by these battles, the division was sent to rest
and reorganized in the vicinity of Étain in June and July.

4. In July elements of the division occupied the calm sectors of the
Woëvre.

5. At the end of July the 50th Division went back into line at Verdun,
south of the fort of Vaux. It launched an attack on August 1 (La
Laufée), underwent the French offensives of August 8 and October 24,
suffering heavy losses, and held this sector until November.


ARGONNE.

6. Sent to the Argonne, it took over the sector of Vauquois.


                                 1917.

1. Withdrawn from the Argonne on February 15, 1917, the division
remained at rest in the area of Saulces-Champenoise until the end of
March, then in the camp at Sissonne, then at Thenailles, near Vervins
(beginning of April).


AISNE.

2. Concentrated on April 8, it went into action on the 15th at
Juvincourt and there underwent the French attack of April 15. After
heavy losses it was relieved between April 29-April 27 and went for
reorganization to Nizy le Comte, near the Sissonne Camp.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

3. About May 10, the division went back into line east of Allment on the
Chemin des Dames.

4. It was sent to rest in July in the vicinity of Mons en Laonnois,
Coucy les Eppes, Parfondru.

5. At the beginning of August, it came back to the Chemin des Dames
(vicinity of Ailles), where, on October 15, the 9th Company of the 158th
Infantry Regiment was reduced to 50 men, including officers (letter).
Following the French offensive upon La Malmaison, the 50th Division
retired on November 1, to the north of the Ailette toward Neuville
(outside of Chamouille) and was still occupying this sector in December.


                              RECRUITING.

Upon its formation the division was composed of Westphalian troops. The
recruiting is still almost exclusively Westphalian.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Since the battle of Vaux in June, 1916, the division likes to consider
itself a shock division.

Its prolonged stay on the Ailette front (August to December) seems to
mean that it had to be put at rest for a fairly long time before being
engaged in an active sector.

It must be regarded as a good division, capable of putting up a vigorous
defense (December).


                                 1918.

1. The 50th Division was withdrawn from line near Ailles (west of
Craonne) on January 9, the neighboring divisions extending their fronts,
and moved by easy stages to the Chimay area, where it arrived on the
14th. It remained here for a month during which time it was thoroughly
trained in open warfare and brought up to strength. It then moved to the
La Capelle-Fontenelle area for rest and further training.


ST. QUENTIN.

2. The middle of March the division moved up to the front, and on the
21st attacked in the front line southwest of St. Quentin; it captured
Holnon during the day, Etreillers on the 22d, Hangest en Santerre on the
29th, and reached Moreuil on the 30th. It was withdrawn about April 1,
after having suffered severely heavy losses, and went to rest, refit,
and train in the Lassigny region.


AISNE.

3. On May 27, the division attacked near Craonne, reached Pontavert
toward noon and crossed the Aisne. The following day it crossed the
Vesle west of Breuil sur Vesle and continued to the south, where a
French counterattack was repelled. On the 30th it reached Goussancourt,
and then the Marne east of Dormans. After having suffered severe losses,
it was relieved by the 28th Reserve Division during the night of June
12–13, and went to rest in the Laon region.


RHEIMS.

4. On the 19th of July the division was thrown into line just southwest
of Rheims to meet the Allies’ tightening at the bases of the Chateau-
Thierry salient. It was withdrawn early in August.

5. About the 30th of September it came back into line northwest of
Rheims, near Prouilly and Cormicy. It remained here, and was driven
back—fighting stubbornly—passing near Brimont, Guignicourt, and Banogne,
where it was withdrawn on the 7th of November.


MEUSE.

6. After a day’s rest, the division was put back into line on the 8th
near Mezieres; it had not been withdrawn when the armistice was signed.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 50th is rated as a first-class division. It distinguished itself in
the fighting during 1918. After the Somme offensive, it was praised by
Prof. Wegener in the Koelnische Zeitung. Immediately after the battle of
the Aisne Maj. Fritsch, in command of the 158th Regiment, was awarded
Pour le Mérite. After the Allied counteroffensive, Lieut. Gen. V.
Engelhuhten, the division commander, was decorated and made governor of
Riga, and the commander of the 53d Regiment was also decorated. The 58th
Regiment was mentioned as having particularly distinguished itself in
the fighting near Banogne in the German communique of October 30. Losses
suffered throughout the year were enormous, but the High Command did all
in its power to make these good. There are no desertions of record since
July 1, 1917. The morale was very good, everything being taken into
consideration.




                         50th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │99 Res.  │229 Res. │99 Res.  │229 Res. │99 Res.  │229 Res.
              │         │230 Res. │         │230 Res. │         │230 Res.
              │100 Res. │231 Res. │100 Res. │231 Res. │         │231 Res.
              │         │232 Res. │         │232 Res. │         │
              │ 22 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 22 Res. Jag. Btn. │         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │50 Res. Cav. Detch.│50 Res. Cav. Detch.│50 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │50 Res. F. A. Rgt. │50 Res. F. A. Rgt. │50 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│50 Res. Pion. Co.  │50 Res. Pion. Co.  │50 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │50 Res. Pont. Engs.│250 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │50 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │50 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │99 Res.  │229 Res. │99 Res.  │229 Res.
              │         │230 Res. │         │230 Res.
              │         │231 Res. │         │231 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │50 Res. Cav. Detch.│50 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(z) Art. Command:  │68 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 50 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 50 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 81 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │  (Staff, 1, 2, and
              │                   │  3 Btries.).
              │                   │ 705 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 902 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 923 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(350) Pion. Btn.:  │350 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 50 Res. Pion. Co. │ 2 Res. Co. 19
              │                   │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 19     │ 50 Res. Pion. Co.
              │  Pion. Btn.       │
              │ 250 T. M. Co.     │ 250 T. M. Co.
              │ 325 Searchlight   │ 30 Searchlight
              │  Section.         │  Section.
              │ 450 Tel. Detch.   │450 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 450 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 60 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │532 Ambulance Co.  │532 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │Field Hospital.    │21 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.     │84 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │450 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │737 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

              (10th Corps District—Hanover and Brunswick.)


                                 1914.

1. The 50th Reserve Division (belonging to the 1st series of divisions
created between August and October, 1914), formed a part of the 25th
Reserve Corps with the 49th Reserve Division. It received its training,
at the time of its formation, in the Alten-Grabow Camp in the 4th Corps
District.


POLAND.

2. In the middle of October the 50th Reserve Division and the 49th
Reserve Division belonged to the 8th Army (Von Hindenburg) and took part
in the second German offensive in Poland (battles between the Vistula
and the Warta in October, Lodz in November, on the Bzura-Rawka front in
December).

Since November the 25th Reserve Corps has belonged to the 9th Army.


                                 1915.

1. Engaged in the operations along the Bzura (region of Bolimow) during
the winter and spring of 1915, the 50th Reserve Division took part in
the summer offensive of Von Hindenburg and pursued the Russians to the
vicinity of Baranovitchi. In June it transferred the 232d Reserve
Infantry Regiment to the 107th Division, a new formation.

2. In September the 25th Reserve Corps was dissolved—the 49th Reserve
Division remained in Russia, the 50th Reserved Division was transferred
to the Western Front. The division entrained at Kovno on October 7.
(Itinerary: Koenigsberg-Marienburg-Stettin-Hamburg-Bremen-Osnabrueck-
Muenster-Aix la Chapelle-Namur-Givet.) It detrained at Rethel October
13–14.


FRANCE-CHAMPAGNE.

3. On October 16 the 50th Reserve Division was sent to Champagne. It
cooperated in the gas attack of October 27 in the vicinity of Rheims and
remained in line until December 19.


ARTOIS.

4. Entraining at Witry les Rheims for Douai on December 21, it took over
the sector Roclincourt, east of Neuville-St. Vaast.


                                 1916.

1. Having lost heavily at Neuville-St. Vaast, the 50th Reserve Division
was withdrawn from this sector in March, 1916, and south of Armentières
(Grenier wood), from April to September. It rested in this calm sector.


SOMME.

2. About December 16 the division was relieved and went into action on
the Somme (Martinpuich-Flers), from September 20 to 28. It suffered very
heavily there.

3. From October 6 to November 11 it occupied the sector south of the
canal of La Bassée (northeast of Vermelles).

4. The division returned to the Somme, on both banks of the Ancre (near
Miraumont, Grandcourt), about November 20, and remained in this active
sector until December 22.

5. At the end of December it went to rest in the vicinity of
Valenciennes.


                                 1917.

1. In January, 1917, the elements of the 50th Reserve Division were in
reserve at Achiet le Petit.


SOMME.

2. At the end of January the 50th Reserve Division came back into line
north of the Ancre (Beaumont-Hamel); it lost heavily there (200
prisoners) on February 11.

3. Withdrawn from the Somme front at the beginning of March, it went
into line east of Transloy (south of Bapaume) on March 13. It withdrew
to the Hindenburg Line, near Metz en Couture (southwest of Cambrai), and
remained there from the end of March to April 18.


ARTOIS.

4. After a rest in the vicinity of Douai until the middle of May, the
division took over the sector of Oppy-Gavrelle, northeast of Arras,
where it did not take part in any important action (May 18 to June 10).


FLANDERS.

5. Transferred to the Ypres front about June 11, in anticipation of the
British attack, it was kept in reserve in the vicinity of Roulers until
July 24.

6. On July 31 the 50th Reserve Division went into action in St. Julien
and suffered heavy losses while fighting for the possession of the
village (Aug. 1–2).

7. Relieved on August 10 it was sent to rest in the vicinity of Mons and
went back into line on September 20, was engaged on the 26th in the
vicinity of Gheluvelt, and left the Ypres front on October 3, after
serious losses—the 1st Company of the 231st Reserve Infantry Regiment
was reduced to 15 men after September 21, the 6th Company to 28.
(British Summary of Information, Oct. 24.)


LILLE.

8. At the end of October it took over a sector in the vicinity of Lille
(Fromelles) (until the middle of December).


CAMBRAI.

9. It then occupied the lines before Cambrai south of Marcoing and
Masnières (Dec. 21-Jan. 31, 1918).


                              RECRUITING.

At the beginning the 50th Reserve Division was composed of drafts from
Silesia and Prussian Saxony, but after the end of 1915 it received most
of its replacements from the 10th Corps District. The 229th Reserve
Infantry Regiment is from Brunswick; the two others from Hanover. In
certain documents we find the division designated as “troops from lower
Saxony.”


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 50th Reserve Division took part in a great number of battles.

Its morale was shaken by the heavy losses which it suffered; it has
improved very much.

The division fought comparatively well at Ypres.


                                 1918.

1. The 50th Reserve Division was withdrawn from line south of Marcoing
on the 31st of January, the neighboring divisions extending their
fronts, and went to the area east of Cambrai, where it received training
in open warfare.


PICARDY.

2. On the 13th of March the division marched from Cagnoncles via
Carnières and Cattenières to Esnes, and on the 17th proceeded to Villers
Outreaux. On the 20th it came into line southwest of Cambrai and took
part in the attack of the 21st. The division suffered very heavy losses
and was relieved by the 9th Reserve Division on the 22d, going to rest
at Liéramont (northeast of Peronne).

3. On the 23d the division followed up the advance behind the 9th
Reserve Division via St. Pierre-Vaast wood (24th), Rancourt-Combles
(25th), Montauban (26th), Fricourt (27th), and on the following day went
into line southwest of Albert, carrying out an unsuccessful attack. In
another attack against the ridge west of Dernancourt on April 5 the
division was beaten back with heavy losses. It was relieved on the 9th
and went to rest at Maricourt.

4. During the night of April 17–18 it relieved the 18th Division near
Morlancourt (south of Albert). It was relieved by the 199th Division
early in May and went to rest and refit in the Solesmes area.

5. On the 24th of May it traveled by rail to Montauban (south of
Albert), marched via Maricourt to Carnoy the following day, and came
into line during the night of May 27th–28th south of Albert. It was
relieved by the 54th Reserve Division on June 28 and went to rest near
Cambrai.


SOISSONS.

6. On the 19th of July the division entrained at Le Cateau and traveled
via St. Quentin to Chauny, where it was loaded on trucks and sent to the
Forêt de Pinon. On the 28th it relieved the 20th Division near Buzancy
(south of Soissons). Here it was gradually forced to retire toward the
northeast, was finally withdrawn to the north of Braine about the 20th
of August, and went to the region between Laval and Laon.

7. The presence of elements of the 231st Reserve Regiment was reported
the 4th of September west of Vauxaillon, and on the 6th to the south of
Neuville sous Margival, the rest of the regiment being in the Urcel-
Laval region.

8. On September 14 the whole division went back into line east of
Soissons near the Mennejean Farm. This was surrounded by the French on
the 15th. The following day Sancy fell to them, too. The same day the
plateau to the east and northeast of the Mennejean Farm was captured. On
the 18th the division lost still more ground and prisoners; it was
withdrawn on the 21st and went to rest near St. Pierre a Arnes (south of
Machault).


RHEIMS.

9. On the 2d of October the division came back into line northeast of
Rheims, near Bétheny, and went through very heavy fighting. It was still
in line on November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

On October 11 the following was written: “The division did fairly well
in its recent encounters, the men, though lacking in enthusiasm, seeming
possessed by a dogged determination to do what they conceived to be
their duty. The morale, which was good, has been very much lowered by
recent losses.” That this statement is erroneous seems to be proved by
the fact that the German communiqués of October 22, November 1 and 2,
say that the division “had shown particular merit in the recent
fighting, retook their position in counterattack and repulsed hostile
attacks,” “bore the brunt of the fighting * * * without showing signs of
weariness,” and “again maintained their positions against heavy
attacks.” Therefore, although the division suffered heavy losses,
especially in the spring, it is still to be considered as second class.




                         51st Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │101 Res. │233 Res. │101 Res. │233 Res. │101 Res. │233 Res.
              │         │234 Res. │         │234 Res. │         │235 Res.
              │102 Res. │235 Res. │102 Res. │235 Res. │102 Res. │234 Res.
              │         │236 Res. │         │236 Res. │         │236 Res.
              │ 23 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 23 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 23 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │51 Res. Cav. Detch.│51 Res. Cav. Detch.│51 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │51 Res. F. A. Rgt. │51 Res. F. A. Rgt. │51 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │Mobile Ers. Detch. │
              │                   │  of 26 F. A. Rgt. │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│51 Res. Pion. Co.  │51 Res. Pion. Co.  │51 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │51 Res. Pont. Engs.│251 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │51 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │51 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │                   │Cylist Co.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │102 Res. │234 Res. │102 Res. │234 Res.
              │         │235 Res. │         │235 Res.
              │         │236 Res. │         │236 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │51 Res. Cav. Detch.│51 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │51 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │
              │ 51 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 1 Abt. 11 Res. Ft.
              │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 896 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 897 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1395 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(351) Pion. Btn.:  │351 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 7 Co. 28 Pions.   │ 7 Co. 28 Pions.
              │ 51 Res. Pion. Co. │ 51 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 251 T. M. Co.     │ 33 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 258 Searchlight   │451 Signal Command:
              │  Section.         │
              │ 451 Tel. Detch.   │ 451 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 85 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │263 Vet. Hospital. │533 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │533 Ambulance Co.  │87 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.
              │87 Res. Field      │88 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │90 Res. Field      │263 Vet. Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │738 M. T. Col.     │738 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │Cylist Co.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

        (11th Corps District—Electorate of Hesse and Thuringia.)


                                 1914.


FLANDERS.

1. The 51st Reserve Division (of the series of divisions created between
August and October, 1914), forming the 26th Reserve Corps with the 52d
Reserve Division, went into action northeast of Ypres in the middle of
October. It fought on the line Cortemarck-Moorslede on the 22d, reached
Langemarck on the 24th, and finally took up its position near
Poelcappelle.


                                 1915.


YPRES.

1. The division remained in the area northeast of Ypres (Poelcappelle,
Langemarck, St. Julien) during the entire year of 1915, and until
September, 1916. In September, 1916, it transferred the 233d Reserve
Infantry Regiment to the 195th Division, a new formation, in consequence
of the Russian advance in Galicia.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. On September 16, 1916, the 51st Reserve Division was relieved from
the sector of Wieltje (north of the Ypres-Zonnebeke road) and
transferred to the Somme. It went into action between Combles and Morval
about December 18 and suffered very heavy losses from the British attack
of the 26th.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. After occupying the Lille front (Neuve Chapelle) for a few days, the
division was sent to Champagne at the beginning of October.

It took over the sector of Tahure-Rouvroy (south of Ripont) in the
middle of October.


                                 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 51st Reserve Division remained on the Massiges front until the
middle of May, 1917, with a short rest at the end of February.

2. It was engaged in the attacks on Maisons de Champagne in March, and
suffered quite heavily.

3. In the middle of May it went into line near Nauroy and Moronvilliers
(Casque-Mont Haut), where it lost heavily.

4. Withdrawn from the front about June 8, it returned, after a short
rest in the vicinity of Marvaux, to the sector east of Tahure (June 22-
Aug. 10).


MEUSE.

5. Brought back to the right bank of the Meuse, after a rest in the
vicinity of Sedan-Montmédy, the division occupied the sector of
Samogneux-Hill 344, about August 22, and lost heavily (French attack of
Aug. 25, German attack of Sept. 9).


CHAMPAGNE.

6. It was relieved about September 12 and sent to rest behind the
Champagne front.


                              RECRUITING.

Mixed at the time of its formation, the division is actually recruited
in the 11th Corps District (Electorate of Hesse and Thuringia), and is
so designated in various documents. Beginning with March 13, 1917, it
has received young men of the 1918 class who have less than four months’
training (236th Reserve Infantry Regiment).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 51st Reserve Division was good at the beginning of the war, but now
appears mediocre.

Health conditions seem to be poor (August, 1917).


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 51st Reserve Division remained in the Vouziers being trained
until about the 20th of January, when it relieved the 52d Division near
the Butte du Mesnil. It was relieved early in March and went to the
Vouziers-Rethel area, where it received some more training in open
warfare.


PICARDY.

2. On the 20th it entrained, and arrived at Etreux (north of Guise) the
following day. From there it marched via St. Quentin-Ham-Roye-Faverolles
to Montdidier, where it arrived on the 30th. The following day it
reenforced the front near Ayencourt (south of Montdidier), relieving the
9th Division. It was relieved by the 2d Division during the night of the
1st-2d of May and went to rest in the Chimay area.


AISNE.

3. On the 30th of May the division, thoroughly rested and brought up to
strength, reenforced the battle front near Vauxbuin (southwest of
Soissons). Here it became heavily engaged and suffered severe losses,
especially the first two days. It was relieved near Cutry (southwest of
Soissons) on June 16, and went to rest near Oulchy le Chateau.

4. During the night of July 19–20, the division reenforced the front
near Blanzy (south of Soissons). Here it became heavily engaged. It was
forced back by the Allied counteroffensive, and was withdrawn from line
south of Braine early in August. It went to rest near Marle.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. On September 28 the division entered line near Somme-Py (north of
Suippes). Here it was badly handled and had to be withdrawn on the 4th
of October, when it had been driven back to St. Etienne à Py. It then
rested for a day or two near Vouziers.


OISE.

6. On the 6th it entrained at Vouziers and Vrizy and arrived at La
Ferté-Chevresis two days later. It was then put on trucks and moved up
to the front, taking over the Bernot-Origny sector (east of St. Quentin)
on the 8th. It was withdrawn about the 15th.


CHAMPAGNE.

7. After having rested a fortnight between the Oise and the Aisne, the
division entered line east of Rethel on the 31st, remaining in line
until the signing of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 51st Reserve is to be considered a good second-class division. It
did not distinguish itself by any brilliant fighting, but it did acquit
itself in the battles of the Somme and the Aisne and during the Allied
counteroffensive. It suffered exceedingly heavy losses, but these were
in large measure made good by drafts of 1919 class recruits.




                             52d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │104.          │66.           │104.          │66.
              │              │169.          │              │169.
              │              │170.          │              │170.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │(2) Sqn. 16 Uhlan Rgt.       │2 Sqn. 16 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │52 Brig.:                    │52 Brig.:
              │ 103 F. A. Rgt. (6 Btries.). │ 103 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 104 F. A. Rgt. (6 Btries., 3│ 104 F. A. Rgt.
              │  of which are Hows.).       │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│103 Pion. Co.                │103 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │104 Pion. Co.                │104 Pion. Co.
              │                             │52 T. M. Co.
              │                             │52 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │52 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │52 Cyclist Co.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │1 & 2 Potsdam Landst. Inf.   │
              │  Btn. (3 C. Dist.).         │
              │2 Co. 24 Pions.              │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │56.           │111.          │56.           │111.
              │              │169.          │              │169.
              │              │170.          │              │170.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 16 Uhlan Rgt.         │4 Sqn. 16 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │52 Art. Command:             │52 Art. Command:
              │ 104 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 104 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 84 Ft. A. Btn. (Staff, 1, 2,
              │                             │  and 3 Btries.).
              │                             │
              │                             │ 892 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 917 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1371 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│137 Pion. Btn.:              │137 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 103 Pion. Co.               │ 103 Pion. Co.
              │ 104 Pion. Co.               │ 104 Pion. Co.
              │ 52 T. M. Co.                │ 52 T. M. Co.
              │ 103 Searchlight Section.    │ 32 Searchlight Section.
              │ 52 Tel. Detch.              │52 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 52 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 46 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │52 Ambulance Co.             │52 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │341 Field Hospital.          │341 Field Hospital.
              │342 Field Hospital.          │342 Field Hospital.
              │343 Field Hospital.          │205 Vet. Hospital.
              │205 Vet. Hospital.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │577 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │52 Cyclist Co.               │
              │577 Divisional Supply Co.    │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │147 Giant Periscope Sect.    │
              │                             │
              │209 Field Sig. Section.      │
              │210 Field Sig. Section.      │
              │Pigeon Loft.                 │
              │107 Wireless Detch.          │
              │57 Wireless Compass Station. │
              │52 Trench Wireless Detch.    │
              │Power Buzzer Section.        │
              │16 M. G. S. S. Detch.        │
              │Staff of 203 Ft. A. Rgt.     │
              │Staff of 3 Abtl. 27 Ft. A.   │
              │  Rgt.                       │
              │1 Btry. 94 Ft. A. Btn.       │
              │1 Btry. 14 Ft. A. Rgt.       │
              │1 Btry. 4 Ft. A. Rgt.        │
              │4 Naval Gun Btry.            │
              │237 Close-range Btry. (3 7-  │
              │  cm. guns).                 │
              │44 Art. Survey Section.      │
              │                             │
              │The following is according to│
              │  a captured German document │
              │  dated June 4, 1917:        │
              │                             │
              │87 Supply Train.             │
              │103 M. T. Col.               │
              │274 M. T. Col.               │
              │725 M. T. Col.               │
              │944 M. T. Col.               │
              │2 Ammunition Train.          │
              │4 Ammunition Train.          │
              │136 Ammunition Train (new    │
              │  pattern).                  │
              │65 Supply Train.             │
              │663 Supply Depot.            │
              │665 Supply Depot.            │
              │107 Balloon Sqn.             │
              │8 Air Sqns. (Protective      │
              │  Flight).                   │
              │205 Air Sqn. (Reconnaissance │
              │  Flight).                   │
              │1 Co. 14 Labor Btn.          │
              │2 Co. 14 Labor Btn.          │
              │3 Co. 14 Labor Btn.          │
              │1 Co. 56 Road Const. Btn.    │
              │6 Co. 56 Road Const. Btn.    │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

              (14th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Baden.)


                                 1915.

The 52d Division (of the even 50 to 58 series) was formed in March,
1915, by taking the 169th and 170th Infantry Regiments from the 29th
Division (14th Army Corps, Baden), and the 66th Landwehr Regiment from
the 7th Division (4th Army Corps). On April 6, 1917, the last-named
regiment was replaced by the 111th Infantry Regiment (the 4th Regiment
of the 28th Division, also from Baden).


ARTOIS.

1. In April, 1915, the 52d Division was in line south of Arras (Monchy
aux Bois, Hebuterne). It occupied this sector until September, 1916.


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. During the Franco-English offensive on the Somme the 52d Division
bore to the south and held the sector Hebuterne, Beaumont-Hamel, north
of Thiepval (September-November, 1916).

2. On November 26 the division was withdrawn from the front and sent to
rest in the vicinity of Bouchain (December).


                                 1917.


ALSACE.

1. On January 13, 1917, the 52d Division was sent to Alsace (northwest
of Bale).

2. About the middle of January it took over the sector of Altkirch
(Carspach-Hirtzbach), which it held until the end of March.

3. After a few days at rest (at the beginning of April) in the Grand
Duchy of Baden south of Muellheim, it entrained on April 16 north of
Bale and was transferred to the Aisne, already including men of the 1918
class in its ranks.


AISNE.

4. On April 21 it went into line south of Juvincourt. It occupied this
sector until July 10, with a period of rest from June 1 to 15.


CALIFORNIE PLATEAU.

5. About July 24 it went back into line on the Californie Plateau, where
it launched an attack on September 14.

6. Sent into rest in the vicinity of Sissonne about the end of
September, it appeared in the vicinity of Pinon about the middle of
October, where it went into action and lost heavily on the 23d.


CHAMPAGNE.

7. After a rest in the vicinity of Chimay (beginning of November), it
went into line on the Champagne front (Butte du Mesnil-Maisons de
Champagne); it remained there until December 15.

8. From December 15 until January, 1918, it was at rest in the vicinity
of Vouziers.


                              RECRUITING.

Since April, 1917, the 52d Division has been almost purely Badensian.
Besides the Badensians, who form almost all of the drafts, we find men
from the neighboring districts of the Empire (Rhine Province, Hesse-
Nassau).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In general the morale of the 52d Division has appeared rather high. In
the sector of Juvincourt (April to July, 1917) the troops of the
division showed nerve and dash in the course of the local operations in
which they took part.

The division had few losses until the month of September.

However, it lost heavily on October 23 (the battle of La Malmaison),
especially the 170th Infantry Regiment.


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 52d Division, which had been resting near Vouziers since December
15, relieved the 52d Reserve Division near Tahure (northeast of Suippes)
on the 10th of January. During the time the division held this sector
the elements not actually in the front line were being trained in open
warfare. Early in March it was relieved by the 52d Reserve Division and
went to the Vouziers area, where it received still more intensive
training in the war of movement.


PICARDY.

2. The division entrained near Vouziers on the 22d of March, and
detrained on the following day near Bohain. On the 24th it left and
marched via Fresnoy le Grand-Holnon wood (26th)-Bethenicourt (27th)-
Etalon-Liancourt-Fosse to Fresnoy les Roye. It relieved the 28th
Division near Hangest en Santerre (northwest of Montdidier) on the 28th.
It was relieved by the 76th Reserve Division on the 14th of April and
went to rest in the Sedan area.


AISNE.

3. Here it was thoroughly reconstituted. It entrained on the 22d of May,
arriving at La Malmaison (southeast of Laon) the same day. On the 26th
it went into line near Juvincourt (east of Craonne), and took part in
the initial attack on the following day. It crossed the Aisne between
Pontavert and Gernicourt; proceeding via Bouvancourt and Guyancourt, it
crossed the Vesle at Jonquery on the 28th, reached Faverolles on the
29th, Olizy on the 31st, and the Marne, in the region of Verneuil, on
June 2. The division was at first ordered to cross the same day, but the
order was subsequently rescinded. It was withdrawn, after having
suffered severely, about the 10th, and was reported to be at rest in the
Sedan area on the 15th. On the 20th it was reported in reserve in the
Tournai region.


LENS.

4. During the night of July 12–13 it relieved the 119th Division in the
Avion sector (south of Lens). It was relieved about the 5th of August by
the extension of fronts of flanking divisions.


ARMENTIERES.

5. During the night of the 6th–7th it relieved the 207th Division near
Vieux Berquin (southwest of Bailleul), the 207th Division taking over
the sector just vacated by the 52d Division. On the 17th it was
withdrawn, the neighboring divisions extending their fronts.


BAPAUME.

6. Five days later it reenforced the battle front near Miraumont (west
of Bapaume). It was withdrawn about the 4th of September, after having
lost over 1,300 prisoners, and went to rest in the Courtrai area. Here
the battalions were reduced to three companies, the strength of which
was further made up by drafts of the 29th Ersatz Regiment (223d Division
disbanded).


ARGONNE.

7. On September 28 the division reenforced the front near Exermont
(southeast of Grandpre). In the heavy fighting that followed the
division was driven back to Landres et St. Georges, where it was
withdrawn about the 14th of October after having suffered heavy losses
(almost 600 in prisoners alone).

8. During the night of October 31-November 1 the division, which had
received large numbers of replacements during its two weeks’ rest,
relieved the 41st Division east of Busancy (north of Grandpre). It was
still in line on the 11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 52d is rated as one of the best German divisions. It was in a great
deal of heavy fighting during 1918 (as in preceding years) and acquitted
itself most creditably.




                         52d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │103 Res. │237 Res. │103 Res. │237 Res. │103 Res. │237 Res.
              │         │238 Res. │         │238 Res. │         │238 Res.
              │104 Res. │239 Res. │104 Res. │239 Res. │104 Res. │239 Res.
              │         │240 Res. │         │240 Res. │         │240 Res.
              │ 24 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 24 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 24 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │52 Res. Cav. Detch.│52 Res. Cav. Detch.│52 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │52 Res. F. A. Rgt. │52 Res. F. A. Rgt. │52 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│52 Res. Pion. Co.  │52 Res. Pion. Co.  │52 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │52 Res. Pont. Engs.│1 Ldw. Pion. Co. (9
              │                   │                   │  C. Dist.).
              │                   │                   │2 Ers. Co. 24
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │                   │252 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │52 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │52 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │104 Res. │238 Res. │104 Res. │239 Res.
              │         │239 Res. │         │239 Res.
              │         │240 Res. │         │240 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │52 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │69 Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │52 Res. F. A. Rgt. │ 52 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 51 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │ 894 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │ 1365 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
              │                   │ 1393 Light Am.
              │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(352) Pion. Btn.:  │253 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │
              │ 8 Co. 28 Pions.   │ 8 Co. 28 Pions.
              │                   │
              │ 52 Res. Pion. Co. │ 52 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │
              │ 252 T. M. Co.     │ 252 T. M. Co.
              │ (?) 312 T. M. Co. │ 184 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 452 Tel. Detch.   │452 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 452 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 23 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │534 Ambulance Co.  │534 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │
              │88 Res. Field      │89 Field Hospital.
              │  Hospital.        │
              │Vet. Hospital.     │90 Field Hospital.
              │                   │264 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                  (8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1914.


FLANDERS.

1. The 52d Reserve Division (belonging to the 26th Reserve Corps with
the 51st Reserve Division), formed between August and October, 1914, was
trained at the Senne Camp and entrained for Belgium on October 12.

The division was engaged in the first battle of the Ypres about October
22.

It fought in October and November in the vicinity of Langemarck-
Passachendaele and suffered heavy losses. Between October 18 and 28, the
240th Reserve Infantry Regiment listed casualties of 28 officers and
1,360 men. (Official List of Casualties.)


                                 1915.


YPRES.

1. The division remained on the front north of Ypres (Pilckem, St.
Julien, Zonnebeke) during the year 1915 and until the month of
September, 1916. Certain of its regiments lost very heavily in April and
May—25 officers and 1,268 men casualties in the 240th Reserve Infantry
Regiment. (Official List of Casualties.)


                                 1916.


SOMME.

1. About September 14, 1916, it was transferred to the Somme minus the
237th Reserve Infantry Regiment, sent to Galicia for the formation of
the 199th Division.

It was engaged in the Lesboeufs sector (Sept. 16–29) and lost very
heavily in the British attack of the 26th.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Sent to Champagne, it went into line at the Butte de Souain on
October 6, then on November 6 entered St. Marie à Py and the vicinity of
Tahure.


                                 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 52d Reserve Division occupied the Tahure front south of Rouvroy
until April 20, 1917. It suffered losses at Maisons de Champagne, at the
end of March, which caused hasty replacements of the 1918 class with
only four months’ training to be sent.


SAPIGNEUL.

2. Relieved between April 15 and 20, it went to the vicinity of Rethel
and passed in review at Asfeld on May 3; went into line on the 5th
southeast of Berry au Bac and underwent the French attack of the 7th
south of Sapigneul. (The 239th Reserve Division had 107 prisoners
taken.) On May 31 it again lost heavily while attacking Hill 108.


YPRES.

3. The division was withdrawn from the Aisne front at the beginning of
July and transferred to Belgium. It went into action on the Ypres-Menin
road on the 31st, the day of the British offensive, and lost heavily.
The attacks of August 10 again caused serious losses—the remnants of the
1st Battalion of the 238th Reserve Infantry Regiment formed only two
companies at the time of their relief. (British Summary of Information,
Aug. 11.)


CHAMPAGNE.

4. About August 11 the 52d Reserve Division left the Belgian front for
Champagne, where it again took over its own sector east of the Butte de
Souain about August 26. It remained there until the end of December.


                              RECRUITING.

At the time of its formation the 52d Reserve Division was made up of one
Rhenish Regiment and three from Baden; to-day it is entirely Rhenish.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In May and June, 1917, the 52d Reserve Division held a very difficult
sector south of Berry au Bac where it apparently lost very heavily.
However, it acted like a good division.

During its rest in the vicinity of Vouziers, at the end of January,
1918, it was given very intensive training. It was considered as an
attack division. (Interrogation of prisoners, February, 1918.)


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 52d Reserve Division was relieved by the 52d Division in the
Tahure sector on January 10 and went to the vicinity of Vouziers, where
it was intensively trained in open warfare.

2. Early in March it returned to line and relieved the 52d Division. It
was relieved on the 23d of April by the 1st Bavarian Division.


YPRES.

3. It proceeded to march to Vouziers, where it entrained on the 28th
and, traveling via Mezières-Signy-Hirson-Mons-Tournai, detrained at
Mouscron on the 30th. On May 4 it marched to Wervicq, and on the
following day moved into line via Warneton and Messines, relieving the
3d Guard Division in the Voormezeele sector (south of Ypres). In the
fighting before Dickebusch on the 8th heavy losses were suffered. It was
withdrawn about the 25th, and went to rest near Menin.

4. During the night of the 13th–14th of June it relieved the 58th
Division near Locre (south of Ypres). It was relieved on the 1st of
July, the flanking divisions extending their fronts, and went to rest in
the region southwest of Courtrai.

5. On the 6th of August it came back into line, relieving the 58th
Division in the Kemmel sector (south of Ypres). It was withdrawn about
the 26th.


CAMBRAI.

6. About the 2d of September it reenforced the front in the Bertincourt
sector (east of Bapaume). After having suffered severe losses in killed
and wounded, besides losing over 1,000 prisoners, it was relieved by the
6th Division near Havrincourt on the 16th.


COURTRAI.

7. About the 27th it entered line near Moorslede (southwest of Roulers).
It suffered severe losses here, and was withdrawn early in October.

8. On October 14 it relieved the Guard Ersatz Division in the Iseghem
sector (north of Courtrai). It was heavily engaged here, and was finally
withdrawn on the 25th. It did not reenter line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 52d was rated as a second-class division, but it was probably not so
good as other divisions similarly rated, for although it was intensively
trained for use as a shock unit for almost two months in Champagne early
in the year it was not used in any of the German offensives. It is to be
noted, however, that the German communique of October 24 said,
“Southwest of Deynze the veteran 52d Reserve Division, which has been in
battle daily since October 14, repulsed the renewed attacks of the enemy
along the Deynze-Waregem railway.”




                         53d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │105 Res. │241 Res. │105 Res. │241 Res. │105 Res. │241 Res.
              │         │242 Res. │         │242 Res. │         │243 Res.
              │106 Res. │243 Res. │106 Res. │243 Res. │106 Res. │242 Res.
              │         │244 Res. │         │244 Res. │         │244 Res.
              │  25 Res. Jag. Btn.│ 25 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 25 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │53 Res. Cav. Detch.│53 Res. Cav. Detch.│53 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │53 Res. F. A. Rgt. │53 Res. F. A. Rgt. │53 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.).     │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│53 Res. Pion. Co.  │53 Res. Pion. Co.  │53 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │53 Res. Pont. Engs.│53 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │253 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │53 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │     1918[23]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │105 Res. │241 Res. │105 Res. │241 Res.
              │         │242 Res. │         │242 Res.
              │         │243 Res. │         │243 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │53 Res. (?) Cav.   │53 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │  Detch.           │  (Saxon).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │(?) Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │ 53 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 53 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  (Saxon).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(353) Pion. Btn.:  │53 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │  (Saxon).
              │ 53 Res. Pion. Co. │279 Pion. Co.
              │ 279 Pion. Co.     │253 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.
              │ 253 T. M. Co.     │453 Tel. Detch.
              │ 453 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.      │535 (?) Ambulance
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.
              │94 Res. Field      │92 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital (Saxon).
              │Vet. Hospital.     │453 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.         │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 23:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, October, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (241st and 242d Reserve Infantry Regiments: 12th Corps District—Saxony.
       243d Reserve Infantry Regiment: 19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1914.


FLANDERS-YPRES.

1. The 53d Reserve Division (of the 27th Reserve Corps with the 54th
Reserve Division), formed between August and October, 1914, were sent to
Belgium, and detrained on August 14 at Ath. It was engaged, with the
divisions of the same series, in the battle of Ypres, against the
British Army. Beginning on October 21, it fought on the front
Poelcappelle-Becelaere; southeast of Gheluvelt on October 29, and near
the Ypres-Menin road at the time of the great attack of November 11. It
suffered very heavy losses—the 25th Reserve Chasseurs Battalion, already
reduced to 225 men on October 31, had only 73 on November 4 (notebook).
On November 25 the 6th Company of the 241st Reserve Infantry Regiment
had only 7 of the men left who constituted it upon its departure from
Saxony (letter).


                                 1915.


FLANDERS.

1. The division remained in line north of Ypres during the winter of
1914–15, alternating with the 54th Reserve Division in the sector
Broodseinde-Polygon wood.

2. It took part in the second battle of Ypres, near Frezenberg and
Gravenstafel, where it again lost heavily.

3. In June it occupied the sector of Wytchaete-St. Éloi and returned
northeast of Ypres (Verlorenhoek) in the middle of July.


CHAMPAGNE AND FLANDERS.

4. At the beginning of October the 105th Reserve Brigade was sent to
Champagne to reenforce the lines near Tahure. The 106th Reserve Brigade
took over the sector of the Lys.

5. In November the division was regrouped and sent to rest in the
vicinity of Ingelmunster (north of Courtrai). It remained behind the
front during the winter of 1915–16 in the vicinity of Roulers.


                                 1916.


LA BASSEE.

1. At the end of March, 1916, the 53d Reserve Division left Flanders and
went into line on both banks of the La Bassee Canal.


SOMME.

2. Sent to the Somme at the end of August, it was engaged southeast of
Maurepas (Le Forest) at the time of the French attack of September 3,
which ended in the capture of Le Forest and of Clery. It suffered heavy
losses in counterattacking and in withstanding the new French offensive
of September 13. Between September 6 and 12 the 241st Reserve Infantry
Regiment listed 12 officers and 1,502 men as casualties. On September 3
the 244th Reserve Infantry Regiment had lost 400 prisoners.


LOOS.

3. Relieved on September 14, it was transferred to the Loos front
(between Hulluch and the Lens-Béthune railroad), from September 21 to
October 5.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. On October 9 it was in Champagne, where it occupied the sector of
Prosnes, east of Rheims.


GALICIA.

5. Withdrawn from the Champagne front, the 53d Reserve Division
entrained for the Eastern Front on November 17. (Itinerary:
Bétheniville-Rethel-Sedan-Trèves-Coblenz-Ems-Cologne-Halle-Cottbus-
Liegnitz-Breslau-Cracow-Tarnow-Jaroslaw-Przemysl-Lemberg-Rohatyn.) It
detrained at Pukow (south of Lemberg) on the 26th.

6. It was sent into reserve behind the line of the Narajowka in
December. In the autumn of 1916 the 244th Reserve Infantry Regiment was
transferred to the 215th Division; later it was transferred to the 96th
Division (Saxon).


                                 1917.

1. At the beginning of January, 1917, the 53d Reserve Division went into
line at the junction of the Narajowka and the Dniester, and remained in
this sector until the middle of June without any important engagement.

2. Relieved and sent to rest in June, it took part in the German
counteroffensive begun on July 20 and advanced north of the Dniester. It
was identified on August 3 east of Krjivtche.

3. The division was withdrawn from the front at the end of November and
entrained for Belgium in the middle of December.


                              RECRUITING.

The 53d Reserve Division is purely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 53d Reserve Division spent a year on the Eastern Front (November,
1916, to November, 1917). It is of mediocre quality.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved in the Houthulst forest on February 12 and
went to rest in the Bruges area.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. On March 1–2 it relieved the 27th Division northeast of Flesquieres.
It took part in the initial attack on March 21, was withdrawn on the 22d
and went to rest near Bourlon wood. The division was in General
Headquarters reserve and on March 27 marched via Havrincourt-
Ruyaulcourt-Moislains-Bouchavesnes, crossing the Somme at Clery, and
continued to march via Raincourt to Rosieres en Santerre. The 241st
Reserve Regiment went into line near Moreuil on the night of April 1–2
and relieved the 426th Regiment (88th Division); the 242d Reserve
Regiment went into line on the night of April 3–4, relieving the 100th
Body Grenadier Regiment (23d Division). On the morning of April 4 the
division attacked in the vicinity of Arriese Cour wood. The division at
this date was operating under the 18th German Army. About the middle of
April it was withdrawn from the Moreuil sector.


VERDUN.

3. About May 1 the division was resting in rear of the Verdun front. It
relieved the 84th Division west of Bethincourt in the first week of May.
It held that quiet sector until the 11th of June, when a tired division
took its place and the 53d Reserve Division returned to an active front.


SOISSONS.

4. The division detrained near Laon on June 14–15, and the next night
relieved the 6th Bavarian Reserve Division north of Le Port. Here it
participated in heavy fighting in July and August until its relief about
August 10. In this engagement the 243d Reserve Regiment was reduced to
three companies per battalion as a result of heavy losses.

5. The division was taken to the region in rear of the Argonne front and
the process of dissolution begun. Before its completion the American
offensive in the Argonne began and elements of the division were used on
the United States front between September 29 and October 15.

According to the available evidence, the 242d Reserve Regiment was
drafted to the 24th and 58th Divisions, the 241st Regiment to the 23d
Division, and the 243d Reserve Regiment to the 40th and 58th Divisions.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It participated in the spring
Somme offensive, but thereafter did not play an important part in the
fighting. The low effective strength was directly responsible for the
dissolution of the division.




                             54th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │108.          │27 Res.       │108.          │84.
              │              │90 Res.       │              │27 Res.
              │              │84.           │              │90 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │             (?)             │17 Hus. Rgt. (Sqn.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │54 Brig.:                    │54 Brig.:
              │ 107 F. A. Rgt. (6 Btries.). │ 107 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 108 F. A. Rgt. (6 Btries.). │ 108 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│107 Pion. Co.                │107 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │108 Pion. Co.                │108 Pion. Co.
              │                             │54 T. M. Co.
              │                             │54 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │54 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │54 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │54 Ft. A. Btn.               │24 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │108.          │84.           │(?)           │84.
              │              │27 Res.       │              │27 Res.
              │              │90 Res.       │              │90 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.          │1 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │54 Art. Command:             │55 Art. Command:
              │ 108 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 108 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 54 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 746 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 955 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 966 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                  │138 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 107 Pion. Co.               │ 107 Pion. Co.
              │ 108 Pion. Co.               │ 108 Pion. Co.
              │ 1 Ldw. Co., 16 Pions.       │ 97 Searchlight Section.
              │ 54 T. M. Co.                │54 Signal Command:
              │ 107 Searchlight Section.    │ 54 Tel. Detch.
              │ 54 Tel. Detch.              │ 87 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │54 Ambulance Co.             │54 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │345 Field Hospital.          │345 Field Hospital.
              │348 Field Hospital.          │348 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │54 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │578 M. T. Col.               │578 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │119 Labor Btn.               │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

          (84th and 90th Reserve Infantry Regiments: 9th Corps
   District—Schleswig—Holstein and Mecklenburg. 27th Reserve Infantry
             Regiment: 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1915.

1. The 54th Division was formed in March, 1915, by the removal of
regiments from divisions engaged at this time between the north of Noyon
and east of Soissons.

Two of these regiments, the 84th (18th Division) and the 90th Reserve
(18th Reserve Division), came from the 9th Corps District (Schleswig-
Holstein and Mecklenburg); the third regiment, the 27th Reserve (7th
Reserve Division) was originally from Prussian Saxony (4th Corps
District).


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Concentrated in March near Guise, the 54th Division was sent to
Champagne in the middle of April (vicinity of Perthes), where it
remained until July, 1915.


RUSSIA.

3. In July it was transferred to Russia. It fought on the Narew (July
and August) and on the Niemen, southeast of Grodno, in September.


FRANCE-OISE.

4. Brought back to France at the beginning of October, it went into line
on the 12th on the left bank of the Oise (Quennevières-Moulin sous
Touvent).


                                 1916.

1. Withdrawn from the Oise front in January, 1916, the 54th Division
rested in the vicinity of La Fère until May. During this time it was
occupied in defensive works in the vicinity of Soissons-Craonne.


VERDUN.

2. In May it was transferred to Verdun. It occupied the sector of Hill
304 on May 14.

3. About September 11 it crossed to the right bank of the Meuse and
advanced north of Fleury. On October 24 it was dislodged by the French
attacks and thrown back with heavy losses north of Douaumont Fort. It
was relieved at the beginning of November.


LORRAINE.

4. Having scarcely made good its losses, it went back into line on
November 5 north of Flirey en Haye.


                                 1917.

1. The division remained in the calm sector of Flirey during the winter
of 1916–17.


AISNE.

2. Relieved in the middle of April, 1917, it was sent behind the
Champagne front (vicinity of Asfeld). On April 21 it reenforced the
lines at Berry au Bac. It underwent the French attack of May 4, to which
it opposed a serious resistance on the Juvincourt Ridge, but suffered
heavy losses (650 prisoners).

3. It was withdrawn from the Aisne front on May 10.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. Sent to the east of Rheims, the division occupied the sector south of
Somme Py from May 15 to July 24. It was filled up there in June by
several reenforcements, totaling about 2,000 men.


YPRES.

5. On July 25 it entrained at Machault (southwest of Vouziers) for
Charleville, from which place it went to Belgium after a short rest. It
was in action east of Ypres from August 5 to 19, and suffered new losses
during the British attack of August 16. One company of the 90th Reserve
Infantry Regiment was reduced to one officer and four men.


CAMBRAI.

6. Sent back into line at the end of August on the Cambrai front
(Havrincourt-Villers Plouich), the division again lost very heavily in
this sector, principally in the course of a tank attack on November 20
(2,789 prisoners).


LORRAINE.

7. Relieved immediately after this attack, it was sent to rest in
Lorraine and reorganized. Between August and November the division
received more than 3,000 replacements. (British Summary of Information.)


                              RECRUITING.

Mixed upon its formation (Schleswig-Holstein, Mecklenburg, Prussian
Saxony,) the 54th Division remained so with a tendency, nevertheless, to
make the 90th Reserve Infantry Regiment a pure Mecklenburg regiment and
to reserve the drafts from the rest of the 9th Corps District for the
84th Infantry Regiment.

In January 1918, the 1919 class did not seem to be represented; the 90th
Reserve Infantry Regiment had just received replacements made up of men
put back in the 1917 and 1918 classes who entered the service in
September, 1917.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 54th Division held the most active sectors on the Western front; it
has everywhere given proof of great energy in its resistance, especially
at Cambrai in November, 1917. However, before the affair of Cambrai
rather frequent desertions proved that the losses incurred at Ypres had
weakened the morale of the troops; besides, the replacements received in
Lorraine were mostly composed of returned wounded of all ages.

However, the 54th Division tried, during its stay in Lorraine, to
amalgamate all these elements and to renew their combat value by
intensive training and careful instruction (March, 1918).


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

The division was relieved in the sector north of Nancy about February 17
by the 48th Landwehr Division. It remained in Lorraine in March
undergoing training for open warfare. It entrained near Dieuze on the
24th and traveled via Metz-Sedan-Charleville-Mons-Valenciennes to a
place about 10 miles east of Douai. The division expected to come into
line near Arras, but after resting one night at Douai it marched off
toward Peronne and arrived at Rosieres on April 2. It moved up to the
line north of Moreuil on the night of April 3–4, taking part in the
attack. The division withdrew on the night of the 5th–6th. It returned
to line south of Thennes on April 10 and stayed in about eight days.


SOMME.

2. The division rested at Cambrai until the night of May 22–23, when it
relieved the 183d Division near Ville sur Ancre. It was relieved on June
20 by the 107th Division. Following its relief, the division rested
north of the Somme until August 3, when it was engaged near Antheuil.
About September 1 the division left its sector near Lassigny and
relieved the 105th Division northeast of Noyon. Here it was relieved on
September 10.


CAMBRAI-ST. QUENTIN.

3. The division rested 15 days before it entered line northeast of
Hargicourt on September 25, relieving the 232d Division. It fought in
the Le Cateau area until October 12, when it retired to reserves in the
vicinity of Landrecies. On November 2 it was reengaged at Ors and
continued in line until the armistice. The last identification was at
Lemont-Fontaine on the 8th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. In the last year its service was
largely on the defensive in active sectors. In this capacity it was
almost constantly in line.




                         54th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1914        │       1915        │       1916
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │107 Res. │245 Res. │107 Res. │245 Res. │107 Res. │245 Res.
              │         │246 Res. │         │246 Res. │         │247 Res.
              │108 Res. │247 Res. │108 Res. │247 Res. │108 Res. │246 Res.
              │         │248 Res. │         │248 Res. │         │248 Res.
              │ 26 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 26 Res. Jag. Btn. │ 26 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Cavalry.     │54 Res. Cav. Detch.│54 Res. Cav. Detch.│54 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │  (Wurtt.).        │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │54 Res. F. A. Rgt. │54 Res. F. A. Rgt. │54 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries., 1–3  │                   │
              │  Sax., 4–9        │                   │
              │  Wurtt.).         │                   │
              │                   │Ers. Abtl. 59 F. A.│
              │                   │  Rgt.             │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│54 Res. Pion. Co.  │54 Res. Pion. Co.  │54 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │  (Saxon).         │                   │
              │                   │54 Res. Pont. Engs.│254 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │54 Pont. Engs.
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │54 Res. Ambulance  │
   Veterinary.│                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1917        │     1918[24]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │107 Res. │246 Res. │107 Res. │246 Res.
              │         │247 Res. │         │247 Res.
              │         │248 Res. │         │248 Res.
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
              │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │54 Res. Cav. Detch.│54 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                   │  (Wurtt.).
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:  │(?) Art. Command:
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │                   │
              │ 54 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 54 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  (9 Btries.       │  (Wurtt.).
              │  Wurtt.).         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│(354) Pion. Btn.:  │1 Res. Co. 13
   Liaisons.  │                   │  Pions.
              │ 1 Res. Co. 13     │2 Res. Co. 13
              │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 13     │312 Searchlight
              │  Pions.           │  Section.
              │ 254 T. M. Co.     │254 T. M. Co.
              │ 312 Searchlight   │454 Tel. Detch.
              │  Section.         │
              │ 454 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │536 Ambulance Co.  │536 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│  (Wurtt.).        │  (Wurtt.).
              │92 Res. Field      │93 Res. Field
              │  Hospital.        │  Hospital
              │                   │  (Wurtt.).
              │Vet. Hospital.     │94 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital
              │                   │  (Wurtt.).
              │                   │246 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col          │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────
Footnote 24:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, September, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

                  (13th Corps District—Wuerttemberg.)


                                 1914.


BELGIUM.

1. The 54th Reserve Division, forming the 27th Reserve Corps with the
53d Reserve Division, was formed of men from Wurttemberg, with the
addition of one infantry regiment and one battalion of chasseurs from
Saxony. Trained at the Muensingen Camp, it went into action for the
first time on October 21, 1914, in Belgium at the battle of Ypres. On
October 29, it made an unsuccessful attack south of Gheluvelt, going
slightly to the north, it took part in the general attack of November 11
in the vicinity of Zonnebeke, where it lost very heavily. From October
21 to November 20 the 248th Reserve Infantry Regiment listed 32 officers
and 1,395 men as casualties. (Official List of Casualties.)


                                 1915.

1. The division remained in Flanders during the entire year of 1915,
occupying the front Becelaere-Polygon wood, between the Ypres-Menin wood
and the Roulers railroad.

2. In April and May it suffered heavy losses during the second battle of
Ypres (Frezenberg, Verlorenhoek, Hooge).


                                 1916.

1. At the end of January and beginning of February, 1916, the 54th
Reserve Division was withdrawn from the Ypres salient, concentrated in
the vicinity of Thielt, Ghent, and Hasselt and sent for training to the
Beverloo Camp (February-March).


ARTOIS.

2. Toward the end of March it took over the sector south of Neuve
Chapelle (north of La Bassée) where it did not take part in any
important action.


SOMME.

3. Relieved at the end of August, it was sent to the Somme (sector of
Combles-La Forest) and suffered very heavy losses between September 8
and 18.


LORRAINE.

4. After a short stay in the Loos salient (Vermelles-Hulluch road) at
the beginning of October the 54th Reserve Division was transferred to
Lorraine and sent into line in the vicinity of Blamont.

5. At this time, the 245th Reserve Infantry Regiment (Saxon) was taken
from it to be assigned to the 192d Division.


VERDUN.

6. At the end of November the division left Lorraine, was sent during
the course of December behind the front northwest of Cambrai, then to
the Meuse, where it went into line on December 22, west of Bezonvaux
(Les Chambrettes), after the French attack of December 16.


                                 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. Withdrawn from the Verdun front about January 23, 1917, the 54th
Reserve Division took over, in Champagne, the sector included between
the Navarin Farm and the Tahure Hill.

2. In March it sent one battalion of the 246th Reserve Infantry Regiment
into the attacks of Maisons de Champagne on March 27.

3. At the beginning of May the division went as a reenforcement south of
Moronvilliers. It went into action from May 15 to June 10 (Téton, Mont
Haut) and lost heavily.

4. About June 10–15, without any rest, it again took over the sector
west of Tahure, which it occupied until August 20–25.


HILL 304.

5. Suddenly transferred to the Verdun area, the 54th Reserve Division
went into line on August 24, north of Hill 304; it remained there until
October 18.


FLANDERS.

6. Sent to Flanders, it was in the Dixmude sector from October 29 until
March 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Mixed at the time of its formation, the 54th Reserve Division became
exclusively Wurttemberg, by the departure of its Saxon elements.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Since the number of prisoners of the 54th Reserve Division in Champagne,
as in the vicinity of Verdun, March to October 1917, was very slight, it
has been practically impossible to obtain information concerning this
division (November 1918).


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division which had been holding the Dixmude sector entrained at
Bruges on March 14, and detrained at Cambrai on the following day. On
March 20 it marched to Seranvillers, and a day later proceeded via
Lesdain to the high ground west of Honnecourt. On the 22d it reached
Gouzeaucourt; on the 23d it passed through Lechelle, Bus, and Sailly
Saillisel; on the 24th it progressed north of Mametz wood, being engaged
near Rozieres on the 25th and at Ovillers on the 26th. The division was
relieved on April 4 by the 27th Division after suffering heavy losses at
Aveluy.


SOMME.

2. The division was in reserve in immediate rear of the front until the
night of April 10–11, when it relieved the 13th Division at Ville sur
Ancre. The division held this sector until May 27 and again from June 28
until August 25. It was withdrawn in the Mametz area where it had fallen
back upon the British attack.

3. Early in September the division was dissolved. Prisoners stated that
the 248th Reserve Regiment was drafted to the 27th Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. Its efforts in the Somme
offensive were unsuccessful. Thereafter the effectives were used up and
the division dissolved.




                             56th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │112.          │35 Fus.       │112.          │35 Fus.
              │              │88.           │              │88.
              │              │118.          │              │118.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │             (?)             │17 Hus. Rgt. (Sqn.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │56 Brig.:                    │56 Brig.:
              │ 111 F. A. Rgt. (6 Btries.). │ 111 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 112 F. A. Rgt. (6 Btries.). │ 112 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│111 Pion. Co.                │111 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │112 Pion. Co.                │112 Pion. Co.
              │                             │6 Field Co. 23 Pions.
              │                             │2 Res. Co. 23 Pions.
              │                             │56 T. M. Co.
              │                             │56 Pont. Engrs.
              │                             │56 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │56 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │112.          │88.           │112.          │88.
              │              │118.          │              │118.
              │              │186.          │              │186.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.          │4 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │56 Art. Command:             │56 Art. Command:
              │ 112 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 112 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 56 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 855 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 858 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 893 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                  │139 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 111 Pion. Co.               │ 111 Pion. Co.
              │ 112 Pion. Co.               │ 112 Pion. Co.
              │ 56 T. M. Co.                │ 56 T. M. Co.
              │ 111 Searchlight Section.    │ 186 Searchlight Section.
              │ 56 Tel. Detch.              │56 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 56 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 165 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │56 Ambulance Co.             │56 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │349 Field Hospital.          │349 Field Hospital.
              │351 Field Hospital.          │56 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │56 Cyclist Co.               │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

      (18th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Hesse and Hesse Nassau.)


                                 1915.

The 56th Division was formed in March, 1915, of surplus regiments—the
35th Fusileer Regiment from the 6th Division (3d Corps District,
Brandenburg), the 88th and 118th Infantry Regiments from the 21st and
25th Divisions (18th Corps District, Hesse Nassau and the Grand Duchy of
Hesse). In May, 1917, the 35th Fusileer Regiment was replaced by the
186th Infantry Regiment (from the 25th Landwehr Division) recruited from
Hesse.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. Concentrated in March, 1915, near Vouziers, the 56th Division went to
the Champagne front, south of Ripont, in April.


GALICIA.

2. At the beginning of May it was transferred to the Eastern Front. It
took part in the Galician offensive (battles of Jaroslau, on May 18, and
of Rudka, on June 18), where it lost heavily.


FRANCE.

3. In June the division was brought back to the Western Front.
Entraining at Jaroslau on June 28, it detrained in the vicinity of
Valenciennes, where it remained at rest for a month.


LORRAINE.

4. On July 28 the division went to Lorraine and remained as a reserve
troop in the vicinity of Pfalzburg-Zabern-Schirmeck.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. On September 25 it was sent to Champagne to oppose the French
offensive. It was engaged in the sector of Maison de Champagne, but was
soon retired on account of its losses. The infantry had casualties of
107 officers and 5,968 men. (Official List of Casualties.)

6. After reorganization, it went into line north of Massiges and took
part in the attack of Mont Têtu at the beginning of November. It was
relieved in the middle of November.

7. In December it returned to the Champagne front.


                                 1916.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 56th Division occupied the same calm sector south of Rouvroy
during the entire winter of 1915–16.

2. Relieved on April 25, 1916, it was sent to rest in the vicinity of
Sedan.


VERDUN (MORT-HOMME).

3. On May 26–27 it was sent into line on the left bank of the Meuse, at
the Mort Homme. It received a vigorous attack there on May 31, had heavy
losses, and continued to hold this sector until the middle of July.


ARTOIS.

4. After a short rest in the vicinity of Sedan, it went to the Vimy
Ridge, in Artois (end of July-end of August).


SOMME.

5. On August 24–25 it was engaged in the battle of the Somme, in
Belleville wood. On August 31 it launched a counterattack northeast of
the wood. It left the Somme on September 9.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. It then took over a quiet sector east of Rheims at Cernay-La
Pompelle. In the middle of November it returned to the Somme front (Pys)
until January 7, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. In January, 1917, the 56th Division was sent to rest in the vicinity
of St. Quentin.


SOMME-HINDENBURG LINE.

2. About February 11 it went back into line south of the Somme in the
vicinity of Biaches, retired at the end of March to the north of St.
Quentin, and from there went to Courrieres in the vicinity of the Lens
mines.


LENS.

3. On April 10 it took over the sector of Lens, where it suffered
important losses from raids and local conflicts. It absorbed 1,000 men
from the 624th Infantry Regiment, dissolved, and some from the 625th
(Hessian).


MEUSE (RIGHT BANK).

4. Withdrawn from the Lens front at the end of June, it remained at rest
in the vicinity of Buzancy and Grandpré in July, near Carignan, at the
beginning of August; spent the second half of August in the Woevre,
reenforcing the Verdun front east of Vaux. In September it occupied the
sector north of the Chaume wood-Baumont, where it was relieved at the
end of October.


MEUSE (LEFT BANK).

5. About November 10 the 56th Division occupied the sector of Cheppy
wood, on the left bank of the Meuse, where it remained until March 20,
1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Since the substitution of the 186th Infantry Regiment for the 35th
Fusileers, the division has become entirely Hessian. By analogy with the
9th Landwehr Division, we sometimes find it designated as “Rhine
troops”; the Rhine Provinces in general cooperate with Hesse and Hesse-
Nassau in sending its replacements.

In the first months of 1918 the reenforcements received comprised men
from the 3d and 4th Corps Districts (Berlin and Silesia) belonging to
the industrial classes.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Having suffered heavily in the Galician campaign in 1915, and in
Champagne and at Verdun, the 56th Division had serious losses at Lens
between April and June, 1917. The 186th Infantry Regiment had heavy
losses during the battle of the Aisne (April, 1917) before joining the
56th Division. The division had few losses on the left bank of the Meuse
from January to March, 1918.

Of 84 prisoners coming from three regiments of the 56th Division,
captured on March 16 and 17, 1918, more than half belong either to the
active or to the reserve.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved west of the Meuse about March 19 by an
extension of the front of the 13th Reserve Division and underwent a
course of training for open warfare. At this time the companies had
about 180 to 200 effectives. It had no men of the 1919 class and few
Alsatians or Poles. The quality of men in the division was high. On
April 18 the division entrained at Cesse (northwest of Stenay) and
traveled via Sedan-Dinant-Charleroi-Braine le Comte-Tournai-Roubaix,
from where it marched to Croix. On the 21st the 118th Regiment proceeded
via Mouveaux-Bondues-Roucq to Halluin, where it rested until the 23d. On
the following day the regiment marched via Wervicq-Comines to Messines.


KEMMEL.

2. The division came into line on the 25th and captured the village of
Kemmel. It was engaged in this vicinity until May 2, when it was
relieved by the 29th Division, and went to rest in the area north of
Menin. It returned to line on the night of May 11–12, relieving the 13th
Reserve Division on the Voormezeele sector. The division remained in
line South of Ypres until the night of June 3–4.


BELGIUM.

3. After its relief the division rested in the Bruges area until its
return to line northeast of Bailleul on July 2. From then until October
19 the division remained in line on this front. It had fallen back east
of Roubaix when it was withdrawn.

4. After several days in reserve the division was again in line near St.
Genois. The German communiqué of October 26 praised the fighting of the
118th Regiment. The last identification of the division was on November
8, when it was east of Avelghem.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was very actively engaged
during almost the entire last year of the war on the British front.




                             58th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │116.          │106.          │116.          │106.
              │              │107.          │              │107.
              │              │120 Res.      │              │120 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 18 Uhlan Rgt.         │2 Sqn. 18 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │58 Brig.:                    │58 Brig.:
              │ 115 F. A. Rgt. (Saxon) (6   │ 115  F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 116 F. A. Rgt. (Wurtt.) (6  │ 116  F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│115 Pion. Co. (Saxon).       │115 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │116 Pion. Co. (Wurtt.).      │116 Pion. Co.
              │                             │58 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │58 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │58 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │7 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │116.          │106.          │116.          │106.
              │              │107.          │              │107.
              │              │103 Res.      │              │103 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 18 Uhlan Rgt.         │4 Sqn. 18 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │58 Art. Command:             │58 Art. Command:
              │ 115 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 115 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │ 97 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │
              │                             │ 711 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 832 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 931 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                  │142 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Res. 22 Pions.            │ 115 Pion. Co.
              │ 115 Pion. Co.               │ 404 Pion. Co.
              │ 404 Pion. Co.               │ 58 T. M. Co.
              │ 58 T. M. Co.                │ 127 Searchlight Section.
              │ 115 Searchlight Section.    │58 Signal Command.
              │ 58 Tel. Detch.              │ 58 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 135 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │58 Ambulance Co.             │58 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │353 Field Hospital.          │353 Field Hospital.
              │354 Field Hospital.          │354 Field Hospital.
              │58 Vet. Hospital             │58 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │580 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1915.

The 58th Division was formed on March 7, 1915, at Roulers, of surplus
regiments taken from old divisions—the 106th and 107th Infantry
Regiments, Saxon, came from the 24th Division; the 120th Reserve
Infantry Regiment (Wurttemberg), from the 26th Reserve Division. At the
end of 1916 the last-named regiment was replaced by the 103d Reserve
Regiment (Saxon). The provincial homogeneity is thus realized.

1. The division remained at Roulers until the beginning of May.


ARTOIS.

2. On May 12, 1915, the 58th Division took part in the battle of Artois
(Carency, May 12–15) and suffered heavy losses. On May 12 and 14 the 1st
Battalion of the 106th Infantry Regiment had casualties of 22 officers
and 642 men. (Official List of Casualties.) The casualties of the
division amounted to 116 officers and 4,194 men.

3. At the beginning of June the division fought at Neuville St. Vaast
(Le Labyrinthe.)

4. It was at rest in the middle of June in the vicinity of Douai.


RUSSIA.

5. On July 21 the division was transferred to Russia. (Itinerary:
Roubaix-Sedan-Longwy-Thionville-Trèves-Coblentz-Cassel-Berlin-
Marienburg-Koenigsberg-Loetzen.)

6. It took part in the offensive against the Russians in August and
September (Narew, Bobr, Bielostok, Vilna) as far as Lake Narotch.


FRANCE.

7. Brought back to France between October 16 and 22 (Itinerary: Vilna-
Kovno-Koenigsberg-Berlin-Hanover-Cassel-Frankfort-Mayence-Coblentz-
Trèves-Sarrebreucken), it took over a sector in Lorraine (Leintrey-
Domèvre) in November and December.


                                 1916.

1. In January and February, 1916, the 58th Division was at rest in the
vicinity of Sarreburg.


LORRAINE.

2. About February 25 it returned to the sector of Leintrey-Embermenil
and remained there until the middle of March. It celebrated its first
anniversary there—150 days of fighting, 1,200 kilometers on foot, 4,400
by railroad (notebook).


VERDUN.

3. Brought back to Verdun at this time, it took part in the attack of
Caillette wood, near Douaumont, on April 2.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. The division was withdrawn from the Verdun front about April 7 and
sent to rest in the vicinity of Rethel. On April 30 it went to
Champagne, where it occupied the sector east of Rheims (Bétheny-Cernay,
La Pompelle).


SOMME.

5. In September the division was engaged on the Somme (Barleux). The 2d
Company of the 20th Reserve Infantry Regiment, 177 strong, was
destroyed, with the exception of 22 prisoners.

6. After occupying a calm sector on the Yser from September 29 to
October 23, it again fought on the Somme (Courcelette-Grandcourt) in
November.

7. On December 20 the division was withdrawn and reorganized—the 120th
Reserve Infantry Regiment left the division for the 204th Division, a
new formation, and went to Belgium.


                                 1917.


VERDUN.

1. In January and February, 1917, the 58th Division became exclusively
Saxon (106th, 107th, 103d Reserve Infantry Regiments). It went to the
Verdun front and remained to the end of March, 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. The latter part of March it went into line at Auberive, and suffered
heavy losses in the attack of April 16–17. Because of these losses, the
8th Company of the 103d Infantry Regiment required a minimum
reenforcement of 70 men.


RUSSIA-LAKE NAROTCH.

3. Relieved about April 20, the 58th Division entrained on the 24th for
Russia. (Itinerary: Coblentz-Giessen-Halle-Lissa-Lodz-Warsaw-Brest-
Litowsk (Apr. 28).) It held the sector south of Lake Narotch from the
beginning of May until the beginning of October.


BELGIUM.

4. On October 6 it was brought back to France. (Itinerary: Vilna-
Koenigsberg-Luebeck-Hamburg-Crefeld-Aix la Chapelle-Liége-Ghent-Bruges-
Thourout (Oct. 11).)


HOUTHULST WOOD.

5. On October 17 it took over the sector south of Houthulst wood and
received the attack of October 22; it was relieved on the 24th.

6. On October 31 it again occupied the sector which it left at the end
of November.

7. It spent December at rest in the vicinity of Bruges.


                              RECRUITING.

Mixed at the beginning (Saxon and Wurttemberg), like the 54th Reserve
Division, the division became homogeneous by exchanging its Wurttemberg
troops for Saxon units.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

When the 58th Division was on the Russian front, a division school was
formed in the month of June, 1917, with the purpose of teaching men the
method of attack.

The division school was dissolved a few days before the departure for
Russia. As soon as they arrived on the Western Front it was made an
assault detachment of the division.

On the Flanders front the 58th Division did not show any high combat
value. Rather frequent cases of abandoning the front line have been
proved (October, 1917).


                                 1918.


YPRES.

1. About April 3 the division extended its left flank and relieved the
38th Division. At that time the division was holding two divisional
sectors. About May 19, it was relieved by the 49th Reserve Division and
moved to the Locre sector where it relieved the 31st Division a day
later. This sector was held by the division until the night of June
13–14 when it was relieved by the 52d Reserve Division.

2. It rested in the Courtrai area until July 7 when it returned to line
west of Dranoutre in relief of the 121st Division. The 52d Reserve
Division again relieved it on August 9.


SCARPE-SOMME.

3. The division entrained at Menin on August 25 and detrained at
Sancourt on the evening of the 26th coming into line on August 28 near
Hardecourt and Bullecourt. It sideslipped south about the 1st of
September and replaced the 52d Division which had been withdrawn. About
September 10 the division was withdrawn from the battle front after
suffering heavy losses. About this time the regiments of the division
were reduced to two battalions of three companies each.

4. On September 27, the division relieved the 39th Division north of
Ecourt-St. Quentin. It retreated by Arleux to a point west of
Valenciennes where it was relieved about October 22. Two days later it
came into line farther south at Ghent and fought until November 7. The
final identifications were at Hecq (Nov. 4), north of Berlaimont (Nov.
5) and north of Pont-sur-Sambre (Nov. 6).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was used as a strong
defensive division exclusively on the British front during 1918.




                         75th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │75 Res.       │249 Res.      │75 Res.       │249 Res.
              │              │250 Res.      │              │250 Res.
              │              │251 Res.      │              │251 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │75 Res. Cav. Detch.          │75 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │75 Res. Brig.:               │75 Res. Brig.:
              │ 55 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 55 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 57 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 57 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│75 Res. Pion. Co.            │75 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │75 Res. Pont. Engs.          │275 T. M. Co.
              │                             │75 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │75 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │75 Res. Cyclist Co.          │75 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │Ers. Field Btn. of the 75th
              │                             │  Res. Div.
              │                             │Balloon Sqn. of the 75th Res.
              │                             │  Div.
              │                             │90 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │75 Res.       │249 Res.      │75 Res.       │249 Res.
              │              │250 Res.      │              │250 Res.
              │              │251 Res.      │              │251 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.          │3 Sqn. 2 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │55 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 55 Res. F. A. Rgt. (9       │82 Ft. A. Btn.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │826 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │
              │                             │1189 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1190 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(375) Pion. Btn.:            │375 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 75 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 384 Pion. Co.
              │ 384 Pion. Co.               │ 75 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 275 T. M. Co.               │ 275 T. M. Co.
              │ 333 Searchlight Section.    │ 65 Searchlight Section.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │475 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 475 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 145 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │537 Ambulance Co.            │537 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │95 Res. Field Hospital.      │98 Res. Field Hospital.
              │99 Res. Field Hospital.      │99 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │169 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │586 M. T. Col.               │742 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │75 Res. Cyclist Co.          │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (249th and 250th Reserve Infantry Regiments, 14th Corps District—Grand
      Duchy of Baden. 251st Reserve Infantry Regiment; 11th Corps
                     District—Electorate of Hesse.)


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. The 75th Reserve Division, trained at the Heuberg Camp in Baden,
included two regiments of the 14th Corps District and one from the 11th
Corps District. The first two were formed from the six field battalions
from Baden, Nos. 61 to 66; the third, from three Thuringian field
battalions, Nos. 58 to 60.

2. Forming a part of the 38th Reserve Corps with the 76th Reserve
Division, it was sent to the Eastern Front at the end of January, 1915.

3. On February 17 it was in the vicinity of Augustowo, after taking part
in the battle of Mazurian Lakes, where it lost heavily (250th Reserve
Infantry Regiment).

4. At the end of February and the beginning of March it occupied the
front near Chtabin.

5. On March 9 it attacked north of Ostrolenka and marched to Ossowiec.
It remained in the region north of Ostrolenka until the end of April.

6. In the summer, it took part in the march upon Vilna and advanced
beyond this by way of Wileisk (Sept. 24), south of Lake Drisviaty (Oct.
6).

7. At the end of October, the 75th Reserve Division went somewhat to the
south and took over the sector of Spiagla, south of Lake Narotch.


                                 1916.


LAKE NAROTCH.

1. The division remained in line in the vicinity of Lake Narotch until
the end of July, 1916. In the spring of 1916, it received the Russian
offensive in this area.

2. At the beginning of August, it was transferred to the Stokhod. We
find it southwest of Sviniouki on October 1; south of Kisselin on
November 9 (except the 251st Reserve Infantry Regiment sent to Galicia
on Oct. 30).


GALICIA.

3. At the end of November, the entire division was in Galicia, where it
occupied the sector of the Narajowka (north of Halicz, Rohatyn).


                                 1917.


GALICIA.

1. The 75th Reserve Division was retained in the vicinity of Halicz, and
of Brzezany until July, 1917 (in reserve from the end of March to the
end of May).


COURLAND.

2. On July 25 the division left Galicia to go to Smorgoni, from which
place it was transferred to the Riga sector (Uxkull) at the end of
August. After the taking of Riga, it advanced beyond the Dvina and took
up its position on the Meloupe.


FRANCE.

3. On December 1 the division entrained for France. (Itinerary: Riga-
Mitau-Kovno-Marienburg-Berlin-Hanover-Cassel-Cologne-Coblentz-Trèves-
Thionville-Metz-Charleville-Hirson-Vervins.) It detrained at St. Gobert
and Vervins about December 7.


AISNE.

4. Sent to rest near Vervins, about December 26, the division took over
the sector of Chavignon-Urcel on the 27th.


                              RECRUITING.

The divisions formed in 1915 were not homogeneous. The 75th Reserve
Division consists of two regiments from Baden and one from the
Electorate of Hesse.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Since the 75th Reserve Division comes from Russia and has only been on
the French front since the end of December 1917, it is difficult to form
a judgment as to the combat value of this organization.

At the end of December elements of the division took part in maneuvers
supported by tanks (at Voulpaix, west of Verdun). (Interrogation of
prisoner, Feb. 20, 1918.)

At the beginning of February the 251st Reserve Infantry Regiment took
part in a division maneuver in which the infantry had to fight simulated
tanks. (Interrogation of prisoner, Mar. 11, 1918.)


                              DISCIPLINE.

It is to be noted that during the trip from Russia to France 40 men
belonging to the Minenwerfer and pioneer companies, were reported
missing. (Interrogation of prisoner, Jan. 31, 1918.)


                                 1918.


PICARDY.

1. The division was relieved south of Laon on March 26 and went to Laon.
By way of Champignon (west of Crepy), Charmes, it marched to Chauny,
where it went into line on March 30. It was engaged until about April
14, and then went to rest north of St. Gobain.


BATTLE OF THE MATZ.

2. It returned to line southeast of Canny sur Matz on the night of May
16–17 and took part in the battle of Noyon in June. It was relieved
about June 20 and rested until July 2. It was in line at Courcelles from
that date until August 18. Prior to the French attack on August 18, the
division counted about 3,000 combatants. It suffered important losses
between the 8th and 18th.

3. The division rested in the Bois de Champien and Bois de Glandon until
August 23 and then in the Bois du Tunnel. On the 27th it went to Ham. On
the night of August 31-September 1 it relieved the 1st Reserve Division
in the sector Libermont-Bois du Tunnel. It fell back across the Canal du
Nord on September 3 and continued its retreat through Sommette, Dury,
Bray St. Christophe until it reached a position at Happencourt on
September 7. It was relieved on the 13th by the 22d Reserve Division.
The attack of August and September had completely disorganized the
division and greatly reduced its morale.


LE CATEAU.

4. The division returned to line west of Bellenglise on September 20 and
was heavily engaged for 10 days.


WOEVRE.

5. On November 10 the division came into line near Jametz on the
American front.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Throughout 1918 its morale
appears to have been low, and after the battle of Matz its effectives
were greatly reduced.




                         76th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │76 Res.       │252 Res.      │76 Res.       │252 Res.
              │              │253 Res.      │              │253 Res.
              │              │254 Res.      │              │254 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │76 Res. Cav. Detch.          │76 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │76 Res. Brig.:               │76 Res. Brig.:
              │ 56 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 56 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 58 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 58 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│76 Res. Pion. Co.            │76 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │76 Res. Pont. Engs.          │276 T. M. Co.
              │                             │76 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │76 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │76 Res. Cyclist Co.          │76 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │76 Res.       │252 Res.      │76 Res.       │252 Res.
              │              │253 Res.      │              │253 Res.
              │              │254 Res.      │              │254 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 1 Res. Uhlan Rgt.     │3 Sqn. 13 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │76 Art. Command:
              │ 56 Res. F. A. Rgt.          │ 56 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │ 58 Res. F. A. Rgt.          │ 2 Abt. 24 Ft. A. Rgt. (5th
              │                             │  and 7th Btries.).
              │                             │ 763 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1081 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1082 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(376) Pion. Btn.:            │376 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 76 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 77 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 77 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 76 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 276 T. M. Co.               │ 76 Searchlight Section.
              │ 344 Searchlight Section.    │476 Signal Command:
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │ 476 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 188 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │538 Ambulance Co.            │538 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │100 Field Hospital (Res.).   │100 Res. Field Hospital.
              │101 Field Hospital (Res.).   │101 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │146 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │743 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │76 Res. Cyclist Co.          │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (11th and 18th Corps District—Hesse Electoral, Hesse—Nassau, and Grand
                            Duchy of Hesse.)


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. The 76th Reserve Division (included in the 38th Reserve Corps with
the 75th Reserve Division), formed in January, 1915, grows out of three
field battalions (Feld bataillone), Nos. 55–57 of the 11th Corps
District, and out of six field battalions, Nos. 67–72 of the 18th Corps
District. It was sent toward Russia at the beginning of February, 1915.

2. On February 13 it was identified in the region of Gumbinnen. It was
really part of the group which operated in the region of Wylkowyszki-
Mariampol.

3. On March 2 it was on the Sopotzkyn-Chtabin front.

4. In March it was northeast of Prasnysz.

5. In April it was in the region of Suwalki-Augustowo.

6. In May it was north of Suwalki.

7. On June 23 the 76th Reserve Division went to the Dubissa area.

8. On June 30, region of Eydtkuhnen.

9. The summer offensive of 1915 brought it, through the region of Vilna,
to Kovno (Aug. 16) and then to the south of Smorgoni (Oct. 6–10).

It was withdrawn from the front about October 15 and was at Vilna on
November 1 and in the region of Mitau on December 5.


                                 1916.


COURLAND.

1. Then moved toward the north, the 76th Reserve Division took up a
sector on the Dvina, opposite Uxkull (Jan.-Aug., 1916).


ROUMANIA.

2. From the 10th to the 20th of September the division was moved to the
Roumanian front.

3. In October it took part in the battles in the regions of Hermannstadt
and Brasso (Kronstadt).

4. At the end of October or beginning of November it occupied the
vicinity of Campolung. At the end of December, to the south of Rimnicu-
Sarat.


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA (FOCSANI).

1. With the stabilization of the Roumanian front, it was in line to the
north and east to Focsani, where it remained from January to April,
1917.

2. In May it was in reserve. At about this time it seems to have been
brought to the rear of the French front.

3. The division reappeared in Roumania, in the vicinity of Focsani, from
August 6 to 14. It attacked on the 15th and suffered heavy losses.

4. Put in reserve, near Focsani, it went back into line at the beginning
of October to the north of Iresti. It was still in that region at the
beginning of January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 252d Regiment in Thuringe, 253d Regiment in Hesse-Nassau, and 254th
Regiment in the Grand Duchy of Hesse. These last two regiments may be
termed Rhenish regiments.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 76th Reserve Division was at all times used on the eastern front.


                                 1918.

1. The division was moved to the Western Front in the spring after
exchanging its older men for younger men from the divisions remaining in
Roumania. It entrained at Focsani on March 7 and traveled by way of
Hermannstadt, Budapest, Breslau, Erfurt, Fulda, to Metz, where it
detrained on March 15. The 254th Reserve Regiment was in cantonments a
few days at Fort Luitpold and then went to Norroy le Veneur where it
remained about 12 days. It entrained on March 31 and proceeded by way of
Sedan and Charleville to Hirson (Apr. 1). From there it marched via
Remigny-Golancourt-Roye-Narvillers-Hangest-Plessier-Rozainvillers, where
it went into cantonments for three days.


MONTDIDIER.

2. On the night of April 12–13 the division relieved elements of the 23d
Division between Malpart and La Chappelle-St. Aignan. About May 2 the
division extended its front to the north and relieved a part of the
240th Division. This was a defensive sector at this time. On May 9 the
French made an attack on Grivesnes Park while the 76th Reserve Division
was holding it. The attack was a complete surprise and caused many
casualties. Between April 10 and May 8 the losses averaged 30 to 35 men
per company and the number of combatants on May 9 was about 75 per
company. It was relieved in the middle of May.


VERDUN.

3. The division entered line in the Verdun region to the south of
Bezonvaux on June 21. It was withdrawn from the quiet sector in mid-
July, and on the 29th relieved the 46th Reserve Division southwest of
Soissons. Until August 2 it was not involved in the attack. It defended
the flanks of the German retreat energetically until its withdrawal on
September 8. A week later its regiments were used singly to support the
units in line in delaying the French advance on the line Coucy le
Chateau-Ferny-Sorny. The losses in the fighting were considerable,
including 575 prisoners. It showed itself a good defensive division.

4. On September 25 the division came in line on the extreme left of the
American line in the Argonne. On October 10 all three regiments were
opposite the United States troops in Grandpre. It remained in line until
November 8 before it was finally withdrawn.

The excessive use of the division gave rise to serious internal
discontent. The rifle strength of the regiments was down to less than
300 by October 24, and the troops were demanding a rest. Some companies
refused to enter the line in mid-October. The divisional commander was
obliged to issue an appeal to the division on October 21 to hold out.
The entire rifle strength of the 2d Battalion, 254th Reserve Regiment,
was but 3 officers and 75 men on October 28.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. As a defensive sector holding
unit the division showed a power of sustained resistance that warranted
a higher classification. By the end the division had been completely
used up.




                         77th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │77 Res.       │255 Res.      │77 Res.       │255 Res.
              │              │256 Res.      │              │256 Res.
              │              │257 Res.      │              │257 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │77 Res. Cav. Detch.          │77 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │77 Res. Brig.:               │77 Res. Brig.:
              │ 59 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 59 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 60 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 60 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│77 Res. Pion. Co.            │77 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │77 Res. Pont. Engs.          │277 T. M. Co.
              │                             │77 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │77 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │77 Res. Cyclist Co.          │77 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[25]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │77 Res.       │255 Res.      │77 Res.       │332.
              │              │256 Res.      │              │257 Res.
              │              │257 Res.      │              │419.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 2 Horse Jag. Rgt. (?) │4 Sqn. 2 Horse Jag. Rgt.
              │77 Res. Cav. Detch. (?)      │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │(?) Art. Command:
              │ 59 Res. F. A. Rgt. (9       │ 59 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(377) Pion. Btn.:            │1 Co. 1 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 78 Res. Pion. Co.           │1 Ldw. Co. 7 C. Dist. Pions.
              │ 277 T. M. Co.               │39 Res. Searchlight Section.
              │ 39 Res. Searchlight Section.│277 T. M. Co.
              │ 477 Tel. Detch.             │477 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │539 Ambulance Co.            │539 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │103 Field Hospital (Res.).   │103 Res. Field Hospital.
              │104 Field Hospital (Res.).   │104 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │105 Res. Field Hospital.
              │                             │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │744 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │77 Res. Cyclist Co.          │77 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │403 Pion. Btn. (?)
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 25:

  Composition at the time of dissolution.


                                HISTORY.

  (255th Regiment: 7th Corps District—Westphalia. 257th Regiment, 332d
            Regiment: 8th Corps District—Rhenish Province.)


                                 1915.

The 77th Reserve Division was formed at the Senne Cantonment (7th Corps
Region) in January, 1915, with six field battalions (Nos. 31–36) of the
7th Corps Region and three of the 8th, (Nos. 37–39.) With the 78th
Reserve Division, it composed the 39th Reserve Corps.


RUSSIA.

1. Brought to the Eastern Front at the beginning of February, detraining
at Insterburg, it was a part of the army operating in Eastern Prussia
after February 12.

2. At the beginning of March it was engaged on the Sopotzkyn-Chtabin
front in the region of Simno; on March 9 it covered the retreat of the
21st Corps and fell back to Seiny, Suwalki and Augustowo (Mar. 10 to
31).

3. During May and June the 77th Reserve Division took part in the
Courland raid. On May 5 it was identified as being on the Rossieny-
Beisagola front (to the South of Chavli).


GRODNO.

4. Taking part in the summer offensive, it advanced through the regions
of Grodno, Olita (Aug 30) and Vileiki (Sept 27).

5. At the beginning of November it established itself in the vicinity of
Kchtchava, east of Novo-Alexandrovsk.


                                 1916.


COURLAND.

1. The 77th Reserve Division stayed in the region north of Kchtchava—and
south of Dvinsk during all of 1916 and until August 1917. In August of
1916 it gave one of its regiments—the 256th—to the Mitau group and later
to the 218th Division.


                                 1917.


COURLAND.

1. At the end of August, 1917, the 77th Reserve Division was transferred
from the region of the Dvinsk to the Riga front, being brought up to
strength by the addition of the 332d Regiment, the latter having
originally come from the 83d Division after having successively been
part of the 11th Landwehr Division and the 8th Cavalry Division.

2. In October the 77th Reserve Division appeared in the vicinity of
Friedrichstadt; near Jakobstadt, at the end of October. The 255th
Regiment may have participated about this date in the occupation of the
island of Oesel.

3. On November 5 the division is identified in the region of Libau; on
January 20, the 257th Regiment at Mitau; and to the northwest of the
Novo-Alexandrovsk-Dvinsk railway, the 255th Regiment on February 10. On
March 1 the 332d Regiment of Infantry was to leave “in order to advance
in the East” (letter).


                              RECRUITING.

Principally Westphalia for the 255th Regiment; Rhenish provinces for the
257th and 332d Regiments. Numerous recruits from Lorraine and Alsace.
Poles in the 332d Regiment, which received the Ersatz Battalion of the
19th Infantry at the time it was formed.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 77th Reserve Division did not leave the Russian front. One of its
present regiments, the 332d, is a former regiment of the Posen garrison,
of which two of the three battalions were Rhenish Landsturm battalions.
Successive replacements gave this regiment the appearance of an ordinary
regiment. In January, 1918, the older and sickly men were released.


                                 1918.

1. The division left Russia about April 1 and traveled via Magdebourg-
Hildesheim-Cologne-Gerolstein-Gouvy-Bastogne-Lebramont-Sedan-Liart-
Rozay-Montcornet, detraining in the vicinity of Laon on April 4. It
marched by stages toward Villers-Carbonnel-Athies, where it rested and
trained from April 11 to 19. On April 20 it entered the line north of
Hangard and was engaged until the end of the month.


SOMME.

2. It returned to line east of Villers-Bretonneux on May 18 and held
that sector until July 4.


WOEVRE.

3. The division was moved to the Woevre by Hirson and Montmedy and on
July 14 relieved the 183d Division in the Flirey sector. It held that
sector until the American attack on St. Mihiel on September 12. The
division suffered very heavy losses in prisoners, but had few other
casualties, the prisoners stating that they were completely cut off by
the American barrage. It was withdrawn on September 16 and did not
thereafter return to line.

4. What remained of the 77th Reserve Division was reassembled at Pagny
and was occupied in organizing the ground between Pagny and Prenay. A
report of October 11 stated that the division passed through Berlin on
its way to the Balkan front on October 2. The division was then
considered as withdrawn from the Western Front.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was not seriously engaged
except in the St. Mihiel attack, which practically destroyed the
division. Its morale was only mediocre. Deserters from the Alsace-
Lorraine element in the division were numerous.




                         78th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │78 Res.       │258 Res.      │78 Res.       │258 Res.
              │              │259 Res.      │              │259 Res.
              │              │260 Res.      │              │260 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │78 Res. Cav. Detch.          │78 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │78 Res. Brig.:               │78 Res. Brig.:
              │ 61 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 61 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 62 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 62 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│78 Res. Pion. Co.            │78 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │78 Res. Pont. Engs.          │2 Landst. Pion. Co. (2 C.
              │                             │  Dist.).
              │                             │278 T. M. Co.
              │                             │78 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │78 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │78 Res. Cyclist Co.          │78 Res. Cyclist Co.
              │                             │83 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[26]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │78 Res.       │258 Res.      │78 Res.       │258 Res.
              │              │259 Res.      │              │259 Res.
              │              │260 Res.      │              │260  Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.          │78 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │                             │2 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │78 Art. Command:             │(?) Art. Command:
              │ 62 Res. F. A. Rgt. (9       │ 62 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│378 Pion. Btn.:              │79 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 79 Res. Pion. Co.           │80 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                             │
              │ 80 Res. Pion. Co.           │299 Searchlight Section.
              │ 278 T. M. Co. (299          │278 T. M. Co.
              │  Searchlight Section).      │
              │ 478 Tel. Detch.             │478 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │540 Ambulance Co.            │540 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │107 Res. Field Hospital.     │106 Res. Field Hospital.
              │108 Res. Field Hospital.     │107 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │108 Res. Field Hospital.
              │                             │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │745 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │78 Res. Cyclist Co.          │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 26:

  Composition at the time of dissolution.


                                HISTORY.

  (258th Regiment: 8th Corps District—Rhenish Province. 259th Regiment:
 10th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Oldenberg. 260th Regiment: 10th Corps
                            District—Hanover.)


                                 1915.

The 78th Reserve Division which, with the 77th Reserve Division,
constituted the 39th Reserve Corps as one of the reserve divisions
created during the winter of 1914–15. One of its regiments—the
258th—grew out of three field battalions of the 8th Corps Region (Nos.
40–42) and the 259th and the 260th out of six field battalions (Nos.
49–54) of the 10th Corps District. All three regiments were trained at
the Alten-Grabow cantonment (4th Corps District).


RUSSIA.

1. In action on the Russian front to the north of Grodno, near Simno,
Kalvariia and Suwalki in March, 1915, it took part in the Courland raid
(region of Chavli) in May. It was engaged in the operations on the
Dubissa to the northeast of Rossieny from the end of May to the middle
of July.

2. In July, with the Army of Niemen (Beulow) it took part in the
offensive against Russia, occupied the region of Poneviej, to the west
of Kupichki (August) arrived before Dvinsk in September and held a
position near the Illukst (September-December).


                                 1916.


COURLAND.

1. The 78th Reserve Division remained in the Illukst (region of Dvinsk)
during the whole year 1916 and until the month of April, 1917.


                                 1917.


COURLAND.

1. Relieved from the Illukst region on April 14, 1917, the division was
transferred to the Western Front. It entrained on April 15 (itinerary:
Kovno-Wirballen-Allenstein-Posen-Leipzig-Nuremberg-Karlsruhe-Friberg-
Muelheim) and detrained near Mulhausen on the 19th.


FRANCE (ALSACE).

2. On April 25 it went into line in the Burnhaupt sector to the north of
the Rhône-Rhine Canal.


AISNE-AILETTE.

3. Relieved on May 11, it was sent into the Aisne. For 10 weeks it
occupied (May 23-Aug. 5) the sector south of the Ailette, where it did
not participate in any action of importance. Beginning with June 19 it
made a series of local attacks in which the 258th Regiment suffered some
fairly big losses (especially on June 20, to the east of Vauxaillon).


VERDUN.

4. Sent toward the Verdun front as a reserve at the time of the French
offensive of August 20, it was engaged to the north of Caurières
(southwest of the Ornes) on September 10. On September 13 it executed a
counterattack and continued to occupy this difficult sector until the
middle of October.


LORRAINE.

5. Withdrawn from Verdun, the division immediately went into line along
the banks of the Seille (between Cheminot and Abaucourt) on October 14.
Its stay in Lorraine was devoid of any particular event.


HAYE.

6. Toward the middle of December it was withdrawn from the Abaucourt
sector and put at rest for instruction in the region of Chambley-Mars la
Tour (Dec. 18 to Jan. 11, 1918), then sent to Seicheprey toward the
middle of January. It was identified as still there on March 29.


                              RECRUITING.

One of the three regiments, the 258th, was Rhenish; the 259th was an
“Oldenberger” Regiment, while the 260th was a Hanoverian and
Brunswickian organization, terms found in documents, as well as the
designation Lower Saxony, a more general term.

The neighboring corps districts (7th, Westphalia, and 9th, Schleswig-
Holstein) were occasionally called upon for replacements.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 78th Reserve Division showed up well on the Eastern Front and on the
French front.

After a hard stay opposite Verdun, the division seems to have gone
through a moral crisis; relatively high number of desertions took place
in the 258th, and especially in the 259th Regiment. The intention of the
High Command in sending the division into Lorraine (October-December,
1917) is said to have been done with an idea of giving its chiefs an
opportunity of getting their units well in hand again.

Nevertheless, the vigorous command and the fairly high number of
effectives, taken for the greater part from the younger classes, make
the 78th Reserve Division a combat division worthy of consideration. At
Jonville at the end of December, 1917, the division took part in assault
practice.

It is to be noted that a certain number of recruits were from Alsace and
Lorraine.


                                 1918.


CHATEAU THIERRY.

1. The division was relieved in the Woevre about May 11 by the 8th
Bavarian Reserve Division. It came into line on June 4 west of Dammard
(Ourcq region). It was engaged until about July 20 and then withdrawn.

2. The division was disbanded at Montcornet on August 12. The 259th
Reserve Regiment was broken up and one battalion of it sent to each
regiment of the 2d Guard Division. The 260th Reserve Regiment was turned
as a draft to the 20th Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. After about two weeks of heavy
fighting on the Marne salient, the division was dissolved.




                         79th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │79 Res.       │261 Res.      │79 Res.       │261 Res.
              │              │262 Res.      │              │262 Res.
              │              │263 Res.      │              │263 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │79 Res. Cav. Detch.          │79 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │79 Res. Brig.:               │79 Res. Brig.:
              │ 63 Res. F. A. Rgt.          │ 63 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │ 64 Res. F. A. Rgt.          │ 64 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│79 Res. Pion. Co.            │79 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │79 Res. Pont. Engs.          │83 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                             │279 T. M. Co.
              │                             │79 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │79 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │79 Res. Cyclist Co.          │79 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │79 Res.       │261 Res.      │79 Res.       │261 Res.
              │              │262 Res.      │              │262 Res.
              │              │263 Res.      │              │263 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.          │3 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │79 Art. Command:             │79 Art. Command:
              │ 63 Res. F. A. Rgt. (9       │ 63 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │ 2 Abt. 20 Ft. A. Rgt. (6 and
              │                             │  8 Btries.).
              │                             │ 718 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 719 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1354 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│379 Pion. Btn.:              │379 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 81 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 81 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 1 Ers. Co. 24 Pions.        │ 1 Ers. Co. 24 Pions.
              │ 279 T. M. Co.               │ 25 Searchlight Section.
              │ 40 Res. Searchlight Section.│479 Signal Command:
              │ 50 Searchlight Sections.    │ 479 Tel. Detch.
              │ 51 Searchlight Section.     │ 64 Wireless Detch.
              │ 79 Searchlight Sections.    │
              │ 79 Res. Pont. Engs.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │541 Ambulance Co.            │541 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │110 Field Hospital.          │110 Res. Field Hospital.
              │111 Field Hospital.          │111 Res. Field Hospital.
              │112 Field Hospital.          │164 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │746 M. T. Col.               │746 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (261st and 262d Reserve Regiments: Entire Prussian territory by
 selection, in the same manner as the Guard. 263d Reserve Regiment: 4th
                    Corps District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1915.


EASTERN PRUSSIA.

1. The 79th Reserve Division was one of the divisions formed in the
winter of 1914–15, and, with the 80th Reserve Division, formed the 40th
Reserve Corps. It grew out of six field battalions of the Guard and
three field battalions. (Nos. 19–21) of the 4th Corps District. It was
trained at the Doeberitz cantonment and sent to Eastern Prussia at the
beginning of February, 1915, where it took part in the battle of the
Masure Lakes from the 7th to the 17th.


RUSSIA.

2. It was identified in the vicinity of Lyck on February 13, as marching
toward Augustowo on the 14th and to the south of the Forest of Augustowo
on the 24th.


POLAND.

3. From the end of February until the end of March it was engaged on the
Bobr, to the north of the Fortess of Ossoviec. At the end of March,
having come back in the northeast, it held the passes in the lakes to
the east of Suwalki-Augustowo.

4. At the beginning of May the 40th Reserve Corps advanced toward
Kalwaria-Mariampol.


KOVNO.

5. On June 9 the 79th Reserve Division appeared before Kovno; it took
part in the siege and the taking of this town (July-Aug. 18).


SMORGONI.

6. The offensive against the Russians took it through Ochmiana (?) to
the south of Smorgoni (Aug. 27). The division took a position in this
region.


SMORGONI-KREVO.

7. The division occupied the Krevo-Smorgoni (south of Vilna) sector from
the end of August, 1915, until some time in November, 1916.


                                 1916.


RUSSIA-FRANCE.

1. Relieved from the Smorgoni sector at the end of November, 1916, the
79th Division was transferred to the Western Front. It entrained at
Mitau (Itinerary: Chavli-Grodno-Bielostok-Varsovie-Lodz-Kalisz-Glogau-
Cottbus-Halle-Paderborn-Duesseldorf-Aix la Chapelle-Herbesthal-Liege-
Louvain-Brussels) and detrained at Ascq (east of Lille) on December 10.


LILLE.

2. Remained there at rest.


                                 1917.


LA BASSEE.

1. About January 10, 1917, it took over the La Bassee-Vermelles sector
(up to Jan. 28).


LENS-VIMY.

2. At the end of February it appeared in the Lens sector and on March 3
on the Vimy front. On April 9 it was sorely tried by the British attack
on the heights of Vimy, where it lost 1,660 prisoners.

3. It was relieved about April 14 and put at rest.


LILLE.

4. On May 3 the division entered the line again in the quiet sector to
the southwest of Lille (between Boutillerie and Fauquissart). It stayed
there until July 8.


FLANDERS.

5. After a few days rest at Templeuve it was transferred to Flanders,
where it was again at rest (east of Bruges) (July).


LANGEMARCK.

6. At the beginning of the British offensive at Ypres (July 31) it was
brought to Langemarck as a “counterattack” division. Engaged on August 6
it suffered very heavy losses and abandoned Langemarck during the attack
of the 16th. It was relieved on the 16th, having lost 75 per cent of its
strength. It was put at rest east of Cambrai and reorganized.


ST. QUENTIN.

7. On September 1 it took over the sector northwest of St. Quentin
(Pontruet-Gricourt), which it occupied until November 28.


CAMBRAI.

8. On November 21, by reason of the British offensive, it hastily put
two battalions in action at Masnières.

9. At the beginning of December the 79th Reserve Division went into line
to the east of Gouzeaucourt. It was relieved in January, 1918,
reappeared on the front at the beginning of February near Gonnelieu, and
went back to rest at the end of the month.


                              RECRUITING.

The 261st and 262d Regiments were taken from depots of the Guard and
were recruited like the latter, from all sections of Prussia. The 263d
Regiment was a “Magdeberg” unit (Prussian Saxony).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 79th Division, already sorely tried at Vimy in April, was much used
at Ypres in August, 1917.

The 261st and 262d Regiments were completely demoralized during the
British attack and fled to the rear. According to an officer this panic
was due to the lack of combat spirit displayed by the 1918 class, which
made up an important part of the strength of the soldiers engaged.

It arrived in a very worn out condition in the St. Quentin sector and
left it on November 28 with nearly full strength and replacement of
material. It should (December, 1917) be capable of putting forth an
appreciable effort.

The soldiers from Alsace and Lorraine, formerly numerous in this
division, were withdrawn from this unit when it was sent to the French
front. Ninety-three of them remained in the 252d Regiment, who were
mostly sent to the Eastern Front on July 3, 1917 (German order).


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division reenforced the Somme battle front on March 21 near
Ronssoy. It advanced west of Epehy on March 22 and was withdrawn to
second line a day later. It followed up the advance and took part in the
attack near Meaulte on April 5, after which it was withdrawn.


BAILLEUL.

2. It rested in Belgium for five weeks, and on May 26 entered the line
northwest of Bailleul. It was relieved on the night of June 19–20.

3. The division rested in Roubaix area until July 20, when it was
transferred by rail to Tergnier (west of La Fere) and then marched to
Guny, west of Coucy le Chateau, where it remained in army reserve. On
August 8 the division was alarmed, and at mid-day was transferred in
motor busses via Chauny-Ham-Nesle to Rethonvillers, arriving before dawn
on the 9th. It came into action on the following day at 4 kilometers
northeast of Andechy.


SCARPE-SOMME.

4. At once the division was heavily engaged with all nine battalions in
line. On the 13th its place was taken by the 121st Division, and it
rested for three or four days in the area southwest of Nesle. On the
16th the division relieved the 204th Division on the line east of
Goyencourt-Hill 81, west of Roye-Avre. It was heavily engaged in
opposing the French attacks until August 31, when it was withdrawn east
of Roye.

5. On September 5 the division relieved the Alpine Corps at Epenancourt.
It fell back in a northeasterly direction by Atilly, southeast of
Vermand, southeast of Maissemy, Pontruet, and Gricourt. It was relieved
about October 8 after losing 2,200 prisoners in August and September.


SCARPE.

6. When relieved, the division went to the Fres-Sancourt area (north of
St. Gobain), where it was in reserve. About the 14th it was taken to La
Ferte-Chevresis to construct rear positions. It was moved in trucks on
the 18th by Sains-Richaumont-Wiege-Villers les Guise-Iron near Etreux.
It went into line on the evening of the 18th, relieving elements of the
81st Division. It was engaged until the armistice. The line of retreat
was through Boue, Boulogne, Avesnes, Sobre le Chateau. In the last place
it was identified on November 10.

At the end the effective strength of the division was greatly
diminished, although it had received drafts from the dissolved 201st and
202d Regiments.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Throughout 1918 the division was
extensively used in important defensive sectors, in which it did fairly
well.




                         80th Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │80 Res.       │264 Res.      │80 Res.       │264 Res.
              │              │265 Res.      │              │266 Res.
              │              │266 Res.      │              │34 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │80 Res. Cav. Detch.          │80 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │80 Res. Brig.:               │80 Res. Brig.:
              │ 65 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 65 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 66 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 66 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│80 Res. Pion. Co.            │80 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │80 Res. Pont. Engs.          │281 T. M. Co.
              │                             │80 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │80 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │80 Res. Cyclist Co.          │80 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │80 Res.       │264 Res.      │80 Res.       │34 Res.
              │              │266 Res.      │              │264 Res.
              │              │34 Res.       │              │266 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.          │4 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │74 Art. Command:             │74 Art. Command:
              │ 66 Res. F. A. Rgt. (9       │ 66 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.)                   │
              │                             │ 3 Abt. 27 Ft. A. Rgt. (8 and
              │                             │  10 Btries.)
              │                             │ 899 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 900 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1370 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(380) Pion. Btn.:            │380 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 82 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 82 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 83 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 83 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 280 T. M. Co.               │ 280 T. M. Co.
              │ 308 Searchlight Section.    │ 96 Searchlight Section.
              │ 480 Tel. Detch.             │ 240 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │480 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 480 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 24 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │542 Ambulance Co.            │542 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │59 Res. Field Hospital.      │113 Res. Field Hospital.
              │114 Res. Field Hospital.     │114 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │165 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │T. M. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (264th Regiment; 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony and part of
     Thuringia. 266th Regiment, 9th Corps District—Grand Duchies of
       Mecklenberg. 34th Regiment, 2d Corps District—Pomerania.)


                                 1915.


EASTERN PRUSSIA.

1. Organized during the winter of 1914–15, this division and the 79th
Reserve Division formed the 40th Reserve Corps. The 80th Reserve
Division was formed out of three field battalions of the 4th Corps
District (Nos. 22–24) and six field battalions (Nos. 43–48) of the 9th
Corps District. After training at the Lockstedt cantonment it was sent
to Eastern Prussia at the beginning of February, 1915. There it took
part in the battle of the Lakes of Masura from the 7th to the 17th.


POLAND.

2. From the end of February to the beginning of March it was actively
engaged in the region of the fortress of Ossoviec and took part in
combats along the Polish frontier before the Russian retreat in Eastern
Prussia. In March it was brought back to the frontier of Eastern Prussia
and fought in the zone of the Suvalki government until July. It
exchanged the 265th Regiment for the 34th Regiment.


SMORGONI.

3. At the time of the Summer offensive the division participated in the
taking of Kovno (Aug. 18), fought on the Niémen (Aug. 19, Sept. 8th) and
entered Vilna. It occupied the new front in the region of Smorgoni and
held this sector until March, 1916.


                                 1916.


NAROTCH LAKE.

1. In March, 1916, the division opposed the Russian offensive on the
Narotch Lake front and occupied this sector until the month of December.


FRANCE.

2. On December 23 it entrained for the Western Front. (Itinerary:
Lyntuny (northeast of Vilna)-Vilna-Kovno-Koenigsberg-Danzig-Stettin-
Hamberg-Hanover-Cologne-Aix la Chapelle-Liège-Mons.) It detrained at
Douai on the 29th and 30th of December and was put at rest at Waziers
(northeast of Douai) until the middle of January, 1917.


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. January 18, 1917, it went into line before Neuve Chapelle (north of
the canal of la Bassée).

2. Relieved at about the beginning of March, it took over a sector to
the south of Lens (Mar. 14). Obliged to fall back to the Méricourt-Avion
line after the capture of the heights of Vimy by the British troops
(Apr. 9), it suffered serious losses in the course of that operation.


FLANDERS.

3. On May 16 it was relieved from the Lens front and sent to rest in the
region of Trent until May 29.

4. From May 29 to June 22 it held the Boesinghe-Wieltje sector, where it
took part in no engagements.


MEUSE.

5. After resting, in July, in the region of Sedan-Montmédy, the 80th
Reserve Division was brought (July 20) as a reserve to the left bank of
the Meuse, and at the beginning of August to the right bank (region of
Juvigny-Jametz-Etraye).


VERDUN.

6. On August 14 it drew near the front and on August 20 reenforced, near
Hill 344, the units strained by the French attack. On the 23d it
sustained very heavy losses and gave up the counter attack.


CHAMPAGNE.

7. At the beginning of September the division entrained for Champagne.
It occupied the Tahure sector the first half of September.


ARGONNE.

8. At the beginning of October it took over the Boureuilles-Vauquois
sector, which it left on January 23, 1918, going to the Semide
cantonment for training.


                              RECRUITING.

The 264th Regiment was recruited in the 4th Corps District and is
sometimes called an Altenberg regiment. The 266th Regiment is a
Mecklenberg unit. The 34th Regiment is Pomeranian in theory with a
fairly heterogeneous make-up like the greater number of the units from
Pomerania.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 80th Reserve Division, which seems to have had a high morale while
opposite the English front, did not come up to expectations on August
20, 1917, while opposite Verdun. It proved incapable of counter
attacking. It is reported that there were desertions and mutiny among
the men which resulted in the relieving of the general commanding the
brigade and of the commanding officer of the 264th Regiment.

The 34th Regiment was completely exhausted during the attacks of August
20.

In Argonne the losses of this division were very slight. At the Semide
cantonment (Jan. 23 to Feb. 20, 1918) the division went through various
maneuvers connected with open warfare.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved in the Vauquois sector by the 237th
Division from Russia about March 18. It rested and trained until March
27, when it traveled by St. Quentin-Ham-Roye to the vicinity of Moreuil.


PICARDY.

2. It reenforced the battle front north of Sauvillers on April 3, but
was withdrawn on the 7th and rested at Ribemont. Losses were heavy
during the brief engagement of the division.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. The division relieved the 14th Bavarian Division on April 21–22 in
the sector Cornillet-Mont Blond. It remained there until the July 15
offensive, but did not take part in that action. On July 27 it returned
to line near Moronvilliers and held that sector until August 22.


AILETTE-AISNE.

4. It marched to Paris and went into line there. Two days later it was
hastily relieved and marched to Chavignon. It entered line on the night
of September 2–3 northwest of Crouy. It was withdrawn on September 21.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. The division returned to Champagne and relieved the 213th Division on
September 27 at Loivre. It was engaged near Orainville, Aumenancourt,
Pont Givart until October 11. It was again in line on October 17 at
Nanteuil sur Aisne. It continued in line until the end of hostilities.
The last identification was near Wasigny on November 7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. In general, it was used to hold
less important defensive sectors.




                         81st Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │81 Res.       │267 Res.      │81 Res.       │267 Res.
              │              │268 Res.      │              │268 Res.
              │              │269 Res.      │              │269 Res.
              │              │              │              │39 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │81 Res. Cav. Detch.          │81 Res. Cav. Detch.
              │4 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.          │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │81 Res. Brig.:               │81 Res. Brig.:
              │ 67 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 67 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 68 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 68 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│81 Res. Pion. Co.            │81 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │81 Res. Pont. Engs.          │84 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                             │281 T. M. Co.
              │                             │81 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │81 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │81 Res. Cyclist Co.          │81 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │47 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │81 Res.       │267 Res.      │81 Res.       │267 Res.
              │              │268 Res.      │              │268 Res.
              │              │269 Res.      │              │269 Res.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │81 Res. (?) Cav. Detch.      │2 Sqn. 1 Drag. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │(?) F. A. Rgt.
              │ 67 Res. F. A. Rgt. (9       │2 Abt. 26 Ft. A. Rgt. (4 and
              │  Btries.).                  │  6 Btries.).
              │                             │980 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │
              │                             │1019 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1034 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(381) Pion. Btn.:            │41 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 84 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 84 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 85 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 85 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 95 T. M. Co.                │ 281 T. M. Co.
              │ 281 T. M. Co.               │ 56 Searchlight Section.
              │ 14 Res. Searchlight Section.│481 Signal Command:
              │ 360 Searchlight Section.    │ 481 Tel. Detch.
              │ 481 Tel. Detch.             │ 137 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │543 Ambulance Co.            │543 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │Field Hospital.              │120 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │302 Field Hospital.
              │                             │220 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │81 Res. Cyclist Co.          │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (267th Regiment: 2d Corps District—Pomerania. 268th Regiment: 6th Corps
    District—Silesia. 269th Regiment: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1915.

The 81st Reserve Division was formed out of six field battalions of the
2d Corps District (Nos. 7–12) and three field battalions (Nos. 13–15) of
the 3d Corps District. The first six were used to form the 267th and the
268th and the last named three were used to form the 269th Regiment. The
division was instructed at the Warthe cantonment (5th Corps District)
before being sent to the Western Front.

1. The 81st Reserve Division (with the 82d Reserve Division it
constituted the 41st Reserve Corps), was transported to Belgium and
detrained at Courtrai January 21, 1915.


SOMME.

2. Sent to the Somme district, it was engaged to the north of Chaulnes
(Jan. 27-Mar. 28).

3. At the end of March the division was sent toward the Eastern Front.


GALICIA-RUSSIA.

The division was found on the Galician front in May (Jaslo, May 9); took
part in operations on the San, near Jaroslav (between San and the
Jaroslav-Przeworsk railway on May 15) then on the Bug (region of Krylov
in July). Going down the Bug by Vladova (August) it advanced up to the
west of Logitchin and the Oginsky Canal (north of Pinsk) in September.
The front becoming fixed, the division established itself in that
region.


                                 1916.


PINSK.

1. The 81st Reserve Division stayed for more than two years in the
Oginski-Iasälda Canal sector (Sept., 1915-Dec., 1917).

2. At the beginning of July, 1916, the 269th Regiment was identified
between the Styr and the Stokhod, doubtlessly as a reserve for the units
engaged against the Russian offensive.


                                 1917.


RUSSIA-FRANCE.

1. In December, 1917, the division was relieved from its sector to the
north of Pinsk and transported to the Western Front. It entrained on
December 20 at Ivanovo (Itinerary: Soldau-Bromberg-Schneide-Muehl-
Berlin-Sarrebruck-Sedan-Cambrai), and detrained at Lille on December 26.
After resting in the vicinity of Lille it went into line to the south of
Fleurbaix (Jan. 24–25, 1918). It again occupied the same sector at the
beginning of April.


                              RECRUITING.

The 267th and the 268th Regiments were originally Pomeranian and became
quite heterogeneous like all regiments from this province. The 268th
Regiment was in theory recruited in Silesia which contributes to a
maintenance of the mixed character of its personnel. The 269th is a
Brandenburg unit.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

On the Eastern Front from May, 1915, to the end of December, 1917.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

1. The division was relieved on the night of April 8–9 by the 35th
Division at Neuve Chapelle. It moved northward and on the 12th
reenforced the battle front south of Meteren. In the attacks in this
area the 268th and 269th Reserve Regiments suffered heavy losses. It was
relieved by the 11th Reserve Division on April 28.


METEREN.

2. On May 18 the division returned to its former sector at Meteren. It
held this sector until May 28, and again from June 6 to 12 and from June
18 to July 19.


LORRAINE.

3. It entrained on the 22d at Roubaix and detrained at Haboudange on the
24th. The itinerary was Courtrai-Ghent-Louvain-Liege-Herbestal-
Gerolstein-Treves-Sarreguemines. After several days of rest near Chateau
Salins it relieved the 19th Division on the night of July 28–29. It held
this quiet sector until October 5, when it was relieved by the 87th
Division.

4. It entrained on the 6th and detrained at Guise about October 8. On
the night of the 10th–11th it came into line near Seboncourt and was
heavily engaged until October 20, when it was withdrawn east of Bohain.
The division suffered heavy losses in this engagement.

5. On October 26 the division reenforced the line south of Guise and
fought until the armistice. The last identification was south of Guise
on November 3.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its services in Flanders was of a
mediocre character. In the St. Quentin area in October it put up a good
resistance.




                         82d Reserve Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │82 Res.       │60.           │82 Res.       │270 Res.
              │              │270 Res.      │              │271 Res.
              │              │271 Res.      │              │272 Res.
              │              │272 Res.      │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │82 Res. Cav. Detch.          │82 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │82 Res. Brig.:               │82 Res. Brig.:
              │ 69 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 69 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │ 70 Res. F. A. Rgt. (6       │ 70 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │  Btries.).                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│84 Res. Pion. Co.            │86 Res. Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │82 Res. Pont. Engs.          │82 Res. Pont. Engs.
              │                             │282 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │1 Ambulance Co.              │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │82 Res. Train Detch.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │82 Res. Cyclist Co.          │82 Res. Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │40 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │82 Res.       │270 Res.      │82 Res.       │270 Res.
              │              │271 Res.      │              │271 Res.
              │              │272 Res.      │              │272 Res.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │82 Res. Cav. Detch.          │3 Sqn. 1 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │70 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 69 Res. F. A. Rgt. (9       │1 Abt. 18 Ft. A. Rgt. (2, 3,
              │  Btries.).                  │  and 13 Btries.).
              │                             │755 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │
              │                             │1224 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1225 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(382) Pion. Btn.:            │382 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 86 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 348 Pion. Co.
              │ 246 Pion. Co.               │ 86 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 282 T. M. Co.               │ 106 Searchlight Section.
              │ 287 Searchlight Section.    │482 Signal Command:
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │ 482 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 174 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │544 Ambulance Co.            │544 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │118 Res. Field Hospital.     │115 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │119 Res. Field Hospital.
              │                             │221 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │749 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │82 Res. Cyclist Co.          │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │46 Labor Btn.                │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

     (270th Regiment: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg. 271st and 272d
                Regiments: 6th Corps District—Silesia.)


                                 1915.

1. Formed during November, 1914-January, 1915, with three field
battalions of the 3d Corps District and six of the 6th Corps District
(Nos. 25–30) it was trained at the Jueterbog cantonment. The 82d Reserve
Division (which with the 81st Reserve Division formed the 41st Reserve
Corps) entrained on January 21 for the Somme. It included an additional
regiment—the 60th Infantry—which the 21st Corps had left in France
before leaving for Russia.


SOMME.

2. It was engaged in February and March, 1915, to the north of Chaulnes.

3. About March 28 it was transferred to the Eastern Front minus the 60th
Infantry, which joined the 121st Division.


GALICIA-RUSSIA.

4. In May, 1915, the 82d Reserve Division as well as the 81st Reserve
Division took part in the German offensive along the San, which resulted
in the breaking up of the Russian front in Galicia. It was identified in
region of Jaslo (May 9) to the south of Radymno (May 12–21) and at
Medyka (June 4). Its pursuit of the Russians brought it together with
the 41st Reserve Corps to the Bug, in the vicinity of Grubeszow (July)
and to the northeast of Pinsk (September-October). During that offensive
the division suffered heavy losses.


PINSK.

5. The Russian retreat being halted, the 82d Reserve Division took its
position in the Pinsk region (Nobel Lake, October-December).


                                 1916.


PINSK-NOBEL LAKE.

1. The division remained the entire year in the Nobel Lake sector and up
to November, 1917. A soldier of the 270th Regiment wrote on November 8,
1917: “I have not loaded my gun since the middle of March.”


                                 1917.


RUSSIA-FRANCE.

1. In November, 1917, the 82d Reserve Division was relieved by some
Landsturm units and re-formed (elimination of soldiers from Alsace and
Lorraine, etc.).

2. At the beginning of December the division was transported to the
Western Front.

3. The division entrained at Ivanovo on December 4 (Itinerary: Brest-
Litowsk-Varsovie-Kalisz-Glogau-Cottbus-Halle-Frankfort-Mainz-Kreuznach-
Sarrebrueck-Metz-Conflans) and detrained at Mars la Tour about December
10.


                              RECRUITING.

In theory Brandenburg and Silesia. Very mixed personnel, seemingly
including men from Pomerania and the eastern Provinces of the Empire.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In January, 1918, the 82d Reserve Division took part in maneuvers in the
vicinity of Thuméréville (northwest of Conflans). After these maneuvers
Lieut. Gen. Fuchs is said to have said that the division could be put in
class 3 of the combat units (Kampf Truppen, 3) a classification which is
just above that of labor troops. (Interrogation of prisoner, Mar. 4,
1918. See Bull. Rens. Second Army (French), No. 744.)

The make-up of the division is heterogeneous and of mediocre quality and
includes returned wounded men, Landsturm, former railway guards,
dismounted troopers, and few recruits of the 1918 class. (Interrogation,
Jan. 22, 1918.)

After a two-year stay in the Pinsk sector the 82d Reserve Division
lacked training when it returned on the Western Front (December, 1917).


                                 1918.


CANTIGNY.

1. The division was relieved on April 20 in the Woevre and marched by
Conflans-Briey-Mairy to Landres, where it entrained. It moved via
Longuyon-Mezieres-Hirson and arrived at Wassigny, where it detrained on
May 5. On May 16 the division relieved the 30th Division west of
Cantigny. It was thrown out of the city by the American attack at the
end of the month. The division was withdrawn about July 22.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

2. To reenforce the Somme battle front the division came into line on
August 9 between Hangest and Arvillers. It was withdrawn on the 18th
northwest of Roye, but a week later returned to its former sector. The
division fell back on the Canal du Nord on August 27, and on September 2
took up a position between the Chaulnes-Ham railroad and a point north
of Moyencourt. It again retreated on the night of September 4–5 and
occupied a position at Etreillers-Roupy before the Siegfried-Stellung.

The division was constantly engaged, resisting strongly, but being
gradually forced back. On the 28th it retired to the line of the St.
Quentin Canal. On October 8, a surprise attack threw it back to Fontaine
Notre Dame. Here it resisted fiercely. It was relieved about October 10
and went to the Guise area.

In this fighting the division lost 2,000 men. Its combatant strength was
estimated to be about 1,200 men on October 7.

3. On October 14 the division reenforced the line east of Bernot and
fought for three days. It returned to the Guise area, but intervened
again west of Pleine-Selve on October 25. Until the armistice it was
engaged south of Guise, east of La Capelle, and at Liessies.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. After August it was almost
constantly in line in the St. Quentin area until its effectives were
almost completely consumed.




                             83d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │Doussin (1    │1 Garrison    │165.          │329.
              │  Garrison    │  Rgt. (329). │              │
              │  Brig., now  │              │              │
              │  165).       │              │              │
              │Rudiger (2    │2 Garrison    │              │330.
              │  Garrison    │  Rgt. (330). │              │
              │  Brig., now  │              │              │
              │  166).       │              │              │
              │              │              │166.          │331.
              │              │3 Garrison    │              │332.
              │              │  Rgt. (331). │              │
              │              │4 Garrison    │              │
              │              │  Rgt. (332). │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │2 Sqn. 92 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Von Conta F. A. Rgt. (Ers.   │249 F. A. Rgt.
              │  Abt. 61 F. A. Rgt.).       │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │83 T. M. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │83 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │83 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │165.          │329.          │165.          │255 Res.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │330.          │              │4 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │331.          │              │346.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │83 Heavy Cav. Rgt.           │3 Sqn. 11 Drag. Rgt.
              │2 Sqn. 92 Ldw. Cav. Rgt.     │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │80 Art. Command:
              │                             │
              │ 249 F. A. Rgt.              │ 249 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 3 Abt. 28 Ft. A. Rgt. (7th
              │                             │  to 9th Btries.).
              │                             │ 796 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 798 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 951 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│83 Pion. Btn.:               │83 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 1 Pions.         │ 1 Ldw. Co. 1 C. Dist. Pions.
              │ 246 Pion. Co.               │ 1 Ldw. Co. 5 C. Dist. Pions.
              │ 83 T. M. Co.                │ 123 Searchlight Section.
              │ 316 Searchlight Section.    │83 Signal Command:
              │ 83 Tel. Detch.              │ 83 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 185 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │83 Ambulance Co.             │83 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │49 Field Hospital.           │49 Field Hospital.
              │165 Field Hospital.          │165 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │83 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │581 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │26 Bav. Ft. A. Btn. (1, 2,
              │                             │  and 4 Btries.).
              │                             │3 Abt. 5 Ft. A. Rgt. (6, 10,
              │                             │  and 11 Btries.).
              │                             │1 Art. Observation Section.
              │                             │121 Sound Ranging Section.
              │                             │8 Bav. Pion. Co.
              │                             │4 Co. 10 Labor Btn.
              │                             │2 Co. 35 Labor Btn.
              │                             │77 Balloon Sqn.
              │                             │(Elements attached, Aug. 14,
              │                             │  1918. German document.)
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (329th and 331st Regiment: 5th Corps District—Posen and Lower Silesia.
            330th Regiment: 7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1915.

The 83d Division was formed out of the garrison of defense of Posen
which went under the name of Posen Corps. It was engaged on the Eastern
Front from the beginning of the war.

The Posen Corps composed of depot battalions of active regiments, of
reserve, of Landwehr, and even battalions of Landsturm, was divided into
four brigades. Its strength was distributed into two divisions, the 83d
and 84th, in June, 1915, and the battalions, which were at first formed
into regiments bearing the names of the respective commanders of these
regiments, were numbered 329 to 336, inclusive.


RUSSIA-POLAND.

1. From March to June, with the Posen Corps, the regiments which were to
form the 83d Reserve Division took part in the Poland campaign to the
north of Pilica and on the Bzura.


VICHNEV.

2. The 83d Division took part in the summer offensive against the
Russians. Leaving the Ostrolenka region (July) it advanced by way of
Grodno, Lipnichki (northeast of Lida, September) up to Vichnev
(October), where it established its position.


                                 1916.


VICHNEV.

1. The division stayed in the Vichnev sector during the entire year 1916
and until the month of April, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. About the middle of April, 1917, the 83d Division was transferred
from Vichnev to Baranovitchi, where it was held some time as a reserve
and then to the northeast of Halicz, from which place it was transported
by automobiles to the Stanislau region (June 5).


GALICIA.

2. At the beginning of July it was attacked by the Russians to the west
of Stanislau (serious losses on July 9, particularly 690 prisoners). It
afterwards took part in the German counteroffensive and advanced through
the Dniester valley up to the west of Chotin (beginning of August.)

3. Relieved about the middle of September, the 83d Reserve Division was
sent to rest in the Czernovitz region and then put back in line to the
northeast of Bojan (October-November).

4. At the end of November the division left the Bojan sector and became
a reserve for the Bothmer Army in back of the Czernovitz front. Before
leaving for the Western Front the 4th Division had sent it men from
Alsace and Lorraine (middle of December when the 36th Division had left
the former some months before.)


                              RECRUITING.

Recruiting was mostly from Posen and Silesia with some support from
Westphalia and the Rhine Province. Coming from Galicia as late as March,
1918, the 83d Division could not come without the soldiers coming from
Alsace and Lorraine which other divisions which had left before had
transferred to it.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Mediocre division, formed to the extent of one third by older men.
Appears for the first time on the Western Front in April, 1918.


                                 1918.


YPRES.

1. The division held the sector north of Ypres until July 18. After its
relief it rested a few days in Roulers and then entrained at
Lichterfelde for the Douai area. On August 16 it traveled via Cambrai
and detrained near Ruyanlcourt. Here it spent the night, moving up to
Flers the next morning. The division came into line on the 19th, when it
relieved the 3d Naval Division north of Albert.


SCARPE-SOMME.

2. It was engaged at Thiepval, Bazentin le Grand, Courcelette, and
Martinpuich until about April 26, when it was withdrawn.

3. On September 10, the division came into line in Lorraine with an
entirely new composition. It then included the 255th Reserve Regiment,
the 346th Regiment, and the 4th Landwehr Regiment grouped under the
brigade and divisional staff of the 83d Division. The 329th Regiment,
one of the former regiments of the division, was sent to Esthonia on
September 5. It had lost 700 casualties in the August fighting. The
reconstructed division held the Embermenil sector until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. After its transfer to the
Western Front, the division held a quiet sector except for a short time
on the Scarpe in August.




                             84th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │Hoffmann,     │5 Garrison    │168.          │334.
              │  afterward   │  Rgt. (333). │              │
              │  Schutze (3  │              │              │
              │  Garrison    │              │              │
              │  Brig.)      │              │              │
              │  (167).      │              │              │
              │Reisswitz (4  │              │              │335.
              │  Garrison    │              │              │
              │  Brig.)      │              │              │
              │  (168).      │              │              │
              │              │6 Garrison    │              │336.
              │              │  Rgt. (334). │              │
              │              │7 Garrison    │              │
              │              │  Rgt. (335). │              │
              │              │Schutze,      │              │
              │              │  afterwards  │              │
              │              │  Kroebel,    │              │
              │              │  Rgt. (8     │              │
              │              │  Garrison    │              │
              │              │  Rgt. “336”).│              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │84 Cav. Rgt. (Ers. Sqns. 8   │84 Cav. Rgt.
              │  Drag., 3 Uhlan Rgts., and 2│
              │  and 4 Landst. Sqn. 5 C.    │
              │  Dist.).                    │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │248 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │847 F. A. Btry.
              │                             │854 F. A. Btry.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │272 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │1 Ldw. Pion. Co. (12 C.
              │                             │  Dist.).
              │                             │3 Landst. Pion. Co. (13 C.
              │                             │  Dist.).
              │                             │84 T. M. Co.
              │                             │84 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │84 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │1 Haguenau Landst. Inf. Btn.
              │                             │  (21 C. Dist. Btn. No. 12).
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │168.          │335.          │163.          │335.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │336.          │              │336.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │423.          │              │423.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 84 Cav. (Heavy) Rgt.  │3 Sqn. 16 Drag. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │54 Art. Command:
              │ 248 F. A. Rgt.              │ 248 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 903 F. A. Btry.             │ 3 Abt. 25 Ft. A. Rgt. (8 to
              │                             │  10th Btries.).
              │                             │ 1007 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1008 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1009 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(?) Pion. Btn.:              │84 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 272 Pion. Co.               │ 2 Res. Co. 1 Pions.
              │                             │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 12 Pions.        │ 272 Pion. Co.
              │                             │
              │ 84 T. M. Co.                │ 84 T. M. Co.
              │ 347 Searchlight Section.    │ 52 Searchlight Section.
              │ 84 Tel. Detch.              │84 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 84 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 166 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │84 (?) Ambulance Co.         │84 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │21 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │77 Field Hospital.
              │156 Field Hospital.          │21 Ldw. Field Hospital.
              │                             │156 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │1008 M. T. Col.              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │1 Anklam, Landst. Inf. Btn.  │
              │  (2 C. Dist. Btn. No. 1).   │
              │7 Posen Landst. Btn. (5 C.   │
              │  Dist. Btn. No. 7).         │
              │1 Glogau Landst. Btn. (5 C.  │
              │  Dist. Btn. No. 15).        │
              │1 Cottbus Landst. Ers. Btn.  │
              │  (3 C. Dist. Btn. No. 23).  │
              │2 Dresden Landst. Inf. Btn.  │
              │  (12 C. Dist. Btn. No. 2).  │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (335th and 336th Regiments: 5th Corps District—Posen. 423d Regiment: 5th
                      Corps District—Lower Silesia.)


                                 1915.

The 84th Division with the 83d Division formed the Posen Corps and was
engaged on the Eastern Front from the beginning of the war. (See 83d
Division.) It was organized in June, 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. After having fought in Poland to the north of Pilica (February to
June, 1915) the elements of the 84th Division operated in the region of
Bleudow.

2. The 84th Division took part in the offensive against the Russians. It
advanced through the region of Bug (Aug. 17), through the southeast of
Bielsk (end of August) north of Slonim (September, battle from the 13th
to the 18th), up to the south of Novogrodek (Sept. 22). The front having
become stationary, the division took a position in the vicinity of
Deliatitchi (north of the Niemen). In December it gave up the 333d
Regiment of Infantry to the 89th Division, then recently organized.


                                 1916.


RUSSIA.

1. The 84th Division stayed in the sector in the vicinity of the Niemen
(Liubtcha, Deliatitchi) during the entire year 1916.

2. From July to October the 334th and 335th Regiments were detached as
reenforcements between Goroditche and Baranovitchi to meet the Russian
offensive.


                                 1917.

1. In 1917 the division still occupied the same sectors along the Niemen
(Deliatitchi, Negnevitchi) until its departure for the Western Front
(December).

2. About the month of June the 334th Infantry was transferred to the
94th Division and replaced by the 423d Infantry, to which the former
transferred some of its men.

In December the division absorbed another lot of men from the 334th
Infantry and some from the Landsturm Battalion V. 15. Its strength had
since November included some young men of the class of 1919.

3. At the end of December the division was transported to France. The 3d
Battalion of the 423d Regiment entrained at Novogrodek on December 31.
(Itinerary: Varsovie-Leipzig-Frankfort on the Main-Thionville) and
detrained at Arrancy (south of Longuyon) on January 7. The 2d Battalion
of the 336th Regiment entrained on December 28 and detrained at Landres
on January 3.


                              RECRUITING.

The division was for the most part recruited from the 5th and the 7th
Corps Districts. This was but slightly changed by the incorporation of
the men of the Landsturm Battalion V. 15 which consisted mostly of
soldiers from Brandenburg and of the addition of those belonging to the
class of 1919 which came from the 4th Corps District.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 84th Division had been on the Eastern front since 1914. Its
offensive value was mediocre.

On the Russian front it began to fraternize at the end of December. The
Germans were only allowed to do so in the presence of their officers. In
November and about December 20 the men in the division who were over 40
years of age were transferred into Landsturm battalions or into
regiments staying in Russia, and replaced by young men nearly all
belonging to the class of 1919 (250 to the 84th Division in November).


                                 1918.


MONTDIDIER-NOYON.

1. The division was relieved by the 53d Reserve Division about May 1. It
moved west and on May 25 relieved the 3d Bavarian Division in the
Lassigny sector. It was taken out in early June and rested until the
9th, when it returned to attack at Courcelles. It again retired on June
20 and rested until July 2.


LASSIGNY.

2. On that date it was in line southeast of Belloy, where it was engaged
until mid-July. It rested near Antheuil until August 12, when it
reenforced the battle front south of Thiescourt. Then it was engaged
until about August 22.


OISE.

3. One regiment—the 423d—entered line on the Oise on August 22 and by
September 4 all the division was in line near Quierzy. It was withdrawn
on September 15.

4. On September 30 the division entered line at Trouquoy and south of
Sequehart. In the fighting in the first week of October the elements of
the division were badly mixed with other divisions. They were taken out
about October 9 and re-formed.

5. It was reengaged on October 27 in the vicinity of Sissonne and fought
until the armistice. The last identification was east of Bucy les
Pierrepont on November 6.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. It was a very mediocre unit,
composed largely of Landsturm elements and of young recruits. It was
decimated by the fighting in the fall and its morale became very bad. A
contributing factor was a draft of 300 prisoners returned from Russia.




                        85th Landwehr Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │69 Ldw.       │17 Ldw.       │169 Ldw.      │61 Ldw.
              │              │21 Ldw.       │              │99 Ldw.
              │              │61 Ldw.       │170 Ldw.      │17 Ldw.
              │              │99 Ldw.       │              │21 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │85 Cav. Rgt. (4 Sqns.).      │85 Cav. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Ers. Ants. of the 36, 71, and│85 F. A. Rgt.
              │  73 F. A. Rgts.             │
              │                             │93 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │844 F. A. Btry.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │Zittau Landst. Inf. Btn.  (12
              │                             │  C. Dist. No. 7).
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │170 Ldw.      │17 Ldw.       │169 Ldw.      │17 Ldw.
              │              │21 Ldw.       │              │21 Ldw.
              │              │99 Ldw.       │              │99 Ldw.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 6 Cuirassier Rgt.     │5 Sqn. 6 Cuir. Rgt.
              │(?) Sqn. 85 Cav. Rgt.        │
              │Ers. Sqn. 12 Dragoon Rgt.    │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?)                          │275 Field Artillery Rgt.
              │                             │
              │844 F. A. Btry.              │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(485) Pion. Btn.:            │1 Ldst. Pion. 4 Army Corps.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Ers. Co. 26 Pions.        │585 Tel. Detch.
              │ 385 T. M. Co.               │
              │ 22 Heavy Field Searchlight  │
              │  Section.                   │
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │85 Ambulance Co.             │320 Field Hospital.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │Field Hospital.              │181 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │85 Cyclist Co.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │Zittau Landst. Inf. Btn. (12 │
              │  C. Dist. Btn. No. 7).      │
              │Osterode Landst. Inf. Btn.   │
              │  (20 C. Dist. Inf. Btn. No. │
              │  8).                        │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (17th Landwehr: 21st Corps District—Lorraine. 21st Landwehr: 17th Corps
  District—Western Prussia. 99th Landwehr: 15th Corps District—Alsace.)


                                 1915.

The 85th Landwehr Division is the old Breugel Division, which at the
beginning of the war, together with the Woernitz Division (86th
Division), formed the Graudenz Corps (also known as the Zastrow Corps
and in 1915 the 17th Reserve Corps), and operated on the Eastern Front.


RUSSIA.

1. Two of the regiments, the 17th Landwehr and the 99th Landwehr, went
to the Eastern Front, the former at the beginning of the war and the
latter in the spring of 1915.


POLAND.

1. Until July, 1915, the Breugel Division was engaged in Poland
(Prasnysz, region of Mlawa).

2. In July it took part in the offensive against the Russians, advancing
to the west of Pultusk (middle of July); besieged Novo-Georgievsk; was
on the Bug (beginning of August) and near Bielsk (end of August). The
61st Landwehr entered Warsaw on August 22 and remained there during the
month of September.

3. With the stabilization of the front the former Breugel, now the 85th
Landwehr Division occupied the Vichnev sector (to the south of Krevo) on
the Little Berezina.


                                 1916.


VICHNEV.

1. The 85th Landwehr Division remained on the Vichnev-Deliatitchi front
for more than two years (September, 1915—October, 1917). In September,
1917, it gave up the 61st Landwehr Regiment to the 217th Division, then
newly organized.


                                 1917.


VICHNEV.

1. About the 15th of October, 1917, the 85th Landwehr Division moved to
the north. It left the Niemen region to go to the south of Dvinsk, near
the lake of Drisviaty. In December it extended its sector toward the
south (Vidzy).


                              RECRUITING.

The 21st Landwehr was recruited in the 17th Corps District, or more
generally in western Prussia. There were numerous soldiers from Alsace
and Lorraine in the division. Frequent desertions on the part of the men
from Lorraine and men from the mining region of the Sarre in 1914 on the
French front led to the decision which sent the 17th Landwehr to Russia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Remained a long while in quiet sectors on the Russian front. The 85th
Landwehr Division had but a very mediocre combat value.


                                 1918.


COURLAND.

1. Toward the end of January the men of the 85th Landwehr Division were
still fraternizing in the Vidzy region. The 17th Landwehr Regiment was
in the vicinity of Jakobstadt in April and the 99th Landwehr Regiment
participated at this time in the operations in Finland.


UKRAINE.

2. Early in May the whole division, with the exception of some elements
(14th Jaeger Battalion, 1st Guard Uhlan Regiment, 229th Mounted Machine
Gun Co.), moved to the Polotsk region. Regiments of the division were
identified in this area early in September. There was a rumor that the
division had been transferred to the Western Front early in October, but
this seems unlikely.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             86th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │Grossman      │Reinhard      │171.          │341.
              │  (171).      │  (341).      │              │
              │              │Krause (342). │              │342.
              │Windhetm      │Hoebel (343). │172.          │343.
              │  (172).      │              │              │
              │              │Gropp (344).  │              │344.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │86 Cav. Regt. (Ers. Sqns. 11 │
              │  Drag., 4 Horse Jag. Rgts., │
              │  1 Ldw. Sqn. 17 C. Dist.    │
              │  Cav., and Res. Ers. Sqn. 17│
              │  C. Dist. Cav.)             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │86 F. A. Rgt.                │86 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │220 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │86 T. M. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │86 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │86 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │110 Labor Btn. Briesen
              │                             │  Landst. Inf. Btn. (17 C.
              │                             │  Dist. No. 1).
              │                             │Neufahrwasser Landst. Inf.
              │                             │  Btn. (17 C. Dist. No. 8).
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │172.          │341.          │172.          │341.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │343.          │              │343.
              │              │344.          │              │344.
              │              │              │              │
              │         4 Jag. Btn.         │              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 7 Uhlan Rgt.          │3 Sqn., 7 Uhlan Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │86 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 86 (?) F. A. Rgt.           │404 F. Art. Btn.
              │                             │971 Light Mun. Col.
              │                             │973 Light Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                  │86 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 3 Ers. Co. 26 Pions.        │ 3 Ers. 26th Pion.
              │ 2 Co. 34 Res. Pions.        │ 3 Pion. Btn. No. 34.
              │ 86 T. M. Co.                │ 19th Searchlight Section.
              │ 328 Searchlight Section.    │86 Div. Signal Command:
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │ 86 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 157 Div. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │86 Ambulance Co.             │86 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │81 Field Hospital.           │81 and 129 Field Hospitals.
              │129 Field Hospital.          │182 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │797 M. T. Col.               │583 M. T. Col.
              │971 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │86 Cyclist Co.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │2 Cologne Landst. Inf. Btn.  │
              │  (8 C. Dist. Btn. No. 15).  │
              │                             │
              │7 Munst. Landst. Inf. Btn. (7│
              │  C. Dist. Btn. No. 69).     │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (341st Regiment: 20th Corps District—Eastern part of Western Prussia.
    343d and 344th Regiments: 17th Corps District—Western Prussia.)


                                 1914.

The 86th Division was organized during the summer of 1915 with the
elements of the Woernitz Division. The latter with the 85th Landwehr
Division, constituted the Suren Corps coming from the garrisons of
Graudenz, Kulm, and Marienburg, which was used on the Eastern Front from
the beginning of the war. There were 11 battalions of mobile depots
(active, reserve, and Landwehr) and two companies of depots of chasseurs
(jaeger).


POLAND.

1. After having participated in the operations on the Polish front from
September to December, 1914, the troops which were to be formed into the
86th Division were then used in the region of Mlawa (trench warfare)
from the end of December, 1914, to the middle of May, 1915. Some of the
units were sorely tried. At Koslau (Nov. 12 to Dec. 25), then at
Prasnysz, the 4th Company of the mobile Ersatz battalion of the 18th
Infantry lost 2 officers and 266 men. (Casualty Report.)


                                 1915.


RUSSIA.

1. From July, 1915, on the Woernitz Division, now the 86th Division,
took part in the German offensive and helped to break up the Russian
front near Prasnysz (July 13–17). Following up its advance, it fought on
the Narew after the taking of Pultusk. It took part in the battles of
Ostrowo (Aug. 8–10), of Bielsk (Aug. 19–25) and on the Niemen
(September).

2. When the Russian front became stationary it found itself on the
Little Berezina and took a position to the east of Deliatitchi.


                                 1916.


RUSSIA.

1. The 86th Division remained in the sector near the Little Berezina
until March.

2. From the 18th of March to the 30th of April it took part in the
battle of Narotch, and until the month of July, occupied the Krevo-
Smorgoni sector. It then went on the Chtchara (July 9–26), opposed the
Russian offensive near Kovel from July 28 to November 4 and finally
established itself on the upper Styr and on the Stokhod, reduced in
strength by the transfer of the 342d Regiment to the 93d Division, then
just formed.


                                 1917.


VOLHYNIA.

1. After having occupied the Stokhod front in front of Kovel until
April, 1917, the 86th Division put into line on April 22, to the south
of Kisselin. It remained there until January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Division sufficiently homogeneous (Prussian Provinces) with relatively
no other numerous elements from other Provinces. Having left the Russian
front at a late date, the division could not leave the soldiers coming
from Alsace and Lorraine behind.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 86th Division seemed to be a good division, composed of young and
vigorous men (March, 1918).

On the Eastern Front it was rated as a first-class division.


                                 1918.


VOLHYNIA.

1. The 86th Division left its sector in the Kiselin area toward the end
of January. It entrained at Rogozwo on the 29th and traveled via Brest-
Litowsk-Kalisch-Cottbus-Eisenach-Frankfort-Sarrebruecken-Metz-Sedan-
Rethel, and detrained at Le Chatelet on the 4th of February.


RHEIMS.

2. It then marched via Neuflize-Isles-Boult-Fresnes, and entered line
near Betheny (northeast of Rheims) on the 27th, when it relieved the
242d Division. It was withdrawn about the 21st of May, and went to rest
near Asfeld.

3. On the evening of the 26th it left and marched toward the front; the
27th it was in reserve; on the 28th it attacked near Trigny (west of
Rheims) and succeeded in advancing about 5 kilometers. On the 6th of
June the 86th and 232d Divisions, supported by the 33d Reserve Division,
captured the town of Bligny (southwest of Rheims), but lost it the same
afternoon when the French counterattacked. The 86th Division had quite
heavy losses. It was relieved on July 21 by the 50th Division and went
to rest in the region northwest of Rheims.

4. On the 10th of August the division reenforced the front near Muizon
(west of Rheims). It was relieved by the 10th Reserve Division on the
28th.


LAON.

5. During the night of September 18–19 it relieved the 50th Reserve
Division near the Colombe farm (south of Laon). It was relieved about
the 23d of October.

6. The division came back into line on November 5 in the vicinity of
Marle; on the 7th it was identified northeast of Vervins; and on the 9th
at Hirson.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 86th was rated as a fourth-class division. It did not participate in
any of the great offensives during 1918, but it did attack vigorously on
two occasions and on the whole acquitted itself better than other
divisions similarly rated.




                             87th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │Griepenkeri.  │Leimbach      │173.          │345.
              │              │  (345).      │              │
              │              │Runge (346).  │              │346.
              │Normann.      │Schwarz (347).│179.          │347.
              │              │8 Landst.     │              │8 Landst.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │87 Cav. Rgt.                 │87 Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │87 F. A. Abt.                │87 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │841 F. A. Btry.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │4 Co. 26 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │2 Ldw. Pion. Co. (Gd. C.
              │                             │  Dist.).
              │                             │87 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │156 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │10 Labor Btn.
              │                             │75 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │173.          │345.          │179.          │345.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │347.          │              │347.
              │              │8 Landst.     │              │3d Res. Ers.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 3 Horse. Gren. Rgt.   │1 Sqn. 3 Jag. z. Pf.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command.                │3 Artillery Command:
              │ 87 F. A. Regt.              │ 38 Field Art. Rgt.
              │                             │ 34 Ft. Art. Btn.
              │                             │ 878 Light Mun. Col.
              │                             │ 975 Light Mun. Col.
              │                             │ 949 Light Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                  │87 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 4 Co. 26 Pions.             │ 242 Pion. Co.
              │                             │
              │ 3 Ldw. Co. 6 Pions.         │ 2 Ers. Pion. Btn. No. 26.
              │ 87 T. M. Co.                │ 113 Searchlight Section.
              │ 264 Searchlight Section.    │87 Div. Signal Command.
              │ 87 Tel. Detch.              │ 87 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 163 Div. Wireless. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │69 Ambulance Co.             │69 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │131 Field Hospital.          │131 and 132 Field Hospitals.
              │132 Field Hospital.          │191 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │157 M. T. Col.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │156 Cyclist Co.              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (345th Regiment; 5th Corps District—Posen. 347th Regiment; 2d Corps
       District—Pomerania. 3d Reserve Ersatz Regiment; 9th Corps
                     District—Schleswig—Holstein.)


                                 1915.

The 87th Division as well as the 89th Division came from the Thorn
Corps, which was engaged on the Eastern Front from the beginning of the
war.


RUSSIA-POLAND.

1. Its battalions were made into a division at the beginning of June,
1915. Before that time the Ersatz battalions, from which it was formed,
belonged to the Griepenkerl and Plantier detachments (Thorn Corps), and
fought near the Polish frontier between the Vistula and Prasnysz. These
were the Leimbach-Zerener regiments which became the 345th, the Runge
which became the 346th and the Schwarz which became the 347th, and to
which latter unit the 8th Landsturm Regiment organized in June, 1915, at
the Elsenborn cantonment was joined.

2. Beginning in July the elements of the 87th Division took part in the
offensive against the Russians: Battles between Drobin and the Vistula,
then to the west of Pultusk; pursuit fighting up to lower Narew (July
18–22); siege of Novo-Georgievsk (Aug. 13–19); battles of Niemen (Aug.
31-Sept. 8) and of Vilna (Sept. 9–26).

3. After having fought between the Bogin and Drisviaty Lakes (Oct.
5–19), the division took up a position in that region.


                                 1916.


DRISVIATY LAKE.

1. The 87th Division occupied the Drisviaty-Vidzy line the entire year
1916 and until the month of October, 1917.


                                 1917.


COURLAND.

1. In October, 1917, the 87th Division relieved the 2d Division in the
Illukst sector. While there it received its first reenforcements from
the 1919 class.

2. Relieved from that front at the end of December, the division was
brought together in the Kovno region. It got a great many men from the
23d Landwehr Division, especially from the 26th and 66th Landwehr
Regiments.


                              RECRUITING.

This division was one of the most heterogeneous of the Prussian Army.
Not only were its regiments recruited in three different Provinces, but
the considerable amount of replacements received since November, 1917,
were from various different regions—men from the class of 1919 from the
9th and 11th Corps Districts in November, 1917, later from the 14th
Corps District; Landwehr from the 4th and 6th Corps Districts at the end
of December; men from the 8th, 14th, and 18th Corps Districts (a small
number) during its stay in Champagne.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 87th Division coming from Russia at the end of March seemed to have
but a mediocre combat value (April, 1918).


                                 1918.

1. The division held the quiet sector at St. Marie a Py until June 18,
when it was relieved by the extension of the flanking divisions. The
division up to that time had had slight losses and was available for
active service.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

2. It entered line on June 22 on the Aisne front near Bouresches. During
this period the division was engaged in harder fighting. In the American
attack south of Torcy the division lost heavily in killed and wounded on
June 25–26. Three hundred prisoners were taken on those days. It took
part in the German retreat until July 26, when it was withdrawn near
Charmel.


SCARPE-SOMME.

3. The division rested at Charleville until August 25. It entrained and
moved to the Bapaume-Peronne area, where it was engaged on August 26–27,
south of Longueval. It was pushed back by Flers (29th), les Boeufs (Aug.
31), north of Morval (Sept. 1), Le Transloy (3d), east of Manancourt and
northeast of Etricourt (4th), northeast of Fins (7th), northwest of
Gonzencourt (9th). It was relieved on the night of September 11–12.
During this period in line the losses of the division were severe. More
than 1,000 prisoners were taken from this division.

4. In spite of heavy losses it was given only a short rest at Vaucelles
(south of Cambrai), and again placed in line east of Villers Guislain on
September 18 for the purpose of delivering a counterattack. It was held
in line at this point until about September 28, when it retired to rest
at Walincourt.


LORRAINE.

5. On October 12 the division came into line southwest of Chateau
Saline. It rested on that quiet front until about November 1, when it
was sent north, and on November 8 came in line at Haut Bugny. The last
identification was northeast of Rocquigny on November 10.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. As a sector holding unit it saw
heavy service on the Marne and in Picardy.




                             88th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │21 Ldw.       │10 Ldw.       │175 Ldw.      │(349) Ldw.
              │              │38 Ldw.       │              │(350) Ldw.
              │1 Ldw. Ers.   │4 Ldw. Ers.   │176.          │351.
              │              │5 Ldw. Ers.   │              │352.
              │              │6 Ers.        │177.          │353.
              │              │8 Ers.        │              │(354).
              │              │7 Ers.        │              │
              │              │9 Ers.        │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │6 C. Dist. Field Cav. Rgt. (2│88 Cav. Rgt.(4 Sqns. ex-Field
              │  Sqns. of 6 Hus. Rgt. and 2 │  Cav. Rgt. 6 C. Dist.).
              │  Sqn. of 2 Uhlan Rgt.).     │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │1 Ers. Abt. 42 F. A. Rgt.    │88 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │223 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ldw. Co. 6 Pions.          │6 Ldw. Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │2 Ldw. Co. 6 Pions.          │ 88 T. M. Co.
              │3 Ldw. Co. 6 Pions.          │ 88 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │ 88 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │31 Landst. Inf. Rgt.
              │                             │111 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │176.          │352.          │176.          │352.
              │              │353.          │              │353.
              │              │425.          │              │426.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │(?) Sqn. Horse Jag. Rgt.     │1 Sq. 10 Jag. z. Pf.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │2 Sqn. 88 Cav. Rgt.          │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │223 F. A. Rgt.               │88th Field Art. Rgt.
              │                             │123 Foot Art. Btn.
              │                             │980, 982, and 1028 Light Mun.
              │                             │  Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│6 Ldw. Pion. Btn.:           │88 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 6 Pions.         │ 349 Pion. Co.
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 6 Pions.         │ 3 Co. Res. Pion. Btn. No.
              │                             │  33.
              │ 88 T. M. Co.                │ 88 T. M. Co.
              │ 249 Searchlight Section.    │ 92 Searchlight Section.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │88 Div. Signal Command:
              │                             │ 88 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 102 B. Div. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │277 Ambulance Co.            │277 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │141 Field Hospital.          │54 and 141 Field Hospitals.
              │26 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │193 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │111 Labor Btn.               │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (352d and 353d Regiments; 6th Corps District—Silesia. 426th Regiments;
                 9th Corps District—Hanseatic cities.)


                                 1915.

1. The 88th Division grew out of the war garrison of Breslau, which was
made up of the 21st Brigade of Landwehr (10th and 38th Landwehr) and by
Silesian and Saxon Ersatz battalions. This originally was the Breslau
Corps, which after the brigade of Landwehr was taken from it, became the
Menges Division. The Ersatz battalions being formed into regiments, the
division then comprised three brigades—1st Landwehr Ersatz Brigade
(later the Schmiedecker Brigade), Paczensky (later Buddenbrock) Brigade,
and the Zenger Brigade. Its regiments bore the names 4th and 5th
Landwehr Ersatz and 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th Ersatz.


RUSSIA-POLAND.

2. In April-May, 1915, the Menges Division fought on the Pilica.

3. In July it was between the Vistula and Pilica taking part in the
offensive against Russia.

4. It advanced in August through the region of Narew (to the south of
Pultusk, Aug. 4; to the north of Bielsk, Aug. 19). At the end of August
it reached the region of Vilna; to the west of Dvinsk in September.


DRISVIATY LAKE.

5. When the front became stationary it took a position near the
Drisviaty Lake (September).

6. The Menges Division became the 88th Division. The Ersatz Battalion
Brigades were regrouped and distributed between six regiments, numbered
349th and 350th Landwehr, 351st, 352d, 353d, 354th Regiments of
Infantry, forming in turn the 175th, 176th, and 177th Brigades.


                                 1916.


DRISVIATY LAKE.

1. The 88th Division occupied the Drisviaty Lake sector from September,
1915, until September, 1917.

2. In July, 1916, the division was reconstituted. The 354th Regiment
went to the 216th Division. In August the 349th Landwehr and the 350th
Landwehr Regiments were engaged on the Stokhod with the 150th Regiment
of the 37th Division.

The 88th Division was now made up of the 351st, 352d, and 353d
Regiments.


                                 1917.


DRISVIATY LAKE.

1. In May, 1917, the 123d Division gave the 88th Division the 425th
Regiment in exchange for the 351st Regiment of Infantry (Saxon). At this
time all the Saxon elements were out of this division and it became
entirely made up of Prussian personnel.

2. Thus constituted (352d, 353d, and 425th) the 88th Division was
relieved from its position near Drisviaty Lake about September. It
remained in the Dvinsk region.

3 The 425th Regiment was replaced by the 426th Regiment, the latter
coming from the 3d Division.


                              RECRUITING.

The oldest regiments of the division, the 352d and the 353d, were
primarily recruited in Silesia, and the 426th in the 9th Corps District.

Members of the 1919 class were identified with the division in April,
1918.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Average.


                                 1918.


ST. QUENTIN.

1. Early in January the division left Russia and, traveling via Kovno-
Wirballen-Koenigsberg-Posen-Berlin-Trèves-Thionville, detrained at
Sedan. After resting and training in the Cambrai region, it entered line
in the Fresnoy sector (northwest of St. Quentin). It remained in line
here, although it had two 10-day rest periods during which it was
occupied only in field service training and in the usual practice
marches, excepting two manœuvres with artillery. It attacked on the
21st, and although held up a day in front of Holnon wood it did very
well, especially when it is considered that the division was considered
unfit for combat upon its arrival from Russia.

2. Just before reaching Vermand on the 24th it stopped advancing, and
the line continuing to go forward it remained in reserve. On the 27th it
proceeded to the Moreuil area (southeast of Amiens), where it arrived
when the German advance was already checked. It was withdrawn about the
2d of April, after having suffered very heavy losses.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. About the 12th of April it relieved the 11th Division south of
Rouvroy in eastern Champagne. It was relieved about the 25th of June by
the 33d Reserve Division and went to rest near Monthois, where it was
trained.

4. About the 13th of July it came back into line in the Tahure sector
just west of where it had previously been. The next day it attacked in
the first line; it could make no progress (it will be remembered that
thus the whole offensive was a failure) and suffered heavy losses,
especially on account of gas. It was relieved early in September and was
reported at rest south of Rethel on the 4th.


WOEVRE.

5. On September 12 the division moved up behind the front near
Dampvitoux (north of Thiaucourt), but since it was soon seen that the
American offensive had only a limited objective it did not enter line
until the 23d. It was relieved by the 224th Division during the night of
October 16–17.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

6. The division arrived at Stenay during the night of the 19th–20th of
October and on the 21st entered line near Cunel (north of Montfaucon).
It remained in line until the armistice was signed.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

In March the British wrote: “From the bearing of prisoners of the 88th
Division, recently captured, it appears that this formation, which from
its composition might be expected to be indifferent is of a very fair
quality and well-disciplined. Men and officers are mostly young and
keen; many of the latter are active.

“As a fighting formation, the 88th Division thus appears to have been
brought up to the standard of the majority of the German divisions in
the western theater and in addition has a leader well acquainted with
the conditions of warfare on this front.”

Although its subsequent conduct was not such as to justify completely
the above estimate, it did at least prove that its rating as a fourth-
class unit was too low.




                             89th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │21 Ldw.       │10 Ldw.       │178.          │333.
              │              │38 Ldw.       │              │375.
              │(In November the above passed│              │8 Ldw.
              │     to the 14 Ldw Div.)     │              │
              │Jonas (178).  │333.          │              │
              │              │375.          │              │
              │              │8 Ldw.        │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │89 Cav. Rgt.                 │89 Cav. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │89 F. A. Abt.                │89 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │911 F. A. Btry.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │5 Co. 6 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │2 Res. Co. 17 Pions.
              │                             │89 T. M. Co.
              │                             │89 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │89 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │11 Labor Btn.
              │                             │45 Labor Btn.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │178.          │333.          │178.          │333.
              │              │375.          │              │375.
              │              │8 Ldw.        │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 11 Drag. Rgt.         │4 Sqn. 11th Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │89 Field Art. Rgt. (Rgt.
              │                             │  Staff, 1 Abt. Staff Btries.
              │                             │  1 to 3).
              │ 89 F. A. Rgt.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                  │5 Co. 26th Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 5 Co. 26 Pions.             │89 Div. Signal Command.
              │ 2 Res. Co. 17 Pions.        │89 Tel. Detch.
              │ 89 T. M. Co.                │
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │68 Ambulance Co.             │68 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │Field Hospital.              │264 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │183 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │721 M. T. Col.               │586 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                             │36 Bav. Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (333d Regiment: 5th and 6th Corps District—Silesia. 375th Regiment: 17th
          Corps District—Western Prussia. 8th Landwehr: 3d Corps
                          District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1915.

The 89th Division reached its present form of organization about
October, 1915. With the 87th Division, it was used to form, while named
Westernhagen Division, the Thorn Corps, and was engaged on the Eastern
Front from the beginning of the war. It at first was comprised of the
21st Landwehr Brigade, taken from the Breslau Corps and the Jonas
Brigade (Keller Regiment and the 8th Landwehr) which became the 178th
Brigade. In November, 1915, this division having given up the 21st
Landwehr Brigade to form the 14th Landwehr Division, it brought up its
strength to three regiments by taking the 333d Regiment from the 84th
Division.


RUSSIA.

1. During the middle of October, 1915, the 89th Division was identified
in the Krevo sector, which it occupied until the end of August, 1916.


                                 1916.


ROUMANIA.

1. About the 24th of August, 1916, the 89th Division was transported to
the Transylvanian front (detraining near Maros-Ludas on Aug. 30).

2. It fought in the vicinity of St. Georges de Brasso (middle of
October); near the Roumanian frontier in the valley of Buzeu (October-
November); on the Buzeu-Rimnicu-Sarat highway (end of December); and
near Plaginesci (Dec. 31).


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA.

1. In the middle of January, 1917, the 89th Division was in line to the
north of Rimnicu.

2. From the end of January to the middle of August it occupied a sector
north of Focsani, east of Odobesci. It took part in the attacks made, in
August, north of Focsani and suffered very heavy losses. After a few
days’ rest it took over the sector between Panciu and Marasesci.


                              RECRUITING.

The 89th Division took part in the entire campaign against Roumania.

It was kept on the Roumanian front until May, 1918.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Its offensive value seemed mediocre.


                                 1918.


ROUMANIA.

1. In January, 1918, the division furnished a great many replacements to
the 76th Reserve Division which was destined to leave for the Western
Front; men were also sent to the 115th Division.

2. Relieved southeast of Panciu early in January, the division remained
for some time in reserve in the Focsani region, then came back into line
northeast of that town. It was identified there in March and April. In
June the 375th Regiment was identified by contact near Drenoud in
Macedonia, but left soon after for the Panciu region where it was
identified on the 28th of July. The division was identified near
Bucharest late in October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The Division was rated as fourth class.




                             91st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │175 Ldw. │33 Ldw.  │175 Ldw. │37 Ldw.  │175 Ldw. │37 Ldw.
              │         │349 Ldw. │         │349 Ldw. │         │349 Ldw.
              │         │350 Ldw. │         │437.     │         │437.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 5 Cuirassier│3 Sqn. 12 Mounted  │2 Sqn. 10 Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Jag. Rgt.        │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │277 F. A. Rgt.     │277 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│385 T. M. Co.      │91 Pion. Btn.:     │91 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 3 Co. 1 Pions. (?)│3 Ers. Co. Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Btn. No. 1.
              │                   │ 3 Ers. Co. 1      │2 Ldst. Pion. Btn.
              │                   │  Pions.           │  6 Army Corps.
              │                   │ (91 T. M. Co.).   │219 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │91 Div. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command.
              │                   │                   │91 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │67 Ambulance Co.   │67 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │27 Ldw. Field      │110 Field Hospital.
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │27 Ldw. Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │                   │241 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │801 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │Deuxponts Landst.  │
              │                   │  Inf. Btn. (2 C.  │
              │                   │  Dist. Btn. No.   │
              │                   │  2).              │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (37th Landwehr; 5th Corps District—Posen. 349th Landwehr; 8th Corps
         District—Rhenish Province. 437th Regiment; 11th Corps
                          District—Thuringe.)


                                 1916.

The 91st Division (Clausius Division) was formed about August, 1916,
from two Landwehr regiments—the 349th and the 350th, which constituted
the 175th Brigade, taken from the 88th Division—and an active regiment,
the 150th, temporarily transferred from the 37th Division. Later the
organization of the 91st Division was modified.


VOLHYNIA.

1. As soon as it was organized the 91st Division was engaged on the
Stokhod, north of the Kovel-Sarny railway and in the vicinity of Borovno
(August, 1916). During these attacks the 150th suffered very big losses.
This regiment rejoined its division (the 37th) shortly thereafter and
was replaced by the 37th Landwehr, which had exercised a discreet
surveillance over the Austrian troops (Russian information).


                                 1917.


VOLHYNIA.

1. During the year 1917 the 91st Division was kept in Volhynia in the
region of the Kovel-Sarny railway.

2. About the month of April it transferred the 350th Landwehr to the
45th Landwehr Division. It received the 437th Infantry, which had been
organized in 1916 from Prussian elements taken from the 344th Infantry,
the 349th Landwehr, and the 350th Landwehr, and which was with Austrian
units.

In November the division seemed to have no particular sector and is
“distributed among the little reliable troops of the Austrian Army,”
(Weekly Bulletin of Information of Russian Army, Dec. 16–23, 1917.)


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Kept in Russia for the occupation of Ukrainia, the 91st Division had but
a very small combat value (April, 1918).


                                 1918.

1. The division was last identified in the Ukraine at the end of August.
There is evidence that the division was brought to the Western Front in
September. Reports and prisoners’ statements pointed to the presence of
the division in the Muelhausen area during October. However, it did not
come into line on the Western Front. The division was not identified
after the armistice among the retreating German units.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                             92d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │28 Ldw.      │39 Ldw.      │28 Ldw.      │39 Ldw.
              │             │419.         │             │2 Ldw.
              │             │432.         │             │32 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │            (?)            │1, 3, and 4 Sqns. 3
              │                           │  Cuirassier Rgt.
              │                           │4 Sqn. Body Gd. Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │12 Ldw. F. A. Rgt. (except
              │                           │  Rgt. Staff, 1 Abt. Staff,
              │                           │  1 and 5 Btries., 2 Abt.
              │                           │  Staff, 7 and 9 Btries.).
              │ 2 F. A. Rgt.              │
              │ 895 F. A. Btry.           │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                │1 Ldw. Co. 14 C. Dist.
   Liaisons.  │                           │  Pions.
              │ 346 Pion. Co.             │120 Searchlight Section.
              │ 92 T. M. Co.              │92 Signal Command:
              │ 92 Tel. Detch.            │ 92 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │276 Ambulance Co.          │276 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │5 Ldw. Field Hospital.     │5 Ldw. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │242 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                 │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (39th Landwehr; 7th Corps District—Westphalia. 32d Landwehr; 11th Corps
                           District—Thuringen.)


                                 1917.

The 92d Division (Rusche Division) was formed at about the end of
November, 1916, on the Eastern Front.


VOLHYNIA.

1. At first as a part of the Bernhardi Army, the 92d Division occupied
in Volhynia the Gorokhov-Kisselin sectors south of the Kovel-Rovno
railway (February-August, 1917). It was then made up of the 419th, 432d,
and the 133d Landwehr (Saxon), the latter being afterwards replaced by
the 39th Landwehr.


GALICIA.

2. In August, 1917, the division was transferred toward the south and
put into line in the Zalosce (Galicia) sector. The 419th Infantry left
the division to join the 77th Division, with which it left for France.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Having occupied from the time of its organization until April, 1918, but
quiet Russian sectors, and, moreover, having given up its best men
(those less than 35 years of age), who were transferred to other
divisions on the Western Front, the 92d Division had but a mediocre
combat value.

The 39th Landwehr, from the time of its formation in 1914, was noted in
Belgium for its acts of insubordination (recruited from the mining
population of Westphalia).


                                 1918.

1. Relieved in the Zalosce sector in January, the division was in
reserve in the vicinity of Zborow during February.


UKRAINE.

2. In April the division was in the Ukraine (39th Landwehr Regiment was
identified near Kiev on the 23d; the 432d Regiment was in the vicinity
of Klintsy on the 27th). The third regiment was the 32d Landwehr, left
behind by the 197th Division upon its departure for France in February.
The 432d Regiment sent to the Western Front was dissolved in May and was
divided between the 22d Reserve and 82d Division. The 2d Landwehr and
the 32d Landwehr Regiment were identified in the Ukraine early in
October. Toward the end of the month elements of the division were
reported along the Danube.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The Division was rated as fourth class.




                             93d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │215.     │342.     │166.     │342.     │   (?)   │433 (10
              │         │         │         │         │         │  and 11
              │         │         │         │         │         │  cos.).
              │         │433.     │         │433.     │         │434.
              │         │434.     │         │434.     │   (?)   │   (?)
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │5 Sqn. 16 Drag.    │5 Sqn. 16 Drag.
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
              │                   │4 Sqn. 85 Cav. Rgt.│4 Sqn. 4 Hus. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │85 Cav. (Heavy)
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │Art. Command:      │253 Ldw. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (except the Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  Staff, and 1 and
              │                   │                   │  2 Abt. Staffs,
              │                   │                   │  and 4 and 6
              │                   │                   │  Btries. of the 3
              │                   │                   │  Abt.).
              │                   │ 35 F. A. Rgt.     │
              │                   │ 899 F. A. Btry.   │
              │                   │ 900 F. A. Btry.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Res. Co. 26      │Pion. Btn.:        │81 Searchlight
   Liaisons.  │  Pions.           │                   │  Section.
              │93 T. M. Co.       │ 2 Ldw. Co. 1      │93 Signal Command:
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 1 Ldw. Co. 17 C.  │ 93 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │  Dist. Pions.     │  (except 2 Sect.).
              │                   │ 93 T. M. Co.      │
              │                   │ 93 Tel. Detch.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │233 Ambulance Co.  │
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │Field Hospital.    │
              │                   │243 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (433d Regiment: 18th and 20th Corps District—Hesse and Eastern Prussia.
           434th Regiment: 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1916.

The 93d Division (von Kramsta) was formed on the Eastern Front about the
month of October, 1916 (region of Lida). One of its regiments, the 342d,
had come from the 86th Division. The 433d and the 434th were newly
created units.


RUSSIA.

1. In November, 1916, the 93d Division was in line to the southeast of
Vichnev. At that time, with the 85th Landwehr Division, it formed the
17th Reserve Corps.


                                 1917.


RUSSIA.

1. During the whole year 1917 the division stayed on the Little Berezina
(Vichnev) front with the 12th Army.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Mediocre combat value.


                                 1918.


RUSSIA.

1. About the middle of December, 1917, the 93d Division left the
Berezina and advanced toward the east.

2. It was in reserve near Minsk the 2d of March and in the Klintsy
region the 27th of April. The 342d Regiment had entrained on April 10 at
Lida for Belgium, where it was dissolved in May; its men being divided
between the 22d Reserves and 119th Division.


UKRAINE.

3. About the middle of May the division was identified near Kiev, where
it was also identified as late as the 9th of September.


RUMANIA.

4. Toward the end of October elements of the division were identified
along the Danube.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The Division was rated as fourth class.




                             94th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │(?)          │334.         │(?)          │365.
              │             │423.         │             │439.
              │             │45 Landst.   │             │24 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 84 Heavy Cav. Rgt.  │1 Sqn. 7 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │            (?)            │8 F. A. Rgt. (Staff, 1
              │                           │  Abt., 2 Abt., 4 and 5
              │                           │  Btries., 3 Abt.).
              │                           │405 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                           │1042 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1051 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                │411 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ T. M. Co.                 │ 2 Ldw. Co. 5 C. Dist.
              │                           │  Pions.
              │ Tel. Detch.               │ 2 Ldw. Co. 8 C. Dist.
              │                           │  Pions.
              │                           │ 85 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │183 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 183 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 131 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │556 Ambulance Co.          │551 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │Field Hospital.            │328 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │331 Field Hospital.
              │                           │519 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │1233 M. T. Col.            │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Attached.    │Bitterfeld Landst. Inf.    │
              │  Btn. (4 C. Dist. Btn. No.│
              │  4).                      │
              │Cosel Landst. Inf. Btn. (6 │
              │  C. Dist. No. 8).         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

        (46th Landstrum: 2d Corps District—Pomerania; 5th Corps
 District—Silesia. 45th Landstrum: 6th Corps District—Silesia; 3d Corps
          District—Brandenburg; 21st Corps District—Lorraine.)


                                 1917.


RUSSIA.

The 94th Division was formed on the Eastern Front about June, 1917. At
that time it comprised the 334th and the 423d Regiments and the 45th
Landwehr.

1. From June to December, 1917, the 94th Division occupied a sector in
the region of Niemen (Negnevitchi).

2. In July, 1917, some elements of the division were transferred to the
vicinity of Baranovitchi to oppose a possible attack in that sector.

In December the 423d Regiment was transferred to the 84th Division and
went with the latter to France.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Mediocre combat value.


                                 1918.

1. When the 334th Regiment was transferred from Russia to the Western
Front in May, 1918, and was disbanded, the 94th Division was considered
as dissolved.


RIGA.

2. About September 21, the 94th Division was reformed at Riga out of the
439th Regiment and the 365th Regiment. The 439th Regiment was taken out
of the 205th Division about the middle of September while stationed in
Esthonia and sent to Riga. The 365th Regiment, which took part in the
campaign of Osel Island, was sent to Riga in June. The 24th Landwehr
Regiment joined the division at Metz.

3. The division left Riga about September 22 for Metz. (Route: Schawli-
Kowno-Eydthkulnen-Bromberg-Posen-Leipsig-Erfurt-Frankfurt-Kreuznach-
Neunkirchen-Metz.) The trip lasted about six days.


METZ.

4. The division rested in the Metz area about one week. Then it was
joined by the 7th Hussar Regiment and the 8th Field Artillery Regiment.


WOEVRE.

On October 11 the division relieved the 107th Division at Doncourt aux
Templiers. It held that sector without event until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was fairly strong in effectives in October. The men had
received little training and their morale was bad.




                             95th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │(?)          │271 Res.     │(?)          │422 (2d
              │             │             │             │  Btn.).
              │             │422.         │             │52 Ldw.
              │             │430 Ldw.     │             │(?)
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │            (?)            │4 Sqn. 19 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │            (?)            │69 Res. F. A. Rgt. (except
              │                           │  1 and 5 Btries.).
              │                           │1017 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1035 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                │1 Landst. Co. 15 C. Dist.
   Liaisons.  │                           │  Pions.
              │ 1 Landst. Pion. Co.       │148 Searchlight Section.
              │ 95 T. M. Co.              │95 Signal Command:
              │ 95 Tel. Detch.            │ 95 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │Ambulance Co.              │644 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │Field Hospital.            │117 Res. Field Hospital.
              │567 Vet. Hospital.         │567 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │1035 M. T. Col.            │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (422d Regiment: 4th Corps District-Prussian Saxony. 430th Landwehr: (?).

52d Landwehr: 3d Corps District-Brandenburg.)


                                 1917.


RUSSIA.

1. The 95th Division was formed on the Eastern Front about the month of
July, 1917. At that time it was made up of the 422d Regiment and 271st
Reserve Regiment and of the 430th Landwehr, the 271st being temporarily
transferred from the 82d Division.


PINSK.

2. Until the end of 1917 the 95th Division occupied a sector in the
Pinsk region. In November it sent reenforcements to the 15th Division
(Western Front).

3. In December it gave up its younger men to the 82d Reserve Division
then sent to the Western Front, and received in exchange older men—men
from Alsace and recruits from the class of 1919. At this time it is made
up of the 422d Regiment, the 430th Landwehr and the 52d Landwehr, the
271st Reserve Regiment having been returned to the 82d Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Composed of older men and recruits of the 1919 class, the 95th Division
seemed to have but a mediocre combat value.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. In January many men of the division were sent to the 14th Division,
which was on the Western Front. In April the division was reported in
the Ukraine. The 430th Landwehr Regiment was to the north of Gloukhov
(east of Koursk) on April 27; the 52d Landwehr Regiment “400 kilometers
from Pinsk” on the 9th of May, after a three-day railroad journey. The
division was identified in the Gomel region toward the end of September.
Soon afterwards it was reported as having come to the Western Front, but
it was never identified there. It was rated as a fourth-class division.




                             96th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │106 Res.     │244 Res.     │(?)          │244 Res.
              │             │102 Ldw.     │             │102 Ldw.
              │             │40 Ers.      │             │40 Ers.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 18 Hus. Rgt.        │4 Sqn. 18 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │53 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 32 Res. F. A. Rgt.        │21 Ldw. Ft. A. Rgt. (1 and
              │                           │  6 Btries.).
              │                           │876 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │947 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1001 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                │219 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │416 T. M. Co.              │ 1 Co. 22 Pions.
              │Tel. Detch.                │ Ldw. Co. 19 C. Dist.
              │                           │  Pions.
              │                           │ 136 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │96 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 96 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │278 Ambulance Co.          │278 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │5 Res. Field Hospital.     │5 Res. Field Hospital.
              │6 Res. Field Hospital.     │6 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │568 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │608 M. T. Col.             │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (102d Landwehr: 12th Corps District—Saxony. 244th Reserve Regiment and
               40th Ersatz: 19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1917.

The 96th Division was a newly formed unit, being organized on the
Galician front in July, 1917.

One of its regiments, the 244th Reserve, was part of the 53d Reserve
Division (until the end of 1916) and later part of the 215th Division.

The 40th Ersatz, formerly of the 19th Ersatz Division, also came to this
division from the 215th Division. As to the 102d Landwehr, it was with
the 82d Reserve Division in the vicinity of Pinsk.


GALICIA.

1. After the Russian offensive beginning in July the 96th Division was
put into line in the Zborow sector. At the end of July it took part in
the German counteroffensive and advanced up to the Russian-Galician
frontier. It held the Husiatin sector until February, 1918, sending
important reenforcements in December, 1917, to the 241st Division
(Saxon).


                              RECRUITING.

Division is entirely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Coming from the Eastern Front at the beginning of April, 1918, the 96th
Division seemed to have only a mediocre combat value (April, 1918).


                                 1918.

1. The division continued to hold the quiet sector south of Blamont
until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. It had practically no losses on
the Western Front. The companies averaged 115 men of an average age of
25 to 35 years.




                            101st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │201.          │45.           │201.          │45.
              │              │59.           │              │59.
              │              │146.          │              │146.
              │              │              │      15 Res. Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 10 Drag. Rgt.         │11 Drag. Rgt. (2 Sqns.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │201 F. A. Rgt.               │201 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │1 Mountain A. Abt.
              │                             │Austro-Hung. Mountain Art. (3
              │                             │  Btries.).
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│201 Pion. Co.                │201 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │101 Mountain T. M. Co.
              │                             │101 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │101 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[27]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │201.          │11 Gren.      │201.          │45.
              │              │146.          │              │146.
              │              │              │              │21 Res.
              │              │9 Jag. Rgt.   │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │(?) Sqn. 10 Drag. Rgt.       │3 Sqn. 10 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │138 Art. Command:
              │ 209 F. A. Rgt.              │ 201 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 201 F. A. Rgt. (elements).  │
              │                             │
              │ 3 Mountain A. Abt.          │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(101) Pion. Btn.:            │101 Pion. Co. (Mountain).
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 101 (Mountain) Pion. Co.    │201 Pion. Co.
              │ 201 Pion. Co.               │201 Searchlight Section.
              │ 205 Pion. Co.               │101 Mountain T. M. Co.
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 9 Pions.         │171 Mountain T. M. Co.
              │ 101 Mountain T. M. Co.      │101 Tel. Detch.
              │ 171 Mountain T. M. Co.      │101 Pion. Btn.
              │ 201 Searchlight Section.    │
              │ 101 Tel. Detch.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │641 Ambulance Co.            │101 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │Field Hospital.              │641 Ambulance Co.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │Field Hospital.
              │                             │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │590 M. T. Col.
              │                             │4 Pack Trans. Col. (Wurtt.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │101 Cyclist Co.              │101 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 27:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, July, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (146th Regiment: 20th Corps District—Eastern Prussia. 11th Grenadiers:
                      6th Corps District—Silesia.)


                                 1915.

The 101st Division was formed in May, 1915, with the 45th Infantry (from
the 2d Division), the 146th Regiment (from the 37th Division), and the
59th Regiment (from the 41st Division) all surplus regiments by reason
of the reduction of divisions to three regiments. Later the 101st
Division was subjected to a number of changes.


SERBIA.

1. After having been part of the Army of the South, on the Bug, the
101st Division was identified on the Serbian frontier at the end of May
and the beginning of June.


GALICIA-POLAND.

2. At the end of June it was brought back to Galicia by way of Budapest
and Stry and took part in the German offensive in Galicia, in Poland. It
was on the Dniester on June 30 and on the Zlota-Lipa on July 20.

It was in the neighborhood of Lublin on August 12, at Siedlce on the
29th and advanced up to a position near Brest-Litowsk.


SERBIA.

3. Chosen to participate in the offensive against Serbia, it was
entrained at Warsaw and went into action on the Serbian front on October
7. It was at Nish on December 9.


                                 1916.


SERBIA.

1. At the end of January, 1916, the 101st Division was still in Serbia
and with the 103d Division formed the 4th Reserve Corps.


MACEDONIA.

2. In February it was in front of Monastir.


VARDAR.

3. In March, together with the 103d Division, it was near the Greek
frontier in the Vardar Valley (Guevgueli) (March to November). In August
it supported the 5th Bulgarian Division.


CERNA.

4. In November the 45th and the 146th Regiments occupied the bend of the
Cerna, while the 59th Regiment continued to hold the left bank of the
Vardar.


                                 1917.


MACEDONIA.

1. The Division was materially changed in 1917. The 45th was replaced by
the 11th Grenadiers, which had in November, 1916, left the 11th Division
in France to join the Hippel Division in front of Monastir. In June the
59th Regiment was withdrawn from the division and sent to the Roumanian
front. It was replaced by the 9th Jaeger Regiment.

2. The 101st Division was kept on the Macedonian front (Vardar Valley,
Doiran, Monastir) to the end of 1917, seemingly after that it breaks up.
The 146th Infantry was still in the vicinity of Monastir in December and
was reported as being sent toward Constantinople and Palestine (March,
1918). In March, 1918, the 9th Regiment of Jaegers arrived in Alsace.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division is rated as third class.


                                 1918.

The 101st Division is considered as consisting of a divisional staff
only, administering Bulgarian units. The division is, therefore, no
longer counted as a German infantry division. The 12th active and 12th
and 13th Reserve Jaeger Battalions are considered independent units.




                             103d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │205.          │32.           │205.          │32.
              │              │71.           │              │71.
              │              │116 Res.      │              │116 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │2 and 4 Sqn. Horse Gren. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │205 F. A. Rgt.               │205 F. A. Rgt.
              │4 Mountain A. Abt.           │4 Mountain A. Abt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│205 Pion. Co.                │205 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │9 Co. 28 Pions.
              │                             │103 T. M. Co.
              │                             │103 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │103 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │205.          │32.           │205.          │32.
              │              │71.           │              │71.
              │              │116 Res.      │              │144.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 6 Drag. Rgt.          │3 Sqn. 6 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │103 Art. Command:            │103 Art. Command:
              │ 205 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 205 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 3 Abt. 11 Res. Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 721 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 919 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1228 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│103 Pion. Btn.:              │103 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 87 Res. Pion. Co.           │ 87 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 9 Co. 28 Pions.             │ 9 Co. 28 Pions.
              │ 103 T. M. Co.               │ 103  M. Co.
              │ (205) Searchlight Section.  │ 208 Searchlight Section.
              │ 103 Tel. Detch.             │103 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 103 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 15 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │103 Ambulance Co.            │103 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │361 Field Hospital.          │361 Field Hospital.
              │362 Field Hospital.          │362 Field Hospital.
              │202 Vet. Hospital.           │202 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │591 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Odd units.   │Divisional M. T. Col.        │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │M. G. Co. of the 4 Gd. Gren. │
              │  Rgt.                       │
              │12  T. M. Co.                │
              │24 Bomb Thrower.             │
              │14 M. G. Co.                 │
              │75 M. G. S. S. Detch.        │
              │2 Bav. M. G. S. S. Detch.    │
              │1 Co. 629 Ambulance Co.      │
              │102 Gd. Pions.               │
              │2 Gd. Pion.Co.               │
              │1 Co. 29 Pions.              │
              │2 Co. 8 C. Dist. T. M. Btn.  │
              │1 Co. 8 C. Dist. T. M. Btn.  │
              │35 Flame-thrower Detch.      │
              │1 Btry. 107 F. A. Rgt.       │
              │22 Btries. 43 Res. F. Rgt.   │
              │1 Btry. 43 Res. F. A. Rgt.   │
              │2 Btries. 2 Gd. F. A. Rgt.   │
              │7 Ft. Art. Rgt.              │
              │4 Btries. 19 Ft. Art. Rgt.   │
              │2 Btries. 1 Res. Ft. Art.    │
              │  Rgt.                       │
              │1 Btry. 16 Ft. Art. Rgt.     │
              │42 Art. Survey Section.      │
              │127 Giant Periscope Section. │
              │306 Supply Train.            │
              │497 Ammunition Train.        │
              │117 Bav. Art. Ammunition     │
              │  Train.                     │
              │42 Res. Art. Ammunition      │
              │  Train.                     │
              │295 Ammunition Train.        │
              │28 Ammunition Train.         │
              │216 Ammunition Train.        │
              │31 Supply Depot.             │
              │13 Supply Depot.             │
              │81 Field Bakery.             │
              │10 Reconnaissance Flight.    │
              │265 Reconnaissance Flight.   │
              │111 Balloon Sqn.             │
              │107 Balloon Sqn.             │
              │37 Wireless Detch.           │
              │1135 Signal Detch.           │
              │289 Pigeon Loft.             │
              │92 Pigeon Loft.              │
              │2 Co. 87 Labor Btn.          │
              │3 Co. 87 Labor Btn.          │
              │100 Pris. of War Labor Btn.  │
              │Chemnitz Landst. Labor Btn.  │
              │2 Co. 11 Bav. Labor Btn.     │
              │1 and 4 Cos. 72 Road Building│
              │  Btn.                       │
              │(According to a captured     │
              │  document of Sept. 26,      │
              │  1917.)                     │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (32d Regiment: 11th. Corps District—Hesse—Electoral. 71st Regiment; 11th
       Corps District—Thuringen. 116th Reserve Regiment: 18th Corps
                     District—Grand Duchy of Hesse.)


                                 1915.

The 103d Division was formed at the Warthe cantonment in May, 1915, by
taking the 32d Regiment from the 22d Division, the 71st Regiment from
the 38th Division, and the 116th Reserve Regiment from the 25th Reserve
Division.


SERBIA.

1. On May 10, 1915, the 103d Division was sent to a region near the
Serbian frontier and stayed there, together with the 101st Division,
until the end of June, between the Drave and the Save.


RUSSIA.

2. During the summer it appeared on the Russian front and participated
in the offensive of the Linsingen Army—near Lemberg, July 29; near
Sokal, August 16.

3. It was put at rest at the end of August.


SERBIA.

4. Transferred to southern Hungary (September), it took part in the
Serbian campaign with the Gallwitz Army. It was at Kragujevac in
November and at Nish at the beginning of December.

5. This expedition having been completed, it stayed at rest at Uskub,
the 71st Infantry going to Veles.


                                 1916.


MACEDONIA.

1. In January, 1916, the 116th Reserve Regiment advanced up to Macedonia
and soon, at the end of February, the 103d Division was on the Greek
frontier (Lake Dorian sector), to the left of the 101st Division, with
which it formed the 4th Reserve Corps.


FRANCE.

2. Entrained for France about April 27.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. Detrained at Châtelet sur Retourne about May 6 and was reviewed at
Avançon by the Emperor on the 9th and went into line on the 23d in the
Prosnes-Prunay sector to the east of the 58th Division (these two
divisions forming the 4th Reserve Corps).


VERDUN.

4. The 103d Division left Champagne on June 16 for the Verdun front. It
was engaged on June 22 in the Vaux-Chapitre wood and took part in the
big attack of June 23 on the Souville Fort and the attack of July 11.
During this period (June-July) it suffered very heavy losses.

5. Relieved at the end of July, it went into line in a sector near
Apremont Forest for a few days (until Aug. 2).


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

6. From the beginning of August to September 15 it occupied the front
along the Côtes de Meuse (Bois des Chevaliers, Vaux les Palameix).


CHAMPAGNE.

7. Transferred to Champagne (Sept. 20), the division took over the
Somme-Py sector, Tahure (until the beginning of October).


SOMME.

8. The 103d Division was next sent to the Somme (detrained at Bohain,
Oct. 8). It was engaged between Bouchavesnes and the St. Pierre-Vaast
wood (Oct. 15 to Nov. 10). The 116th Reserve Regiment was particularly
put to the test.


CHAMPAGNE.

9. After a few days’ rest the division came back to Champagne (Nov. 13).
It occupied the Souain sector (Nov. 15 to Jan. 15, 1917). While there
was engaged only in a few local raids. In December and January it
received important reenforcements.


                                 1917.


VERDUN.

1. The 103d Division in January, 1917, went to the Verdun front
(Samogneux-Louvemont). It stayed there four months and was always on the
defensive.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

2. Relieved on May 23, the division was transferred to the Aisne. It
held the Chemin des Dames sector (Malmaison, Les Bovettes, Panthéon, La
Royère) from May 26 to October 11–12. It only participated in the
attacks of June 6 and July 8 as supporting troops and as a result
suffered but slight losses during that period.

3. Relieved from the Aisne front on October 11 the 103d Division was
sent to rest in the region of Sissonne. It seems to have been
transferred on October 24 toward the north of the Ailette as an
attacking division.


ST. QUENTIN.

4. After a rest at the end of November and the first two weeks of
December in the vicinity of Origny-Ste. Benoite, the division took over
the sector of Itancourt (Dec. 27–28) near St. Quentin.


                              RECRUITING.

The 32d Regiment and the 71st Regiment, recruited in Thuringen and
Hesse-Electoral, and the 116th Reserve Regiment in the Grand Duchy of
Hesse. Although the 3d Batallion of the 85th Landwehr was transferred to
the 116th as 3d Batallion of this unit, its recruiting was a great deal
less from the 9th Corps District than from the 18th Corps District.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The showing made by the 103d Division in the conflicts in which it was
engaged warrants its being classed among the good units. Its losses in
1917 were comparatively small. Its strength was gradually made up of
younger men by the transfer from it of the older soldiers. It was
classed as an attack division by the German Command. A secret order of
the 103d Division of September 20, 1917, contains the following: “Our
division, which was specially trained for offensive work, and which is
designated as an attack division (Angriffs division), is, in an
offensive, very superior to the adversary * * *.”


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was in line south of St. Quentin on March 21 as the left
division of Von Conta group. It advanced toward Vendeuil without meeting
great resistance and reached there at midnight. The 22d it reached the
Crozat Canal and crossed at Liezon the next day. Placed in reserve on
the 23d, it followed the general advance by Villequier-Aumont (24th),
Quesmy (25th), Lagny (27th). On the 28th the division captured the
Dives-Lassigny road and relieved the 36th Division in that vicinity. It
attacked Plemont on March 30, but was unable to maintain its position
and fell back on April 1, after heavy losses. It was relieved about
April 15.


AISNE.

2. About April 27 the division relieved the 108th Division at Corbeny.
It was still in line when the attack of May 27 started and advanced to
the Marne northwest of Chatillon via Romigny, Vandieres, Bois de
Mareuil. It was relieved by the 22d Division between June 24 and 26.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

3. It rested near Fismes until it reentered line about July 14 in the
sector Anthenay-Bois de Trottes. It was engaged until about August 1,
when it was withdrawn from the battle front southwest of Rheims.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

4. The division rested at Malmaison until August 22, when it was engaged
north of St. Aubin. In that locality it remained in line until about
September 5.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. On September 26 the division entered line in Champagne, relieving the
202d Division in the area south of Fontaine en Dornmeois. It received
the full weight of the French attack and in four days in line lost more
than 2,000 prisoners, including 6 battalion commanders.

6. After three weeks of rest, elements of the division were reengaged
southwest of Longwe on October 24. Other elements were identified in the
sector of the 76th Reserve Division and the 2d Landwehr Division, near
the junction of the American and French Armies. Elements continued to be
identified in this general locality until the armistice. Most of the
division appeared to have been opposed to the French Army. The last
identification was at Sedan.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. At the end its effectives were
greatly reduced. Discontent over their prolonged service in line had
lowered the morale of the division.




                            105th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │209.          │21.           │209.          │21.
              │              │122 Fus.      │              │122 Fus.
              │              │129.          │              │129.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Mounted Jag. Rgt. (2       │4 Mounted Jag. Rgt. (Sqns.).
              │  Sqns.).                    │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │209 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.).  │209 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│209 Pion. Co.                │209 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │105 T. M. Co.
              │                             │105 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │105 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │209.          │21.           │209.          │21.
              │              │129.          │              │129.
              │              │400.          │              │400.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 4 Mounted Jag. Rgt.   │5 Sqn. 4 Mounted Jag. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │105 Art. Command:
              │ 259 F. A. Rgt. (2 Abts.).   │ 259 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 1 Abt. 11 Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 901 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1103 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1138 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│105 Pion. Btn.:              │105 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 209 Pion. Co.               │ 209 Pion. Co.
              │ 105 T. M. Co.               │ 1 Co. 18 Pions.
              │ 412 T. M. Co.               │ 105 T. M. Co.
              │ 11 Searchlight Section.     │ 22 Searchlight Section.
              │ 209 Searchlight Section.    │105 Signal Command:
              │ 105 Tel. Detch.             │ 105 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 153 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │105 Ambulance Co.            │105 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │363 Field Hospital.          │363 Field Hospital.
              │364 Field Hospital.          │364 Field Hospital.
              │365 Field Hospital.          │105 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │592 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (21st and 129th Regiments: 17th Corps District—Western Prussia. 400th
             Regiment: 8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1915.

The 105th Division was formed at Thorn in May, 1915. At the outset it
comprised the 122d Regiment of Fusileers obtained from the 26th Division
(13th Corps District), the 21st Infantry from the 35th Division, and the
129th Infantry from the 36th Division (17th Corps District).

In 1917 the 400th replaced the 122d Regiment (Wurttemberg).


SERBIA.

1. In June, 1915, the 105th Division appeared on the Serbian front at
the same time as the 101st and 103d Divisions.


GALICIA.

2. At the end of June it was transferred to Galicia via Budapest and
Stry. It participated in the offensive against the Russians on the Gnila
Lipa from June 24 to July 1, on the Zlota Lipa July 20. From Galicia it
went to Poland; fought at Krasnostaw at the end of July and between
Wieprz and the Jaselda until August 20. At the end of August it was on
the Chtchertchev-Brest-Kobryn railway front.


SERBIA AND BULGARIA.

3. Chosen for the Serbian campaign, it again found itself in company
with the 101st and 103d Divisions and went into line on the Serbian
front in October but did not stay there long. While the 122d fusileers
pushed on in the south of this country, the 21st and the 129th entrained
in December for Eastern Bulgaria.


                                 1916.


BULGARIA.

1. Assigned to watch the Roumanian frontier and the coast of the Black
Sea, the 21st went to Varna and the 129th from Choumla to the coast.
This mission did not end until May, 1916.


MACEDONIA.

2. At this time the division was being re-formed in Macedonia, where the
three regiments were again together at the beginning of June.


GALICIA.

3. The June Russian offensive was responsible for its return to Galicia
and at the end of the month it was in Bukovina. The 105th Division
operated in the region of Kolomea (end of June, beginning of July) and
suffered heavy losses. The 122d fusileers reported 26 officers and 1,165
men out of action. The division next fought in Galicia to the east of
Stanislau in July and August (east of Tlumacz-Tysmienica), to the east
of Halicz in September.

4. The division remained in the vicinity of Halicz until October.


COURLAND.

5. Relieved from Galicia, the division was sent to Courland, to the
south of Kekkau (October).

6. On October 20 it took over the sector to the west of Jakobstadt.


                                 1917.


JAKOBSTADT.

1. The 105th Division occupied the Jacobstadt front until November,
1917. In April the 400th Regiment replaced the 122d which was
transferred to the 243d Division (old 8th Ersatz Division), a
Wurttemberg unit. The division took Jacobstadt on September 21.


FRANCE.

2. On November 5 the 105th Division entrained at Mitau and was
transported to France. (Itinerary: Kovno-Koenigsberg-Schneidemuehl-
Berlin-Cassel-Coblenz-Treves-Thionville-Sedan-Mezieres.) It detrained at
Juniville (south of Rethel) on November 11 and rested in this region.


                              RECRUITING.

The 21st and the 129th were classified as “troops from Western Prussia”
in an official document. Although the 21st was called the 4th
Pomeranian, it was actually recruited for the most part in the Province
of Western Prussia, which was its station in peace time. The 400th was,
by reason of its replacement depot, a Rhenish unit.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 105th Division was first put into line on the French front at the
beginning of January, 1918. It suffered losses in Galicia during the
Summer of 1916.

Its long stay in the Courland sector had not increased its combat value.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was engaged west of Noyon on April 15 and remained in
that area until May 17, when it was relieved by the 223d Division.
Losses were very considerable in the early part of the division’s
occupation of that sector.


NOYON.

2. It rested north of Noyon until May 31 when it reenforced the Aisne
battle front at Nampcel, east of the Oise. Throughout June it was
engaged in this sector. It attempted a local attack on Moulin sous
Touvent on July 3 without success. In minor operations in June and July
the division lost about 1,000 prisoners. In August it was heavily
engaged and forced back on Noyon, where it was relieved by the 54th
Division about September 1.

3. The division rested for about three weeks in the area south of Ferte
Chevresis-Montigny sur Crecy. It was engaged at Septvaux about September
27. It fought in the retreat through Fourdrain as far as Mesbrecourt-
Assis sur Serre. It held that sector until the capture of Mesbrecourt on
October 22, after which it took up a position to the north. The division
was in the neighborhood of Pargny wood until November 5. Thereafter it
was identified at Vervins (6th), Voulpaix (7th), north of Wimy (9th).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. As a sector holding division it
saw almost constant service most of which was in the Noyon area. Its
morale was greatly lowered in November.




                            107th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │213.          │52 Res.       │213.          │52 Res.
              │              │227 Res.      │              │227 Res.
              │              │232 Res.      │              │232 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │             (?)             │3 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │213 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.).  │213 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│213 Pion. Co.                │213 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │4 Co. 21 Pions.
              │                             │107 T. M. Co.
              │                             │107 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │107 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │213.          │52 Res.       │              │52 Res.
              │              │227 Res.      │              │232 Res.
              │              │232 Res.      │              │448.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.          │3 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │157 Art. Command:            │157 Art. Command:
              │ 213 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 213 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 154 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 713 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1283 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1353 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│107 Pion. Btn.:              │107 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 213 Pion. Co.               │ 4 Co. 21 Pions.
              │ 4 Co. 21 Pions.             │ 213 Pion. Co.
              │ 91 T. M. Co.                │ 26 Searchlight Section.
              │ 107 T. M. Co.               │107 Signal Command:
              │ (213) Searchlight Section.  │ 107 Tel. Detch.
              │ 107 Tel. Detch.             │ 128 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │107 Ambulance Co.            │107 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │366 Field Hospital (?).      │366 Field Hospital.
              │166 Vet. Hospital.           │97 Res. Field Hospital.
              │                             │166 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │593 M. T. Col.               │593 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (52d Reserve Regiment: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg. 227th Reserve
  Regiment: 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony. 232d Reserve Division:
                     10th Corps District—Hanover.)


                                 1915.

The 107th Division was formed at Glogau in May, 1915, with regiments
transferred from the 49th Reserve Division (227th Reserve Regiment),
from the 50th Reserve Division (232d Reserve Regiment), and from the 5th
Reserve Regiment (52d Reserve Regiment).


GALICIA.

1. The division took part in the battles near Lemberg (June 17–22).


RUSSIA.

2. In July the division was engaged near the Bug, in the vicinity of
Grubeszow (July 19–30).

3. On July 31 it fought to the northeast of Cholm. It was near Wlodawa
from August 13 to 17.

4. On August 25 and 26 it participated in the taking of Brest-Litowsk.
It entered Pinsk on September 16.


SERBIA.

5. From Pinsk it operated against Serbia, staying there from the
beginning of October to the end of November, 1915.


                                 1916.


COURLAND.

1. In January, 1916, the division was in reserve in the vicinity of
Dvinsk, where it remained until March 15.


POSTAVY-SMORGONI.

2. On March 18 it took over the sector to the north of Postavy. From May
to June 20 it was near Smorgoni. At the end of the month it was assigned
to meet the Russian offensive in Volhynia.


VOLHYNIA.

3. It was engaged between the Styr and the Stokhod from June 21 until
the middle of July.

4. In August and September it was still in Volhynia, near the Kovel-
Rovno railway.


KOVEL.

5. The division stayed in this region and occupied the sector west of
Kachovka until the beginning of November, 1917.


                                 1917.


FRANCE.

1. Relieved about November 9, 1917, from the Kovel sector, the 107th
Division entrained on the 13th at Poginski for the Western Front.
(Itinerary: Kovel-Brest-Litovsk-Warsaw-Posen-Frankfort on the Oder-
Berlin-Cassel-Coblenz-Treves-Thionville-Sedan-Charleville-Hirson.) It
detrained east of Cambrai on the 18th.


CAMBRAI.

2. From November 21 on it was engaged to the southwest of Cambrai
(Noyelles-Rumilly).

3. It was retired from the front about the end of December.


                              RECRUITING.

The 52d Reserve Regiment remained a Brandenburger regiment, as at time
of its formation. The 227th Reserve Regiment, formed in the 5th Corps
District at the end of 1915, had a majority of effectives from the 4th
Corps District and still received replacements from Prussian Saxony. On
the other hand, the 232d Reserve Regiment, formed in the 4th Corps
District, recruited principally in Hanover (10th Corps District). The
107th Division had hence a heterogeneous organization.


                                 1918.


CAMBRAI.

1. The division remained in line in the Gonnelieu sector until about
February 15, when it was relieved by the 18th Division from “B” Army and
went into reserve. On March 1 it returned and relieved the 18th Division
in its former sector at Gonnelieu.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was still in line when the offensive of March 21 began and
advanced via Mesnil to Avelny wood under the 39th Corps. It was relieved
on April 16 by the 16th Reserve Division near Anthuille and went to rest
near Cambrai.

3. On May 16 the division came into line at Morlancourt, relieving the
199th Division, and held that sector until the night of May 23–24. It
rested in the Cambrai area until its return to line at Morlancourt on
the night of June 20–21. It was withdrawn about August 1.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. When the British began the attack on August 8 the division hastily
returned to line near Proyart. Until the 28th it was hotly engaged at
Proyart, Mericourt, and Herleville. One thousand seven hundred prisoners
were taken from the division in this fighting.


WOEVRE.

5. On September 3 the division started for Metz to rest. Its destination
was changed and it detrained at Conflans on September 16, marched via
Frianville-Brainville-Allamont-Moulotte to Harville, where it went into
line. The sector was a quiet one, and the battalions were well rested.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

6. The division left that sector on October 11 and went in trucks from
Conflans to Stenay via Longuyon-Montmedy-Sedan. By way of Dun sur Meuse
the division entered the line on October 14. One regiment had previously
entered line on the 11th. Until the 20th the division was engaged in
resisting without especial success the American attack. Two of the
regiments of the division were out of the line from the 20th to November
1. The total losses of the division up to this time were estimated at
2,100, including 352 prisoners. Two regiments of the division were again
engaged from November 1 to 10 in the Villers area, when the division was
considered withdrawn following a failure to identify it by contact.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. There was evidence that the
morale of the men was low as a result of the heavy casualties that the
division suffered throughout 1918.




                            108th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │(?)           │97.           │(?)           │97.
              │              │137.          │              │137.
              │              │265 Res.      │              │265 Res.
              │              │              │         14 Jag. Btn.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Cavalry.     │             (?)             │1 Res. Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │243 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.).  │243 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│             (?)             │1 Res. Co. 1 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │108 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │
              │                             │108 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │885 F. A. Btry.
              │                             │
              │                             │888 F. A. Btry.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[28]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │(?)           │97.           │5.            │97.
              │              │137.          │              │137.
              │              │265 Res.      │              │265 Res.
              │         14 Jag. Btn.        │              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │6 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.          │6 Sqn. 17 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │(?) Art. Command:
              │ 243 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 243 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(108) Pion. Btn.:            │108 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Res. Co. 1 Pions.         │ 1 Res. Co. 2 Pion. Btn. No.
              │                             │  1.
              │ 1 Co. 33 Res. Pion. Btn.    │ 1 Co. 33 Res. Pions.
              │ 108 T. M. Co.               │ 2 Landst. Co. 17 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 275 Searchlight Section.    │ 275 Searchlight Section.
              │ 108 Searchlight Section.    │ 108 T. M. Co.
              │ 108 Tel. Detch.             │ 108 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 108 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │264 Ambulance Co.            │264 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │94 Field Hospital.           │94 Field Hospital.
              │258 Field Hospital.          │334 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │197 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │2 Landst. Pion. Co. (17 C.   │Attached.
              │  Dist.).                    │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 28:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, October, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (97th and 137th Regiments: 21st Corps District—Lorraine. 265th Reserve
               Regiment: 9th Corps District—Mecklenburg.)


                                 1915.

The 108th Division was formed during the summer of 1915 in the Niemen
Army (Scholtz Army) by taking the 137th Infantry from the 31st Division,
the 97th Infantry from the 42d Division, and the 265th Reserve Infantry
from the 80th Reserve Division. It was called the Beckmann Division in
honor of its commanding general before it received the number 108.


COURLAND.

1. About December 1 it went into line to the west of Sventen Lake
(region of Dvinsk).


                                 1916.


VOLHYNIA.

1. In June, 1916, the division was transferred to Volhynia and opposed
the Russian offensive in the vicinity of Svinioukhi. Here it had heavy
losses. On June 16 the 1st Battalion of the 137th Infantry reported 24
officers and 978 men out of action. (Casualty List).

2. It was in this sector until its departure for the Western Front
(middle of December, 1917.)


                                 1917.


FRANCE.

1. Entrained on December 12 in the vicinity of Brest-Litowsk.

2. Detrained near Hirson about December 18 and stayed at rest for three
weeks in the vicinity of Aubenton.


                              RECRUITING.

The 97th and the 137th of the old 21st Corps were among those regiments
which did not find a sufficient source of recruits in their home
stations and filled up their ranks with soldiers from the Rhine Province
and Westphalia.

The 265th Reserve Regiment, originally recruited from the Hanseatic
cities, was now principally recruited in Mecklenberg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 108th Division, coming from Russia, only went in line on the Western
Front on January 1, 1918.

At the end of January, 1918, the 137th and 97th still had in its ranks
many men from Alsace and Lorraine, which must have been transferred
shortly thereafter.


                                 1918.


AISNE.

1. After having had some training in the Vervins area, the 108th
Division relieved the 5th Reserve Division near Corbeny (northeast of
Craonne) during the night of January 22–23. It was relieved about the
21st of April by the 103d Division.


SOMME.

2. On the 30th it relieved the 9th Bavarian Reserve Division near
Villers-Bretonneux (south of Corbie). During the night of May 19–20 it
extended its front to the south and relieved the jaeger division. It was
relieved by the 41st Division on the 9th of July, and went to rest in
the Cappy area, south of the Somme.

3. On the 7th of August it relieved the 43d Reserve Division astride the
Somme (west of Bray). The next day the British captured 1576 men from
the division. It was withdrawn from line about the 23d. It went to the
Cambrai region, and was there disbanded—the 137th Regiment was
transferred to the 15th Division, the 97th Regiment to the 202d
Division, and the 265th Reserve Regiment was dissolved.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 108th was rated a third-class division, but considering that
although it was trained in assault tactics (in January) it was not used
in any of the German offensives, and that the only heavy fighting in
which it participated was when it was caught by the British attack of
the 8th of August, where it fought poorly, and also that the 15th and
202d Divisions—the units which received its regiments when it was
disbanded—were second and third class, respectively, this rating seems
to have been too high.




                            109th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │174.          │2 Gren.       │174.          │2 Gren.
              │              │26 Res.       │              │26 Res.
              │              │376.          │              │376.
              │              │              │   4 Btn. (57 Ldw. Rgt.).
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │98 Cav. Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │227 F. A. Rgt.               │227 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │1 Ldw. Co. Gd. Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │109 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │109 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[29]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │174.          │2 Gren.       │174.          │2 Gren.
              │              │26 Res.       │              │26 Res.
              │              │376.          │              │376.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 10 Drag. Rgt.         │2 Sqn. 10 Drag. Rgt.
              │                             │5 Sqn. 10 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │ 109 Art. Command:
              │ 227 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 227 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 2 Abt. 290 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(109) Pion. Btn.:            │218 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. Gd. Pions.       │ 338 Pion. Co.
              │ 2 Ldw. Co. 15 Pions.        │ 2 Ldw. Co. 15 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 109 T. M. Co.               │ 276 Searchlight Section.
              │ 276 Searchlight Section.    │ 109 T. M. Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │ 109 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │228 Ambulance Co.            │373 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │98 Field Hospital.           │98 Field Hospital.
              │277 Field Hospital.          │27 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │109 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │434 M. T. Col.               │595 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 29:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, September, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (2d Grenadiers: 2d Corps District—Pomerania. 26th Reserve Regiment: 4th
        Corps District—Prussian Saxony. 376th Regiment: 1st Corps
                        District—Eastern Prussia.)


                                 1915.

The 109th Division was formed in Courland in May, 1915. It obtained the
2d Grenadiers from the 3d Division, which has since then completely
changed its organization. It obtained the 26th Reserve Infantry from the
6th Reserve Division (3d Reserve Corps), and the 2d Ersatz Infantry
Regiment (Koenigsberg), which received the number 376.


PONIEVIEJ.

1. It was a part of the Niemen Army from the time that army was
organized until its departure for the Roumanian front (November, 1916).
In July it was in the vicinity of Ponieviej.


JAKOBSTADT.

2. At the end of October it took a position in front of Jakobstadt.


                                 1916.


COURLAND.

1. In 1916 the 109th Division still occupied the same sector in the
vicinity of Jakobstadt to the southwest of Lievenhof (Buschhof). It
stayed there until November, 1916.


ROUMANIA.

2. Transferred to Roumania, it took part in the campaign, valley of Jiu
(November), southeast of Rimnicu-Sarat (December). In the meanwhile it
headed the troops which entered Bucharest on December 6 (2d Grenadiers).


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA-NAMOLOASA.

With the stabilization of the Roumanian front, the division took a
position near the junction of the Rimnicu in front of Namoloasa
(southeast of Focsani). It held this sector during the entire year 1917.


                              RECRUITING.

A composite division. The 2d Grenadiers was Pomeranian; the 26th Reserve
Regiment was originally from Prussian Saxony, and the 376th got its
recruits from depots in Eastern Prussia. It first appeared on the
Western Front at the end of March, 1918.


                                 1918.


SOMME.

1. The division came into line on the night of April 27–28 and relieved
the 19th Division west of Hangard. It continued to hold this sector
until August 10. In the first two days of the British attack the
division lost 1,544 prisoners. After its withdrawal the division was
taken to the vicinity of Trelon and disbanded.

2. The 26th Reserve Regiment was drafted to the 36th Fusileer Regiment
and the 66th Regiment to the 113th Division. The 2d Grenadier Regiment
passed intact from the 109th Division to the 3d Reserve Division. The
376th Regiment was divided among the three regiments of the 1st
Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. After about four months in line
on the Somme the losses in casualties and prisoners led to the
dissolution of the division in September.




                            111th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │221.          │73 Fus.       │221.          │73 Fus.
              │              │76.           │              │76.
              │              │164.          │              │164.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 and 4 Sqn. 22 Dragoon Rgt. │3 and 4 Sqn. 22 Dragoon Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│221 Pion. Co.                │221 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │262 Pion. Co.
              │                             │111 T. M. Co.
              │                             │111 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │111 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │221 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.).  │221 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │221.          │73 Fus.       │221.          │73.
              │              │76.           │              │76.
              │              │164.          │              │164.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 22 Dragoon Rgt.       │4 Sqn. 22 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(111) Pion. Btn.:            │111 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 221 Pion. Co.               │ 221 Pion. Co.
              │ 262 Pion. Co.               │ 262 Pion. Co.
              │ 111 T. M. Co.               │ 111 T. M. Co.
              │ 221 Searchlight Section.    │ 199 Searchlight Section.
              │ 111 Tel. Detch.             │111 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 111 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 19 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │111 Art. Command:            │111 Art. Command:
              │ 221 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 94 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 2 Abt. 25 Ft. A. Rgt. (5 and
              │                             │  7 Btries.).
              │                             │ 702 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 758 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1341 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │111 Ambulance Co.            │111 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │370 Field Hospital.          │370 Field Hospital.
              │371 Field Hospital.          │371 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │111 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (73d Fusileers, 164th Regiment: 10th Corps District—Hanover. 76th
            Regiment: 9th Corps District—Hanseatic cities.)


                                 1915.

The 111th Division was formed near Brussels on March 26, 1915, by
obtaining the 73d Fusileers from the 19th Division, the 164th Infantry
from the 20th Division, and the 76th Regiment from the 17th Division.


COTES DE MEUSE.

1. About the middle of April, 1915, the 111th Division was in line along
the Cotes de Meuse (Calonne, Hattonchatel trench) after having detrained
on April 11 at Mars la Tour.


ARTOIS.

2. In August it was transferred to Artois (Monchy au Bois sector).


                                 1916.

1. The 111th Division stayed on the Artois front until August, 1916.


SOMME.

2. About August 21 it was relieved and sent to the north of the Somme.
Engaged near Guillemont and Guinchy, it suffered serious losses (Aug.
25-Sept. 6).


COTES DE MEUSE.

3. After a few days’ rest in the Cambrai region it was put into line
near Cotes de Meuse (Bois de Chevaliers, Sept. 15) and stayed there
until October 26. It was brought up to strength by the addition of 2,000
replacements.


SOMME.

4. At the end of October it was brought back to the Somme. At first it
was at rest in the region of Bohain and then took over a sector between
Bouchavesnes and the St. Pierre-Vaast wood.


                                 1917.

1. In January, 1917, it was south of the Somme near Barleux, from which
position it was relieved a short time before it fell back on the
Hindenberg Line.


HINDENBURG LINE.

2. It occupied the Bellicourt sector (north of St. Quentin) from May 10
to about June 24. On May 7 and 15 it received 600 replacements (classes
of 1917 and 1918) to make up the losses sustained on April 27 at Arleux
en Gohelle.

3. The division was then put at rest for a month in the vicinity of
Cambrai.


YPRES.

4. It entrained on July 25 and 26 and was transported to Flanders, where
it was engaged on the 27th and 28th to the north of Ypres(Boesinghe-
Steenstraat). It met the artillery preparation and the attack of July
31, which caused it considerable losses. It was relieved the very night
of the attack and was temporarily reorganized at Bohain.


LORRAINE.

5. Sent to Lorraine, it took the Regnieville sector (west of Pont à
Mousson) about August 20; rested and reorganized.


FLANDERS.

6. It left this sector on October 14 to return to Flanders
(Poelcappelle). It detrained on the 16th at Alost and was engaged from
the 22d to the 26th and relieved November 4.


ARTOIS.

7. From the end of November to January 8, 1918, it held the Monchy le
Preuxen-Vis en Artois sector (southeast of Arras). The division received
the remaining necessary replacements; the 73d Fusileers received, on
December 24, 400 men between the ages of 20 and 35, taken from the
Russian front (especially from the 15th Landwehr Division).


                              RECRUITING.

The 76th Infantry was a Hanseatic unit while the 73d Fusileers was a
Hanoverian organization. As men from the 9th Corps District quite
frequently served in regiments from the 10th Corps District and
reciprocally, in case of necessity, the regiments of a division drew
without distinction from either source, it was to be expected that the
111th Division was termed as “regiments of Lower Saxony.”


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 111th Division, which was considered a good unit, was sorely tried
in Flanders by the Franco-British attack of July 31, 1917. Many men left
their formations either when going into line or under bombardment. The
division stayed but four days in line and had to be relieved without
having been able to counterattack. The 111th Division was composed of
young men, part of whom had experience in very active sectors.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was relieved by the 234th Division at Arleux about the
1st of March. It remained in rear of the front until March 21 when it
returned to its former sector to attack east of St. Leger. It had been
resting at Auberchicourt, which place it left on the 17th and marched
via Palluel to Villers lez Cagnicourt, arriving there on March 20.

The division was in the first wave of the attack and advanced via
Ecoust, then south to Vaulx-Vraucourt on the 22d, Mory (24th). It passed
into second line about this time and reentered line north of
Hamelincourt on April 1 to relieve the 26th Division. After a week it
side-slipped south and relieved the 239th Division northeast of Ayette,
which sector it held until April 20. It was relieved by the 234th
Division.

2. On May 6 the division relieved the 5th Bavarian Division north of
Bucquoy. It continued to hold this sector until August 17, when it was
relieved by the 4th Bavarian Division.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

3. The division taken from the comparatively quiet Bucquoy sector was
used to reenforce the battle front at Favreuil on August 25. It was only
engaged four days in this sector. Withdrawn on the 29th, it moved
northward and on September 2 reenforced the front east of Hendecourt. It
fought then for three days before it was withdrawn. In these two brief
periods in line the division suffered very heavy casualties besides
losing 500 prisoners.


LENS.

4. The division rested in the Tourcoing area until it reentered line
south of Acheville on the night of September 24–25 in relief of the
207th Division. It was engaged here until October 11, when the 49th
Reserve Division relieved it east of Lens.

5. The division rested in the Douchy-Haspres area in support until
October 18, when it moved to Artres and came into line on the night of
October 20–21 at Monchaux sur Ecaillon. Until November 7 the division
was constantly in line. It was near Vendegies until October 24, and
later at Arties (28th), Farmars (29th), Jenlain (Nov. 2), Sebourg (4th),
west of Risin (5th), and near St. Amand (5th). It was out of line at the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was used as an assault
division on the Somme in March, but thereafter served as an intervention
division in the Somme area. The division showed considerable power of
resistance.




                            113th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │225.          │36 Fus.       │225.          │36 Fus.
              │              │48.           │              │48.
              │              │32 Res.       │              │32 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │             (?)             │3 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │225 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.)   │225 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│225 Pion. Co.                │225 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │251 Pion. Co.
              │                             │252 Pion. Co.
              │                             │113 T. M. Co.
              │                             │113 Pont. Engrs.
              │                             │113 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │114 Anti-Aircraft Section.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │225.          │36 Fus.       │225.          │36 Fus.
              │              │66.           │              │66.
              │              │32 Res.       │              │27.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier Rgt.     │3 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art Command:             │225 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 225 F. A. Rgt.              │407 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │1089 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1172 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1200 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│113 Pion. Btn.:              │113 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 225 Pion. Co.               │ 225 Pion. Co.
              │ 251 Pion. Co.               │ 251 Pion. Co.
              │ 112 T. M. Co.               │ 113 T. M. Co.
              │ 113 T. M. Co.               │ 67 Searchlight Section.
              │ (226) Searchlight Section.  │113 Signal Command:
              │ 113 Pont. Engs.             │ 113 Tel. Detch.
              │ 113 Tel. Detch.             │ 51 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │212 Ambulance Co.            │212 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │372 Field Hospital.          │372 Field Hospital.
              │373 Field Hospital.          │373 Field Hospital.
              │113 Vet. Hospital.           │113 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │597 M. T. Col.               │597 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

       (4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony and part of Thuringe.)


                                 1915.

The 113th division was organized near Sedan on March 26, 1915. Its three
infantry regiments were taken from old divisions: the 48th from the 5th
Division (3d Corps District-Brandenburg), the 36th from the 8th Division
(4th Corps District-Prussian Saxony), and the 32d Reserve from the 22d
Reserve Division (11th Corps District-Thuringe).

In March, 1917, the 48th was replaced by the 66th Regiment (old 7th
Division from Prussian Saxony) taken from the 52d Division.

1. Detraining at Conflans on April 8, the division spent a few days in
the Woevre.


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

2. It appeared along the Côtes de Meuse (Calonne trench) on April 26,
1915.

3. From that date until January 14, 1916, it stayed around the Côtes de
Meuse and in Woevre-Calonne trench, Ailly wood, St. Mihiel, Eparges, and
Bois Bouchot.


                                 1916.

1. January and February, 1916, rested at Brainville and Conflans.


VERDUN.

2. On February 24 the 113d Division was transferred to the Verdun front.
It participated in the attacks of the 8th and 9th of March against the
village of Douaumont and suffered considerable losses. In six weeks
spent around Douaumont the losses are said to have been 30 officers and
2,000 men put out of action (letter).


OISE.

3. Relieved at the beginning of April it was put into line in a calm
sector—region of Soissons, then in the region of the Oise (Tracy le Val,
Puisaleine).


SOMME.

4. In July, at the beginning of the Franco-British offensive, it
detached some of its elements in the Somme (Peronne, July 1, then at
Frise, Assevillers, and Belloy). The three rest battalions of the
division formed in an emergency an assembled regiment (notebook).

5. After a new stay in the Soissons region (August and September) the
whole division was again engaged in the Somme between Rancourt and the
St. Pierre-Vaast wood. It suffered very heavy losses near Bouchavesnes
(Oct. 1–10).

6. At rest from October 14 to 21 in Woevre.


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

7. At the end of October, the 113th Division took over the Bonzee-
Ronvaux sector (Côtes de Meuse).


                                 1917.

1. The 113th Division stayed around the Côtes de Meuse until the end of
January, 1917.


ALSACE.

2. At the beginning of February it went into Alsace and occupied a
sector between the Thur and the Rhone-Rhine canal (March).


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

3. On April 21 it was hastily entrained at Mulhouse and transferred to
the Aisne. It went into line on the 26th at Chemin des Dames and met the
second French offensive in the Courtecon-Malval farm region (May 5).


ST. GOBAIN FOREST.

4. Relieved in the middle of May, it stayed at rest for six days in the
vicinity of Assis sur Serre and thereafter in a sector in the St. Gobain
forest (Deuillet-Fresnes).

5. On August 10 it was put at rest behind Laon.


CRAONNE.

6. It went back into line at the end of September in the Craonne sector.
As a result of the French offensive it fell back to the east of
Hurtebise where it was relieved about November 10.

7. It rested in the Laon region from the middle of November to January
20.


                              RECRUITING.

In 1917 the division took on a distinctly provincial aspect, its
regiments receiving replacements from Prussian Saxony (the 36th
Fusileers and the 66th Infantry) and in Thuringe (the 32d Reserve
Regiment).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 113th Division was a good unit. It put up an energetic resistance on
the Chemin des Dames on May 5, 1917. From that time up to the offensive
of March, 1918, it had not been seriously engaged.


                                 1918.

1. Having finished its training in the Sissonne region, the 113th
Division relieved the 235th Division about the middle of January in the
Juvincourt sector (east of Craonne), and was itself relieved by the 5th
Reserve Division on the 21st of February. It trained for a week at
Vervins, and then moved to Wassigny, where it underwent more training
until the 16th of March, when it marched via Bohain and Fonsommes to
Bellicourt.


ST. QUENTIN.

2. On the 21st it attacked in the first line near Maissemy (northwest of
St. Quentin). Although suffering very heavy losses, the division had
succeeded in pushing on as far as St. Christ-Briost and Pargny (on the
Somme) on the 24th. It was withdrawn shortly after (probably on the
26th).


AISNE.

3. On the 27th of May the division reenforced the Aisne front near
Craonne and attacked in the first line. It was withdrawn about the 14th
of June and went to rest near Conde sur Aisne (east of Soissons).

4. The division reenforced the front near Troissy (east of Dormans) on
the 15th of July. It was caught in the confusion caused by the Allied
counteroffensive, and was forced to retire. It was not identified after
the 22d, and so it seems as though it was not in line after that date
until prisoners were again taken on the 29th near Villers-Agron
(southeast of Fere en Tardenois), which is in a line almost due north of
where it had previously been engaged. Here it took over the part of the
line previously held by the 2d Guard Division. It was withdrawn early in
August and went to rest in the region southeast of Maubeuge.


CAMBRAI.

5. On the 10th of September the division reenforced the front near Metz
en Couture (southwest of Cambrai). It was withdrawn from line near
Villers-Plouich (southwest of Cambrai) after having lost over 1,600
prisoners about the 2d of October, and went to rest east of Denain.

6. On the 22d it came back into line near Douchy (south of Denain). Two
days later it side-slipped toward the south. It was identified in line
to the north of Le Quesnoy in November, but was withdrawn a day or two
later. It did not return to line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 113th was rated as a second-class division. Although the division
commander received Pour le Merite and the commander of the 36th Regiment
was also decorated after the battle of the Somme, the division does not
appear to have particularly distinguished itself there. On the whole,
however, its conduct though not brilliant was dependable.




                            115th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │229.          │136.          │229.          │136.
              │              │171.          │              │171.
              │              │40 Res.       │              │40 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 and 2 Sqn. 22 Dragoon Rgt. │1 and 2 Sqn. 22 Dragoon Rgt.
              │  (one-half picked troops).  │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │229 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.).  │229 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│229 Pion. Co.                │229 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │115 T. M. Co.
              │                             │115 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │115 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │229.          │136.          │229.          │136.
              │              │171.          │              │171.
              │              │40 Res.       │              │173.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 22 Dragoon Rgt.       │2 Sqn. 22 Dragoon Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │115 Art. Command:
              │ 229 F. A. Rgt.              │ 229 Field Art. Rgt.
              │                             │ 94 Foot Art. Btn.
              │                             │1074, 1077, and 1078 Light
              │                             │  Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(115) Pion. Btn.             │43 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │229 Pion. Co.                │229 Pion. Co.
              │2 Co. 33 Res. Pion.          │2 Co. Res. Pion. Btn. No. 33.
              │115 T. M. Co.                │115 T. M. Co.
              │229 Searchlight Section.     │74 Searchlight Section.
              │115 Tel. Detch.              │115 Div. Signal Command.
              │                             │115 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │89 Div. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │115 Ambulance Co.            │115 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │350 Field Hospital.          │376 and 377 Field Hospitals.
              │376 Field Hospital.          │167 Vet. Hospital.
              │377 Field Hospital.          │
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │598 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (136th and 171st Regiments: 15th Corps District—Alsace. 40th Reserve
          Regiment: 14th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Baden.)


                                 1915.

Formed in April, 1915, near Tournai, the 115th Division received the
136th and 171st from the 30th and 39th Divisions (15th Corps),
respectively, and the 40th Reserve Regiment from the 28th Reserve
Division (14th Reserve Corps).

1. In April, 1915, the 115th Division was in reserve in the Tournai-
Courtrai region.


ARTOIS.

2. In May it was sent as a reenforcement to the north of Arras and
fought at Notre Dame de Lorette and Neuville St. Vaast and was sorely
tried. The infantry losses amounted to 128 officers and 5,208 men out of
action (Casualty List), of which 47 officers and 2,258 men belonged to
the 171st Regiment.


AISNE.

3. Relieved about June 15, the 115th Division took over the Missy sur
Aisne sector (east of Soissons), which it occupied until the last days
of July.


RUSSIA.

4. At the end of July it was transferred to the Eastern Front, and for a
time in August operated on the Narew.

5. It took part in the summer offensive. It was before Kovno on August
19, in the region of Vileiki at the end of September, and near Narotch
Lake at the beginning of October.


                                 1916.


POSTAVY-NAROTCH LAKE.

1. The 115th Division occupied the Postavy-Narotch Lake sector until the
beginning of August, 1916.


GALICIA.

2. About August 2 the division was transferred to Galicia. It was
engaged to the west of Zalosce (south of Brody), August to September.


VOLHYNIA.

3. In October it was in line in Volhynia to the west of Loutsk
(Sviniouki). The 171st was kept to the southwest of Brody with the
Melior detachment.


ROUMANIA.

4. In the middle of December the 115th Division was transferred from
Volhynia to Roumania, where, together with the 109th Division, it made
up the 54th Corps, which operated between Buzeu and the Danube.


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA.

1. In January, 1917, the 115th Division took a position on the Roumanian
front to the south of Namoloasa and stayed in this sector until the
middle of August.

2. It was then in line to the north of Focsani, in the Panciu-Marasesti
region (August-December).


                              RECRUITING.

The Grand Duchy of Baden and the Rhenish countries supplied the greater
part of the recruits.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved on the Roumanian front on February 1 by an
Austrian division and rested in the Braila area during February and
March. On April 8 it entrained and traveled via Budapest-Vienna-Prague-
Dresden-Coblenz-Cologne-Aachen-Liege-Brussels to Lille, when it
detrained about April 18. About the 21st the division reentrained and
was railed to Antwerp, where it went through a course of intensive
training.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

The division left Antwerp on May 21 and traveled via Brussels-Mons-
Maubeuge-Le Cateau-Bohain, detraining north of St. Quentin on May 22.
Four days later it continued its journey by rail to Versigny, southeast
of La Fere, and was billeted in the Crepy area until May 29. On the
following day it left and marched via Chaillevoois-Vailly (May 31)-
Ambrief (June 1)-Villers-Helon (2d) and relieved the 37th Division near
Longpont on the Aisne battle front on the night of June 2–3. It
withstood the Allied counterthrust at Corcy in July, suffering heavy
losses. It was relieved on the night of July 19–20.


VERDUN.

2. The division was moved to Brieulles and in the first days of August
relieved the 22d Reserve Division in the sector Malancourt-Forges. In
this vicinity it remained until September 19, when it was relieved by
the 7th Reserve Division.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

3. On the second day of the American attack the division returned to
bolster up the line in the Gesnes area. The division now included the
173d Regiment, which came from the 223d Division (dissolved) to supplant
the 40th Reserve Regiment (disbanded). The division took part in the
several captures and recaptures of Gesnes. It fought hard and suffered
heavy losses before its relief on October 12 by the 3d Guard Division.
Two days later it came back to support the 3d Guard Division and was
engaged in the fighting around Romagne until October 18. On November 1
the division again came into line near Remonville and fought until the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was badly hit on July 18 by
the French attack and later in the Argonne. It showed good qualities in
the Meuse fighting and was mentioned in the official German communiqué.




                            117th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │233.          │157.          │233.          │157.
              │              │11 Res.       │              │11 Res.
              │              │22 Res.       │              │22 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │             (?)             │1 and 2 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier
              │                             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │233 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.).  │233 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│233 Pion. Co.                │233 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │117 T. M. Co.
              │                             │117 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │117 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │233.          │157.          │233.          │11.
              │              │11 Res.       │              │157.
              │              │22 Res.       │              │450.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier Rgt.     │1 Sqn. 8 Cuirassier Rgt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │233 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 233 F. A. Rgt.              │88 Foot Art. Btn.
              │                             │1068, 1069, and 1070 Light
              │                             │  Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(117) Pion. Btn.:            │117 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 233 Pion. Co.               │ 233 Pion. Co.
              │ 263 Pion. Co.               │ 263 Pion. Co.
              │ 117 T. M. Co.               │ 117 T. M. Co.
              │ 233 Searchlight Section.    │ 147 Searchlight Section.
              │ 117 Tel. Detch.             │117 Div. Signal Command:
              │                             │ 117 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 187 Div. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │117 Ambulance Co.            │117 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │379 Field Hospital.          │378 and 379 Field Hospitals.
              │380 Field Hospital.          │117 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │6 Mountain Art. Btry.        │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                     (6th Corps District—Silesia.)


                                 1915.

The 117th Division was created by the 7th Army near Liart about April 7,
1915. Its three regiments were obtained from the 6th Corps and the 6th
Reserve Corps—the 157th Infantry from the 12th Division, the 11th
Reserve Regiment from the 11th Reserve Division, and the 22d Reserve
Regiment from the 12th Reserve Division.

1. In April, 1915, the 117th Division was in Champagne (region of
Châtelet).


ARTOIS-NOTRE DAME DE LORETTE.

2. Transferred to Artois, it was engaged to the north of Souchez and at
Notre Dame de Lorette (May and June). In this fighting it was hard hit,
107 officers and 5,255 men out of action, of whom 44 officers and 2,161
men belong to the 11th Infantry. (Casualty List.)

3. The division was re-formed at the end of June in the region of Lille.


LENS.

4. Toward the middle of July it went back into line to the northwest of
Lens (from Vermelles to the Grenay-Lens railway). It suffered very heavy
losses in the attacks occurring at the end of September and the
beginning of October (Loos)—109 officers and 6,463 men out of action.
(Casualty List.)

5. Taken away from the Artois front in the middle of October, it was put
at rest in the vicinity of Roubaix-Tourcoing.


FLANDERS.

6. At the end of October it took over the Messines sector.


                                 1916.

1. The 117th Division occupied the Messines front until the beginning of
March, 1916.

2. Rest at Courtrai; instruction and training at the Beverloo Camp
(March-April and May).


YPRES.

3. At the beginning of June the division went into line to the east of
Ypres (near the road from Ypres to Menin, and until July 20).


SOMME.

4. On July 23 it went to the Somme (Pozieres); it was engaged from the
end of July to the middle of August.

5. On August 17 the division entrained for the Eastern Front.


BUKOVINA.

6. It was identified in the Carpathian Mountains as part of the 3d
Austro-Hungarian Army (region of Jablonica, October).


                                 1917.


CARPATHIAN MOUNTAINS.

1. The 117th Division remained here (Jablonica, Worochta, Koeroesmezoe,
Jacobeni sectors) until the middle of May, 1917.


ROUMANIA.

2. At the end of May it was transferred via Maramaros-Sziget to the
Roumanian front (Putna valley, region of Ocna, June-September). At rest
in Transylvania in September and was there reequipped for mountain
warfare.


ITALY.

3. Sent to Italy at the beginning of October, it was on the 24th behind
Tolmino as an army reserve. In December it was on the left bank of the
Piave.


                              RECRUITING.

Silesian division, with recruits coming especially from Upper Silesia
(mining district and mountainous districts), it was used on several
occasions as mountain troops (Carpathians, Italy).

On the Carpathian, Roumanian, and Italian fronts (August, 1916-March,
1918).


                                 1918.


LORRAINE.

1. The division rested in the vicinity of Vahl-Ebersing until April 6,
when it entrained at St. Avold and moved to Lille. It went into billets
near there on the 7th and came into line near Neuve Eglise on April 13.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

2. It was engaged in the Bailleul, Kemmel, and La Clyette area until the
1st of May. After a few days in support, the division reentered west of
Dranoutre on May 4 and held that sector until mid-May.

3. The division rested near La Madeleine. Its units were very much
weakened. The 11th Reserve Regiment was disbanded about May 16 and
transferred its effectives to the other two regiments of the division.
It was replaced by the 11th Grenadier Regiment, which was brought from
the Macedonian front about May 21. The division remained at rest until
about June 3, when it was again reported in line near Voormezeele.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. The division held that sector without event until June 25, when it
was withdrawn and sent to rest near Ghent. On August 4 it was moved by
rail to Peronne, where it went into the Vrely-Hangest wood sector until
August 18. In the British attack south of the Somme on August 8 the
division lost about 2,700 prisoners.

On August 27 it reenforced the battle front at Maricourt for a couple of
days. It was withdrawn about September 1.


ARGONNE.

5. The division rested and was reconstituted in rear of the Argonne
front in early September. The 22d Reserve Regiment suffered so heavily
on the Somme that it was dissolved and its men divided between the other
two regiments. The 450th Regiment from the dissolved 233d Division
replaced the 22d Reserve Regiment in the division.

6. About September 12, the division relieved the 37th Division in line
near Avocourt. It was swamped in the first drive of the American Army on
September 26. Elements kept up the fight until September 29, when they
were withdrawn after having been pressed back to about Cierges. Its
defense was not particularly vigorous, but was better than that of the
divisions on either side. Its total losses were estimated at 3,200,
including 1,861 prisoners.


MEUSE.

7. On November 2 the division returned to line just west of the Meuse.
While resting at Juvigny the division received replacements. In the
retreat it crossed to the east bank of the Meuse and was in line on the
day of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second-class. Up to the middle of June the
division seems to have been a holding rather than an attacking one.
After the Somme battle in August its effectives were feeble and morale
low. It had many older men, returned wounded, and convalescents, and a
large number of Poles and Alsatians.




                            119th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │237.          │46.           │237.          │46.
              │              │58.           │              │58.
              │              │46 Res.       │              │46 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │Wedel. Rgt. (1 and 3 Sqn. 1
              │                             │  Uhlan Rgt. and 4 Sqn. 1
              │                             │  Mounted Jag. Rgt.).
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │237 F. A. Rgt. (7 Btries.).  │237 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│237 Pion. Co.                │237 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │119 T. M. Co.
              │                             │119 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │119 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │237.          │46.           │237.          │46.
              │              │58.           │              │58.
              │              │46 Res.       │              │46 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 1 Mounted Jag. Rgt.   │4 Sqn. 1 Jag. z. Pf.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │119 Art. Command:            │119 Artillery Command:
              │ 237 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 237 Field Art. Rgt.
              │                             │ 2 Abt. 27 Foot Art. Rgt.
              │                             │  (Btries. 5 to 7).
              │                             │ 1274, 1275, and 1338 Light
              │                             │  Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│119 Pion. Btn.:              │119 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 237 Pion. Co.               │273 Pion. Co.
              │ 273 Pion. Co.               │91 Searchlight Section.
              │ 3 Res. Co. 32 Pion. Btn.    │119 Div. Signal Command.
              │ 119 T. M. Co.               │119 Tel. Detch.
              │ 237 Searchlight Section.    │65 Div. Wireless Detch.
              │ 119 Tel. Detch.             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │119 Ambulance Co.            │119 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │605 Ambulance Co.            │382 and 383 Field Hospitals.
              │381 Field Hospital.          │168 Vet. Hospital.
              │382 Field Hospital.          │
              │383 Field Hospital.          │
              │168 Vet. Hospital.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │600 M. T. Col.               │600 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │16, 17, 60, and 61 (?) Light │
              │  Machine Gun Sections.      │
              │79 M. G. S. S. Detch.        │
              │1 Co. 3 T. M. Btn.           │
              │352 Pion. Mining Co.         │
              │Kortemarck Pion. Park.       │
              │Strovendorp Pion. Park.      │
              │57 Ft. Art. Btn.             │
              │157 Ft. Art. Btn.            │
              │5 Btry. 7 Res. Ft. A. Rgt.   │
              │404 Ft. Art. Btn.            │
              │5 Btry. 39 Ldw. Ft. A. Rgt.  │
              │6 Btry. 29 Ldw. Ft. A. Rgt.  │
              │8 Quick-firing Mortar Co.    │
              │182 Ft. A. Btry.             │
              │187 Ft. A. Btry.             │
              │428 Ft. A. Btry.             │
              │478 and 642 Mountain Ft. Art.│
              │  Btries.                    │
              │2 and 4 Mountain Ft. Art.    │
              │  Btries. (18 C. Dist.)      │
              │1,000 Ft. Art. Btry.         │
              │9 Art. Survey Section.       │
              │819 Tel. Detch.              │
              │62 Div. Wireless Detch.      │
              │21 Pigeon Loft.              │
              │218 Messenger-dog Detch.     │
              │48 Reconnaissance Sqns.      │
              │26 Combat Sqn.               │
              │30 Balloon Sqn.              │
              │4 Co. 44 Labor Btn.          │
              │3 Co. 53 Labor Btn.          │
              │4 Co. 122 Labor Btn.         │
              │61 Supply Train.             │
              │19, 108, 121 Bav. and 835 M. │
              │  T. Col.                    │
              │491 Ammunition Train.        │
              │682, 711, and 758 Truck      │
              │  Trains.                    │
              │587 Supply Train.            │
              │571 Depot Supply Col.        │
              │119 Supply Depot.            │
              │  (According to a captured   │
              │  document dated Sept. 29,   │
              │           1917.)            │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

             (5th Corps District—Posen and Lower Silesia.)


                                 1915.


GALICIA-POLAND.

1. Formed in April, 1915. Its three regiments were obtained from
divisions belonging to the 5th Army—the 46th from the 10th Division, the
58th from the 9th Division, and the 46th Reserve from the 10th Reserve
Division. Assembled in annexed Lorraine, it was sent to Galicia for the
April German offensive. The division took part in the battle of Gorlice
at the end of the month.

2. In July it was in Poland, west of the Wieprz, and at the end of
October in the region of Baranovitchi.


                                 1916.


BARANOVITCHI.

1. In January, 1916, the division held a sector to the east of
Baranovitchi (Russia).


NAROTCH LAKE.

2. About March 28 it went to Narotch Lake and opposed the Russian
offensive.

3. Sorely tried on March 30, it was relieved on April 7.


SMORGONI.

4. In May it was found at the west of Smorgoni.


GALICIA.

5. It was transferred to Galicia at the end of June at the time of the
Russian offensive. Engaged on July 27, it suffered heavy losses. The 1st
Battalion of the 58th was almost entirely captured and the division
retired 15 km. (letter). On August 7 new losses at Tlumacz. The division
was placed in reserve behind Stanislau until the beginning of September.
On September 6 it reappeared on the front in the region of Halicz.


                                 1917.


GALICIA.

1. The division stayed near Halicz until March 9, 1917. It was then sent
to the vicinity of Brzezany, where it was almost immediately put in
reserve.

2. At the beginning of May it was sent to the Western Front. (Itinerary:
Brzezany (May 3)-Lemberg-Breslau-Liegnitz-Dresden-Leipzig-Cassel-
Frankfort-Aix la Chapelle-Liége-Brussels-Roulers (May 8).)


FLANDERS.

3. Ypres sector; went into line at the beginning of June and was
relieved on July 18.

4. Bixschoote sector; went into line at the beginning of August. The
division met the attack in Flanders, in which it suffered serious losses
on August 16. The 9th Company of the 58th Infantry was reduced to 38 men
(notebook). On the 9th and 10th of October there were new engagements.

5. Relieved from the front on October 15 the division rested in the
vicinity of Gand.


CAMBRAI.

6. After a month’s rest the 119th Division went into line on the Cambrai
front to participate in the counterattacks which followed the surprise
attack of November 20. It fought here from the 23d to the 27th, not
without some losses.

7. Relieved after December 6, the division was reorganized in the
vicinity of Solesmes.


                              RECRUITING.

This division recruited from the 5th Corps District. A document dated
November 23, 1917, described the division as composed of “regiments of
Lower Silesia and Posen.” In order to overcome the majority of Poles,
the division received recruits from the 3d and 6th Corps Districts
(Brandenburg and Silesia), which were fruitful sources of recruiting.

Twenty-one per cent of the prisoners taken from the 119th Division in
August, 1917, belonged to the 1917 class. The 1918 class was meagerly
represented. The 46th Reserve Regiment had a large proportion of Poles.
The soldiers from Alsace-Lorraine remained on the Eastern Front when the
division left Galicia (May, 1917).


                                 1918.

1. About the end of January the division was relieved near Pronville by
the 20th Division. It replaced the 3d Guard Division astride the
Bapaume-Cambrai road about February 12. The date of its relief in this
sector is not known. A captured diary shows that the division was
training in the Helesmes area (north of Denain) until the middle of
March. On the 16th it marched to Noyelles sur Selle, and on the
following day reached Cambrai, where it remained until March 20.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. The division came into line near Inchy on the 21st and took part in
the initial attack. It was withdrawn on the 23d and rested two days. It
reappeared in line on the 25th and fought southeast of Hebuterne until
relieved by the 5th Bavarian Reserve Division on April 7–8. The division
lost heavily in this fighting.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

3. Withdrawn from the Somme, the division reentered the Lys battle line
on April 26 near Locon. It was engaged there until early in May (6th),
when it was withdrawn near Hinges and rested in the area Lille-Tournai
until June 11. On that date it marched to Orchies, was railed to Le
Forest, and from there came into line via Noyelles, relieving the 12th
Reserve Division on the night of June 13–14. While at rest the division
received a number of drafts, mostly of the 1919 class.

4. The division held the Mericourt sector until the night of July 12–13,
when it was relieved by the 52d Division and took over the billets of
the 52d Division in the Orchies area.

5. The division rested until August 1, when it moved to Ham via Douai-
Cambrai-Caudry-Bohain-St. Quentin. Then it rested until August 8, when
it was alarmed and rushed up in busses to the Le Quesnel sector.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

6. On August 9 the division was engaged south of the Somme. In the
fighting it lost about 900 prisoners before its relief on August 17. On
August 27–28 it returned to line in the Misery-Licourt sector and
remained in line until September 24, when it was withdrawn from west of
Bellenglise. After a week’s rest the division reentered line at Estrees;
was engaged for 17 days in the Beaurevoir-Le Cateau area. Since August 8
it has lost nearly 3,000 prisoners.

YPRES.

7. The division rested at Ghent until October 27, when it relieved the
3d Landwehr Division south of Machelen. It retreated via Olsene to
Nazareth, in which area it was withdrawn about November 9.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was used as an attack
division in the March and April offensives. While on the defensive in
August and September on the Somme it was decimated.




                            121st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │241.          │60.           │241.          │60.
              │              │7 Res.        │              │7 Res.
              │              │56 Res.       │              │56 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 and 3 Sqns. 12 Horse Jag.  │12 Horse Jag. Rgt. (? 2
              │  Rgt.                       │  Sqns.).
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │241 F.A. Rgt.                │241 F.A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│241 Pion. Co.                │241 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │260 Pion. Co.
              │                             │4 Co. 27 Pions.
              │                             │121 T. M. Co.
              │                             │121 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │121 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │Labor Btn. of the 121 Div.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │241.          │60.           │241.          │60.
              │              │7 Res.        │              │7 Res.
              │              │56 Res.       │              │56 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 12 Horse Jag. Rgt.    │2 Sqn. 12 Jag. z. Pf.
              │  (?).                       │
              │2 Sqn. 12 Horse Jag. Schutz. │
              │  Rgt.                       │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │121 Art. Command:
              │ 241 F. A. Rgt.              │ 241 F.A. Rgt.
              │                             │85 Foot Art. Btn.
              │                             │1217, 1219, and 1223 Light
              │                             │  Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(121 Pion. Btn.):            │121 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 241 Pion. Co.               │241 Pion. Co.
              │ 260 Pion. Co.               │260 Pion. Co.
              │ 121 T. M. Co.               │104 Searchlight Section.
              │ 241 Searchlight Section.    │121 Div. Signal Command.
              │ 121 Tel. Detch.             │121 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │59 Div. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │229 Ambulance Co.            │229 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │384  Field Hospital.         │384 and 385 Field Hospitals.
              │385  Field Hospital.         │206 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │601 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (60th Regiment: 21st Corps District—Lower Alsace. 7th Reserve Regiment;
         5th Corps District—Posen. 56 Reserve Regiment; 7th Corps
                          District—Westphalia.)


                                 1915.

The 121st Division was formed in the Falkenhausen Army in Lorraine in
April, 1915. Its three regiments came from divisions which had been in
existence for some time. The 60th came from the 31st Division (21st
Corps), the 7th Reserve from the 9th Reserve Division (5th Reserve
Corps), and the 56th Reserve from the 13th Reserve Division (7th Reserve
Corps). These regiments were brought together in the region of St.
Avold-Faulquemont at the beginning of April and on the 9th reached
Thiaucourt, Euvezin, and the Mort Mare wood (notebooks).


HAYE.

1. The 121st Division next appeared in the Bois de Prêtre sector at the
beginning of May, 1915.

2. It stayed there until the end of February, 1916.


                                 1916.

1. The division left the Bois de Prêtre on March 1, 1916, and rested in
the vicinity of Metz.


VERDUN.

2. On March 15 it came to the Verdun front (north of Vaux). On April 1
it attacked and took the village of Vaux; it again attacked on April 11
and made progress between Vaux and Douaumont, paying dearly for the
advance.

3. Relieved from the Verdun front on April 20, it was put at rest near
St. Avold until May 15. It had lost 58 per cent of its infantry strength
in front of Verdun. From March 18 to May 30 the 6th Company of the 7th
Reserve Regiment received no less than 192 replacements.


SOMME.

4. Transferred to Péronne by way of Sedan, Charleville, Hirson, and
Bohain, the 121st Division went into line on the left bank of the Somme
on May 18.

5. On July 1, while in this sector, it was surprised by the French
offensive and suffered heavy losses (numerous prisoners).

6. Relieved on July 4, it was put at rest and reorganized.


RUSSIA.

7. On July 18 it entrained for the Eastern Front. (Itinerary: Aix la
Chapelle-Cologne-Thorn, Warsaw, and Brest-Litowsk.)


KOVEL.

8. Taking over the Kovel sector on July 26, it launched counterattacks,
in which it was sorely tried.


                                 1917.


NAROTCH LAKE.

1. At the beginning of January, 1917, the 121st Division left the Kovel
sector to go into the region of Narotch Lake and stayed in the latter
place until May 17.


FRANCE.

2. On May 20 it entrained for France. (Itinerary: Vilna-Insterberg-
Allenstein-Bromberg-Landsberg-Berlin-Stendal-Minden-Duesseldorf-Aix la
Chapelle-Verviere-Liége-Brussels-Audenarde.) It detrained at Elsegem on
May 25.


CAMBRÉSIS.

3. Transferred to Cambrai on June 10, it took over the Moruvres-
Avrincourt sector, which it occupied from June 12 to the beginning of
August.


FLANDERS.

4. It was thereafter brought to the Ypres front to the south of the
railway running from Ypres to Roulers (Aug. 19). Artillery fire caused
it to lose heavily; the British attack of September 20, of which it bore
the brunt, increased its losses. Before the battle of the 20th the 12th
Company of the 56th Reserve Regiment was reduced to 65 men, of whom 40
were men of the class of 1918. The 9th Company was entirely destroyed or
captured.

5. Relieved in the night of the 21st of September the division was sent
to rest (region of Mars la Tour) and reorganized (more than 2,000 men
coming from the 605th and 614th Landstrum, Batallion X 12, and the 109th
Landwehr). These replacements were very heterogeneous—soldiers from
Westphalia, Hanover, Baden, Magdeberg (men previously wounded and
convalescents).


COTES DE MEUSE.

6. At the beginning of October the 121st Division took over a sector
near Cotes de Meuse (les Éparges, Ravin de Malochis). It stayed there
until about April 10, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The name “7th Brandenberger” for the 60th Infantry was only of historic
interest. The regiment recruited almost entirely in Westphalia. The 56th
Reserve Regiment was also recruited in Westphalia, and there were
numerous soldiers from there in the 7th Reserve Regiment to
counterbalance the numerous Poles in the 5th Corps District; hence the
make-up of the division was for the most part Westphalian.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 121st Division fought very well in its last battle in Flanders
(September, 1917) and was put to a good test.

In March, 1918, the number of men in the ranks who had taken part in
these attacks was about 35 or 40 per cent, and the replacements used
after the battle of Flanders were generally of inferior military value.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved on the Woevre about April 11. It entrained
on April 24 at Conflans and traveled via Sedan-Charleville-Hirson-
Valenciennes to Pont a Marcq, where it detrained on April 26, after a
journey of about 20 hours. It came into line in the Dranoutre sector on
May 2 in relief of the 10th Erzsatz Division.


LOCRE.

2. It held the Locre sector until May 21, when it was relieved by the
16th Bavarian Division. On June 19 it returned to its former sector at
Dranoutre and held it until July 7.

3. The division rested in the Tourcoing area until July 31, when it
entrained and traveled via Courtrai-Valenciennes-St. Quentin to Laon,
where it detrained on the following day. Here it rested until 5 p. m. on
August 8, when it was alarmed and marched to the La Fere area (19
miles), arriving on the next day about 11 a. m. On the same day at 8 p.
m. the division was again alarmed and was moved in motor busses via
Chauny-Noyon-Roye to the Damery area, where it arrived on the 10th of
August about 10 a. m. and was immediately engaged.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. The division fell back by Parvillers-Damery-Fresnoy-Cremery-Sept
Fours-Nesle to the east bank of the Somme Canal. It was relieved on the
night of September 1–2 by the 25th Reserve Division. The division lost
800 prisoners in this fighting.

5. It rested in early September in the Maretz area (southeast of
Cambrai). On September 18 it was hurried to the line and counterattacked
at Bonyon that evening. Until October 1 it was engaged at Hargicourt,
Villeret, and Le Catelet. After only four days of rest the division
again came into line on October 5 in the Gouy area. It was withdrawn to
be reorganized on October 9.

6. After resting near Maubeuge the division returned to line west of
Catillon on the night of October 18–19. It fought for about seven days
between that place and Ors. On November 6 it was engaged at Maroilles
and was in line near Limont-Fontaine on the day of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was an average division. In
the final campaign it showed no particular power of resistance and lost
abnormally in prisoners.




                             123d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │245.          │178.          │245.          │178.
              │              │182.          │              │182.
              │              │106 Res.      │              │106 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │5 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │245 F. A. Rgt.               │245 F. A. Rgt.
              │246 F. A. Rgt.               │246 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│245 Pion. Co.                │245 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │264 Pion. Co.
              │                             │1 Co. 2 Bav. Pions.
              │                             │123 T. M. Co.
              │                             │123 Pont. Engs.
              │                             │123 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │96 Antiaircraft Section.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │245.          │178.          │245.          │178.
              │              │106 Res.      │              │106 Res.
              │              │351.          │              │351.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 and 5 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.    │5 Sqn. 20 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │123 Art. Command:            │123 Art. Command:
              │ 245 F. A. Rgt.              │ 245 Field Hospital.
              │                             │ 137 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 816 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1148 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1149 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(123) Pion. Btn.:            │123 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 245 Pion. Co.               │ 245 (Saxon) Pion. Co.
              │ 264 Pion. Co.               │ 264 (Saxon) Pion. Co.
              │ 123 T. M. Co.               │ 123 T. M. Co.
              │ 245 Searchlight Section.    │ 128 Searchlight Section.
              │ 124 Tel. Detch.             │123 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 123 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 168 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │123 Ambulance Co.            │123 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │387 Field Hospital.          │386 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │387 Field Hospital.
              │                             │236 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (178th and 351st Regiments: 12th Corps District—Saxony. 106th Reserve
                 Regiment: 19th Corps District—Saxony.)


                                 1915.

The division was formed in April, 1915, by taking three regiments
(178th, 182d, and 106th Reserve) from established divisions of the 12th
Corps the 12th Reserve Corps (Saxons). In October, 1916, the 182d
Regiment was transferred to the 216th Division and was replaced by the
425th Infantry, which was also transferred from this division in March,
1917, and replaced by the 351st Regiment (Saxon).


CHAMPAGNE.

1. In May, 1915, the 123d Division occupied the region northwest of
Rheims.

2. At the end of May it was transported to Lille, where it seems to have
been transferred as a reserve; in the middle of June it was in the
vicinity of Arras.


ARTOIS.

3. It next occupied different sectors in Artois.

4. In September it held the Souchez front. On October 8 it took part in
the attack on Loos and left Artois in the middle of that month.


FLANDERS.

5. After a rest at Lille the division went to Flanders (November), where
it held a sector south of the canal from Ypres to Comines.


                                 1916.


FLANDERS.

1. In the middle of March, 1916, the 123d Division was put at rest near
Bruges.

2. It was temporarily in line about April 9 at St. Éloi; then remained
as a reserve to the armies in the vicinity of Menin and Courtrai until
July 5.


SOMME.

3. At this date it was transferred to the Somme and fought near
Hardecourt and Maurepas until July 22, losing more than 6,000 men.


RUSSIA.

4. At the beginning of August, 1916, the 123d Division left the Western
Front for the Russian front.


NAROTCH LAKE.

5. It went into line in the region of Narotch Lake about September.


                                 1917.


NAROTCH LAKE-MITAU.

1. At the end of January, 1917, the 106th Reserve Regiment was detached
as a reenforcement in the Mitau sector, which was menaced by a Russian
attack.

In March the 425th Infantry (Prussian) was exchanged for the 351st
Infantry, which had been grouped under this number since 1915, and was
originally three battalions of the Saxon replacement depot of the old
war garrison of Breslau.


SMORGONI.

2. In the middle of August the division, which up to that time had held
the Narotch Lake sector, was engaged between Smorgoni and Krevo.

3. It again returned to the Narotch Lake vicinity in November.


FRANCE.

4. About November 8 it was transferred to France. (Itinerary: Chavli-
Varsovie-Lodz-Kalich-Cottbus-Cassel-Frankfort on the Main-Sarrebrueck-
Metz). It detrained at Piennes, Baroncourt, and was billeted in that
district for eight days.


MEUSE.

5. About November 22 it took over a sector on the Verdun front (south of
Bezonvaux). It stayed there all winter. It was identified to the
southeast of Damloup in February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

Since March, 1917, there have been but Saxons in the 123d Division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 123d Division had but a mediocre combat value by reason of its long
stay in calm sectors on the Russian front.

In Russia it fraternized on two occasions, the second one at the time of
its last stay on the Russian front.

The losses of the division on the Russian front were almost nothing and
it suffered no losses on the Verdun front until February, 1918.


                                 1918.


VERDUN.

1. The division continued to hold the uneventful Bezonvaux sector until
June 3, when it was relieved by the 7th Reserve Division.


RHEIMS.

2. On the night of June 18–19 it relieved the 232d Division north of the
Bligny (southwest of Rheims). It participated in the attack of July 15
and made a slight advance. On the 20th it was relieved.

3. The division marched by Savigny-Trigny-Bourgogne-Houdicourt. It was
railed to Asfeld and rested at Sery. On the 27th it marched to Novion-
Porcien and was railed to Montmedy. From there it marched to Grand
Failly, where it camped until the 31st.


VERDUN.

4. On August 8 the division relieved the 6th Bavarian Division near
Samogneux and rested in that sector until September 3.


ST. MIHIEL.

5. After it rested in the St. Mihiel sector until September 12, it was
put into line at Thiaucourt to check the American offensive. It remained
there until the night of October 7–8, when it was withdrawn.

6. The division was moved by autotrucks to Dun via Spincourt-Billy-
Damvillers-Haraumont-Fontaines, arriving there on the night of October
9–10. It marched into line near Cunel on October 11.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

7. The division was engaged in almost continuous fighting without any
major attack, until it was withdrawn on October 25. While it did not win
special merit for its defense, it fought persistently and was quick to
take every advantage of the terrain. The division lost 238 prisoners and
2,200 other casualties (estimated). The division was considered in
reserve of the 5th Army at the time of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its conduct in the July offensive
was mediocre and in the Argonne it did nothing to distinguish itself.




                             183d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │183.          │183.          │183.          │183.
              │              │184.          │              │184.
              │              │122 Res.      │              │122 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │183 F. A. Abt. (3 Btries.).  │183 F. A. Abt.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│183 (Saxon) Pion. Co.        │183 (Saxon) Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │401 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │          1918[30]
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │33 Res.       │184.          │33 Res.       │184.
              │              │418.          │              │418. (Saxon).
              │              │440 Res.      │              │440 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.          │4 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │183 Art. Command:            │183 Art. Command:
              │ 183 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 183 (Saxon) F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│183 Pion. Btn.:              │183 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 2 Res. Co. 16 Pions.        │ 2 Res. Co. 2 Pion. Btn. No.
              │                             │  16.
              │ 1 Res. Co. 20 Pions.        │ 1 Res. Co. 20 Pions.
              │ 183 (Saxon) Pion. Co.       │ 183 (Saxon) Pion. Co.
              │ 401 T. M. Co.               │ 401 T. M. Co.
              │ 183 Searchlight Section.    │ 183 (Saxon) Tel. Detch.
              │ 183 (Saxon) Tel. Detch.     │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │575 Ambulance Co.            │575 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │42 Field Hospital.           │42 Field Hospital.
              │344 Field Hospital.          │344 Field Hospital.
              │228 Vet. Hospital.           │228 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │603 M. T. Col.               │603 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────
Footnote 30:

  Composition at the time of dissolution October, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

  (184th Regiment: 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony. 418th Regiment:
 18th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Hesse. 440th Reserve Regiment: 10th
         Corps District—Hanover and Grand Duchy of Oldenberg.)


                                 1915.

The 183d Division (known as the 183d Brigade until June, 1916) was
created at Cambrai in May, 1915. It comprised at that time the 183d
Infantry (Saxon) and the 184th Infantry (Prussian), to which there was
added in July, 1915, the 122d Reserve Regiment (Wurttemberg), three
newly formed regiments, the 184th being organized out of companies taken
from various regiments of the 7th and 8th Divisions. In November, 1916,
the 183d Division was modified. Two of its original regiments (the 183d
and the 122d Reserve) were respectively replaced by the newly formed
418th and 440th Reserve—the 418th Regiment being formed from companies
of the 111th Division, the Ersatz Division of the Guard, the 8th, Ersatz
Division, and the 10th Ersatz Division, and the 440th Reserve Regiment
being organized out of various elements, including the 3d Battalion of
the 79th Reserve Regiment and the 4th Battalion of the 75th Landwehr.


AISNE.

1. In June, 1915, the 183d Brigade occupied the Missy sur Aisne sector
(east of Soissons).

2. At the end of June it was engaged at Quennevieres.


LORRAINE.

3. Transferred to Lorraine (end of July), it stayed there until the end
of September (region of Benestroff).


CHAMPAGNE.

4. It was brought to the Champagne front (between Prunay and Souain)
about September 23 and opposed the French offensive (September-October).
The 184th Infantry was nearly wiped out on September 25, the 183d losing
a very large number of prisoners.

5. Relieved from the front in November, the brigade was put at rest in
the vicinity of Charleroi.


                                 1916.

1. In January, 1916, the division was in reserve in the vicinity of
Machault.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. From February to May it was on the Champagne front near the Souain-
Somme Py road.

3. June; at rest (region of Tournai). At the end of June the 183d
Brigade became the 183d Division by changing the 183d Field Artillery
Detatchment into a regiment.


SOMME.

4. On July 2 it was brought to the north of the Somme and engaged in the
vicinity of Pozières-Contalmaison until July 24. It suffered very heavy
losses here—from the 10th to the 15th the 184th Infantry lost about
2,000 men.

5. About July 25 it was withdrawn from the front and reorganized. (It
received 2,000 replacements, mostly men from the 1916 and 1917 classes.)


ARTOIS.

6. From the end of July to September 21: Neuville-St. Vaast sector
(north of Arras).


SOMME.

7. From the beginning of October to the 21st it went into its second
engagement on the Somme (Belloy-Deniécourt sector) and was again sorely
tried.


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

8. November 15 to February, 1917, Côtes de Meuse (Lamorville-Spada
sector.) In November the 183d Division was reorganized and became
entirely Prussian (present composition)


                                 1917.

1. From the middle of February to the beginning of April, 1917, it was
at rest in the region of Conflans, then in the vicinity of Anizy le
Château.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

2. At the beginning of April the 183d Division came to strengthen the
Chavonne-Soupir-Braye en Laonnois sector. While opposing the French
attack of April 16 it suffered very heavy losses (2,100 prisoners), and
while fighting fell back to the Chemin des Dames (April 18–21). As a
result of the losses on the 16th the companies of the 184th Regiment
were reduced to 25 to 30 men.

3. The division was relieved on April 21. In May the 184th Regiment
received 1,500 replacements from the 4th Corps District, half of which
belong to the class of 1918.


ALSACE.

4. From May 11 to June 24 it held the Aspach-Rhone to Rhine Canal
sector.

5. From the end of June to July 31 it was at rest, successively to the
south of Colmar (15 days), near Friberg, and to the south of Longuyon
(Pierrepont).

6. It entrained at Longuyon for Belgium (July 31) and detrained at
Roulers the 1st and 2d of August.


FLANDERS.

7. On August 15 the division was engaged near St. Julien (southwest of
Poelcappelle) until August 20.


CAMBRAI.

8. After a short rest in the region of Cambrai it took over the
Vendhuile-Hargicourt sector, to the west of Catelet, on September 9. On
November 20 part of the 440th Reserve Regiment was sent as a
reenforcement to the south of Cambrai (Masnières); later the entire 183d
Division was transferred to the northeast of Vendhuile to cover the
flank of the German attack executed on November 30.


                              RECRUITING.

The 183d was more homogeneous than it seemed at first glance. The
recruits of the 9th and 10th Corps District were often mixed and the
418th and 440th Regiments have many men from the same Provinces. Also
the 184th received in the main men from that portion of the 4th Corps
District which adjoined the 10th Corps District (Harz section).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

During the French attack of April 16, 1917, the division as a whole
showed up well. The 418th and the 440th Reserve gave proof of vigor and
courage and only gave way under continual pressure of the opposing
troops.

It seemed that the German Command wished to reward the division for this
resistance by giving Gen. von Schuessler, commanding the 183d Division,
the Ordre pour le Mérite.

The 183d Division was sorely tried in the course of these attacks and
had to be entirely reorganized.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division held the Vendhulle sector until February 2, when it was
relieved by the 79th Reserve Division. It returned to this part of the
line on February 25, relieving the 79th Reserve Division. It took part
in the attack of March 21, advancing by Epehy (21st), Manancourt (23d),
to Bazentin (25th). It retired to rest at Contalmaison.


ALBERT.

2. The division received drafts in early April. On the 16th it came into
line north of Albert and held there for four weeks. On the 13th of May
it was relieved by the 243d Division.

3. On the 19th the division was engaged at Ville sur Ancre, but after
four days in line it was relieved and sent to a quiet sector.


WOEVRE.

4. On June 22 the division took over the Regnieville sector, which it
held until July 14 without event. It was relieved by the 77th Reserve
Division on that date.

5. It entrained at Thiaucourt on July 16 and traveled via Montmedy-
Sedan-Charleville-Charleroi-Mons-Valenciennes and detrained near Cambrai
on the night of July 17–18. From there it marched to Ypres, rested there
for six days, and on the 25th relieved the 26th Reserve Division in the
Hebuterne sector.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

6. The division was struck by the British offensive in August, and
before it was withdrawn near Irles on August 24 it had suffered heavy
casualties, including the loss of 1,400 prisoners.

7. It marched to Cambrai, where it remained three days. On the 28th it
was marched to Douai and entrained for Lille, from where it marched to
Templemars. On the night of September 3–4 it relieved the 18th Reserve
Division north of the La Bassee Canal.

8. The division was engaged in the La Bassee sector until September 10.
Immediately after it was withdrawn from line the division was dissolved.
The 440th Reserve Regiment was sent as a draft to the 11th Division. The
other two regiments of the division were also disbanded and used as
drafts.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was used as an assault
division in the March offensive but thereafter deteriorated. It was next
seriously employed on the Somme in August, where its tremendous losses
robbed it of further utility.




                            185th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │185.          │185.          │185.          │185.
              │              │186.          │              │186.
              │              │190.          │              │190.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │185 F. A. Abt. (3 Btries.).  │185 F. A. Abt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│185 Pion. Co.                │185 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │186 Pion. Co. (dissolved in
              │                             │  Aug.).
              │                             │190 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │229.          │65.           │29.           │65.
              │              │161.          │              │161.
              │              │28.           │              │28 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 5 Mounted Jag. Rgt.   │3 Sqn. 5 Mounted Jag. Rgt.
              │  (?)                        │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │185 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 185 F. A. Rgt. (9. Btries.).│2 Abt. 16 Res. Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                             │838 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1281 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1348 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(185) Pion. Btn.             │185 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │10 Co. 28 Pions.             │ 10 Co. 28 Pions.
              │                             │
              │185 Pion. Co.                │ 185 Pion. Co.
              │402 T. M. Co.                │ 89 Searchlight Section.
              │185 Searchlight Section.     │185 Signal Command:
              │185 Tel. Detch.              │ 185 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 134 Res. Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │576 Ambulance Co.            │576 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │7 Field Hospital.            │65 Field Hospital.
              │65 Field Hospital.           │267 Field Hospital.
              │267 Field Hospital.          │385 Vet. Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (65th and 161st Regiments: 8th Corps District—Rhenish Province. 28th
        Reserve Regiment: 8th Corps District—Rhenish Province.)


                                 1915.

The division was created in May, 1915. Merely a brigade (the 185th) at
the outset, it was composed of the 185th Infantry (from various Baden
regiments), of the 186th Regiment (Hessian elements), and of the 190th
Regiment (Westphalian elements). Later the 185th Brigade underwent
changes which entirely changed its original composition.


HÉBUTERNE.

1. In June, 1915, the 185th and 186th Infantry Regiments were engaged in
the vicinity of Hébuterne.

2. The three regiments of the 185th Brigade entrained at Douai at the
end of July and were transferred to Alsace.


ALSACE.

3. At first it was in reserve in the region of Mulhouse; later it was
put in line between Altkirch and the Swiss frontier, where it stayed
until the end of September.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. At the beginning of October it was in Champagne holding the sector
west of the Souain-Somme Py road.


                                 1916.

1. The 185th Brigade stayed on the Champagne front (Tahure) until the
middle of June, 1916.


SOMME.

2. At the beginning of July it opposed the Franco-British offensive in
the Somme at the northeast of Fricourt, near Thiepval, Contalmaison, and
Bazentin (beginning of July to the 18th). It suffered serious losses.

3. At the end of July it rested at St. Quentin, Vermand and Cateau. At
this time the 185th Brigade became the 185th Division by the
transformation of its field artillery detachment into a regiment.


OISE-AISNE.

4. In August it held a sector to the west of Soissons (from the Oise to
Chevillecourt). The 185th Division was reorganized by the transfer of
its three infantry regiments which were replaced by the 65th and the
161st Infantry from the 15th Division and by the 28th Reserve Regiment
from the 16th Reserve Division—both Rhenish divisions.


SOMME.

5. The 185th, thus reorganized, was brought back to the Somme about
September 7. It was engaged near Ginchy and Combles until the middle of
October.

6. After a short stay north of Soissons (end of October to the beginning
of November) it came back for a third time in the Somme district
(Saillisel, night of Nov. 10–11). Here it was again put to a test.

7. It left the Somme on December 9 and rested in Belgium (Alost).


                                 1917.

1. At the beginning of January elements of the division were in line to
the south of Grenier wood (region of Lille).


FLANDERS.

2. The division occupied a sector north of Ypres (Wieltje) from the
beginning of February to April 15.


ARTOIS.

3. About April 20 it was engaged in front of Arras (to the north of the
Scarpe until the beginning of May). Losses sustained obliged it to have
recourse to a distant source for replacements: the Ersatz Truppe of
Warsaw (class of 1918 and men put back of the 1917 class), which
reenforcements arrived at top speed on May 5.


LA BASSÉE.

4. The division held the La Basée sector (Hulluch-Vermelles) from the
end of May to September 21.

5. In October it was at rest for three weeks in the vicinity of Carvin.


FLANDERS-CAMBRAI.

6. Transferred to Belgium (Oct. 28) it took over a sector to the west of
Houthulst Forest (Nov. 6–7). In December it was on the Cambrai front
(until about Jan. 10, 1918).


                              RECRUITING.

Since August, 1916, the division had been entirely composed of regiments
coming from the Rhine Province (8th Corps District) and as such is
entirely homogeneous.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 185th Division gave good account of itself in all the battles in
which it took part.


                                 1918.

1. The 185th Division was withdrawn from the Cambrai front near
Gonnelieu, being relieved by the 9th Reserve Division during the night
of January 11–12. It went to the Solesmes area, where it was trained
with a view of being used in offensive operations.


ARRAS.

2. About the middle of February it relieved the 24th Division near
Monchy le Preux (southeast of Arras). On the 28th of March it attacked
with all three regiments, and suffered heavy losses from enfilade
machine-gun fire; officer casualties for the division amounted to 90. It
was withdrawn about the 27th of April.

3. It relieved the 26th Reserve Division near Mercatel (southeast of
Arras) between the 13th and 16th of May. It was relieved by the 39th
Division during the night of August 2–3.


SOMME.

4. On the 18th it reenforced the front near Herleville (south of Bray).
It was withdrawn on September 5.

5. On the 18th it reenforced the front near Villeret (northwest of St.
Quentin), and was withdrawn on the 1st of October. During these last two
engagements the division lost heavily, more than 2,050 in prisoners
alone.

6. A week later it reenforced the front near Ligny en Cambresis (west of
Le Cateau). It was withdrawn on the 25th.

7. After a fortnight’s rest it relieved the 6th Division southwest of
Mons on the 8th of November.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 185th was rated as a second-class division. Although trained in open
warfare, it was used in only one of the great German offensives, and
there did nothing to indicate that it merited a better rating.




                            187th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │187.          │187.          │187.          │187.
              │              │188.          │              │188.
              │              │189.          │              │189.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │5 and 6 Sqns. 16 Dragoon Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │231 F. A. Abt.               │231 F. A. Abt.
              │                             │3 Mountain Art. Abt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│187 Pion. Co.                │187 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │192 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │417 Anti-Aircraft Section.
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │187.          │187.          │187.          │187.
              │              │188.          │              │188.
              │              │189.          │              │189.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 16 Dragoon Rgt.       │5 Sqn. 16 Dragoon Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │6 Art. Command:
              │ 231 Rgt. (9 Btries.).       │ 231 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 66 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 720 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1267 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1320 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(187) Pion. Btn.:            │187 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 187 Pion. Co.               │ 1 Res. Co. 15 Pions.
              │ 1 Res. Co. 15 Pions.        │ 187 Pion. Co.
              │ 187 T. M. Co.               │ 187 T. M. Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │ 60 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │187 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 187 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 122 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │219 Ambulance Co.            │219 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │28 Field Hospital.           │28 Field Hospital.
              │33 Field Hospital.           │33 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │255 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                   │605 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (187th Regiment: 9th Corps District—Schleswig—Holstein. 188th Regiment:
       4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony. 189th Regiment: 3d Corps
                          District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1915.

The 187th Division (the 187th Brigade until June, 1916) was created May
20, 1915. Its regiments were made up as follows: The 187th, from the 9th
Corps District; the 188th, from the 4th Corps District; and the 189th, a
Brandenburger unit.


ALSACE.

1. In June, 1915, the 187th Brigade was sent to Alsace and stayed in
line in the Fecht valley and the vicinity (Metzeral-Sondernach-
Hilsenfirst-Reichackerkopf) until the end of December.

2. It next went to rest in the vicinity of Colmar.


                                 1916.


ALSACE.

1. At the end of January, 1916, it went back in line in the Fecht valley
and the region of Guebwiller. It was kept there until the summer,
participating in battles for the possession of the heights
(Hartmannswillerkopf, Reichackerkopf).

2. At the beginning of July the 187th Brigade became the 187th Division
by the transformation of its field artillery detachment into a regiment.


TRANSYLVANIA.

3. Relieved at the end of August from the Muenster, it rested eight days
at Rouffach then entrained at Colmar for the Roumanian front.
(Itinerary: Karlsruhe-Stuttgart-Ulm-Munich-Vienna-Budapest-Sieben-
Buergen.)


ROUMANIA.

4. On September 13 it was engaged in Transylvania (region of
Hermannstadt, Tour Rouge passes), then took part in the battle of Brasso
(Kronstadt) at the beginning of October and in the operations in the
vicinity of Slanic (December). It suffered heavy losses.


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA-FRANCE.

1. On February 11, 1917, the 187th Division left Roumania for the
Western Front. (Itinerary: Arad-Budapest-Oppeln-Breslau-Dresden-
Wuerzberg-Strassberg.) It was at rest near Dieuze (about six weeks).


LORRAINE.

2. About April 20 it took over the Moncel-Arracourt sector.


AISNE.

3. Hastily relieved on April 28, it entrained at Morhange on May 2 and
detrained in the vicinity of Amagne and was put into line on May 10 on
the Rheims front (north of Bermericourt; southeast of Berry au Bac)
until June 15.

4. At rest in the Aussonce-La Neuville area (end of June to July) the
187th Division was held in reserve as a “Stossdivision” or
“Eingriffsdivision.”


CHAMPAGNE.

5. About July 14 it was engaged in the Cornillet, Mont Blond, Mont Haut
sector, which it held until August 26. The 187th Infantry was
particularly tried during the attack of July 26.

6. From August 26 to September 29 it was at rest in camps at La Neuville
en Tourne à Fuii later in the region of Vervins.


FLANDERS.

7. Transferred to Belgium (Sept. 30), the division opposed the British
attack near Poelcappelle. It was partially relieved after the attack and
went into line and counter attacked on the 10th to the north of
Langemarck. Its losses in this sector were heavy.

8. After a rest to the north of Bruges from the 12th of October to
November, it went back to the front near Blankaart (south of Dixmude).


                              RECRUITING.

The three regiments of this division came from different Provinces—the
187th from Schleswig-Holstein, the 188th from Prussian-Saxony, and the
189th from Brandenburg. This was confirmed by a German communiqué which
mentioned “the attack troops from Schleswig-Holstein and Brandenberg” at
Mont Haut (July, 1917).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 187th Division was made up of young men who were well trained and
who came from active divisions.

The 187th Division was a division equipped for mountain warfare.


                                 1918.


ARMENTIERES.

1. The 187th Division was withdrawn from line south of Lake Blankaart
about the 10th of January, and on the 16th relieved the 38th Landwehr
Division near Bois Grenier (south of Armentieres). It was relieved by
the 6th Bavarian Division about February 20 and went to the Lille area,
where it most probably received training in open warfare, though the
fact has not been definitely established.


ARRAS.

2. It left there and arrived at Douai on the 25th of March. It spent the
night of the 27th–28th in Vitry. On the 28th it reenforced the front
near Fampoux (east of Arras) on the 28th, when it attacked. A man of the
188th Regiment subsequently wrote: “We tried to break through on the
28/3/18, but only pushed Tommy back to his reserve line, and don’t
forget that it was with enormous losses to ourselves.” It was relieved
by the 2d Guard Reserve Division during the night of May 18–19, and went
to rest in the region east of Douai.

3. During the night of June 18–19 it came back and relieved the 2d Guard
Reserve Division. It was relieved by the 48th Reserve Division on the
7th of July.


ARMENTIERES.

4. After less than a week’s rest, the division came to the Armentieres
front and relieved the 39th Division between Neuf-Berquin and Vieux-
Berquin (north of Merville). It was relieved early in September by the
extension of fronts of the neighboring divisions.


CAMBRAI.

5. On the 7th it reenforced the front in the Inchy en Artois sector
(west of Cambrai). After suffering exceedingly heavy losses, it was
withdrawn about the 28th and went to rest in the Boushain region.


DOUAI.

6. October 3 it relieved the 15th Reserve Division in the Oppy sector
(west of Douai), and was withdrawn about the 20th.

7. On the 27th it reenforced the front in the Chateau l’Abbaye sector
(northeast of St. Amand), but was withdrawn a few days later.


VALENCIENNES.

9. It was identified in line near Quievrechain (northeast of
Valenciennes) on November 5.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 187th was rated as a second-class division. The only offensive in
which it participated was that of the Somme, where it did not
distinguish itself. Subsequently it was used only to hold the front.
Toward the end of the year it was very much reduced in strength.




                             192d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │192.          │192.          │192.          │192.
              │              │193.          │              │193.
              │              │25 Bav.       │              │25 Bav.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │1 Ldw. Sqn. (12 C. Dist.).
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │192 F. A. Abt. (3 Btries.).  │192 F. A. Abt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│192 Pion. Co.                │192 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │404 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │192.          │183.          │192.          │183.
              │              │192.          │              │192.
              │              │245 Res.      │              │245 Res.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │(?) Sqn. 1 Res. Hus. Schutz. │1 Sqn. 18 Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │  Rgt.                       │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │(?) Art. Command:            │192 Art. Command:
              │ 192 F. A. Rgt. (9 Btries.). │ 192 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 58 (Saxon) Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │ 850 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1150 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │ 1162 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(192) Pion Btn.:             │192 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 4 Co. 22 Pions.             │4 Co. 22 Pions.
              │ 192 Pion. Co.               │192 (Saxon) Pion. Co.
              │ 404 T. M. Co.               │404 T. M. Co.
              │ 192 Searchlight Section.    │129 Searchlight Section.
              │ 192 Tel. Detch.             │192 Signal Command:
              │                             │ 192 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │ 173 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │29 Ambulance Co.             │29 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │5 Res. Field Hospital.       │2 Res. Field Hospital.
              │23 Ldw. Field Hospital.      │3 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │292 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                (12th and 19th Corps Districts—Saxony.)


                                 1915.

The 192d Brigade (became the 192d Division in June, 1916) was formed out
of regiments created by selection of men from various units. It was
formed at the beginning of June, 1915, with the 192d Infantry (Saxon),
formed out of elements taken from the 32d Division, the 193d
(Westphalian, 7th Corps District), detached after its creation to the
13th Reserve Division, and with the 25th Bavarian Regiment, formerly
belonging to the 4th Bavarian Division, the regiments of which had
contributed to the formation of this last regiment.

1. Until the month of September, 1915, the three regiments of the
brigade occupied different sectors on the Western Front—the 192d near
Charency in August, the 193d on the Aisne (region of Chamouille), and
the 25th Bavarian near Warneton (Flanders) in July.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. At the end of September the elements of the 192d Brigade were brought
together in the rear of the Champagne front. Engaged as a reenforcement
against the French offensive (Sept. 27 to the beginning of October) near
the Souain-Somme Py road, it suffered heavy losses (50 officers and
3,594 men out of action, according to official lists). The brigade
stayed in the Souain sector until the end of November.

3. In December it was at rest in the region of Bignicourt-Machault.


                                 1916.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. At the beginning of January, 1916, the 192d Brigade again took a
sector in Champagne (until Jan. 26).

2. From the end of January to the beginning of March it was at rest in
the vicinity of Montcornet.

3. From the 4th to the 18th of March the regiments were engaged in
making defensive works in the region of Laon.


VERDUN-BOIS D’AVOCOURT.

4. On March 18 the brigade was brought near Vouziers and Stenay, then
assembled in the rear of the Verdun front on the left bank of the Meuse
(Mar. 22). On the 23d it relieved the 11th Bavarian Division, sorely
tried by the attacks on Malancourt and the Bois d’Avocourt. It took part
itself in the battles which effected the capture of that wood and
suffered heavy losses. From April 13 to May 10 the 11th Company of the
192d Infantry received at least 125 replacements and the 12th Company
116 replacements.

5. The 192d Brigade stayed in the Malancourt-Avocourt wood sector until
the end of August, holding it alternately with the 11th Bavarian
Division. During this period (May-August) it only took part in local
engagements.

6. In June it was changed into a division, its composition remaining
unchanged except for the expansion of its field artillery.


FLEURY-DOUAUMONT.

7. On August 22 the new division was relieved and transferred to the
right bank of the Meuse (Charency-Longuyon). On the 28th it was engaged
in the Fleury-Douaumont sector. Its regiments were sorely tried by the
French attacks of September 3 and 9.

8. Relieved from the front at the end of September and beginning of
October the division was entirely reorganized. The 193d Infantry went to
the 222d Division (being organized) and was replaced by the 418th, newly
formed; the 25th Bavarian went to the 14th Bavarian Division and was
replaced by the 245th Reserve Regiment of the 54th Reserve Division.


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

9. About the end of October the 418th Regiment, which had been put in
line in the Moranville sector (Côtes de Meuse), replaced the 183d
Infantry in the 183d Division, the last-named regiment going to the 192d
Division, which was now entirely Saxon.


BEZONVAUX.

The 192d Division, having thus acquired its present organization, took a
position to the east of Bezonvaux in December.


                                 1917.


VERDUN-BEZONVAUX.

1. It occupied this sector until December, 1917, and during this long
period remained entirely passive.


HILL 344.

2. Relieved from this calm sector about December 10, 1917, it
immediately went into line north of Hill 344, where it still was in
January, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The division was entirely Saxon after the end of 1916.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 192d Division stayed more than a year in a very calm sector (east of
Bezonvaux, December 1916, to December, 1917).

In January, 1918, the division might be considered as rested, but its
combat value at that time seemed rather mediocre. In the various actions
in which it took part on the Verdun front it did not distinguish itself.


                                 1918.


OISE.

1. The division held the sector on the Verdun front until the middle of
April, when it was relieved, and on May 19 it relieved the 200th
Division southeast of Rouvrel. It was still in line when the Allies
attacked on August 8. About August 11 the division was withdrawn.


ST. MIHIEL.

2. The division marched to Origny via Rosieres-Athies-St. Quentin. It
left there August 25 and went by train to Chambley via Ribemont-Crecy-
Mortiers-Marle-Charleville-Sedan-Montmedy-Longuyon-Metz, arriving on
August 26. On the 20th the division entered line in the tip of the St.
Mihiel salient.

3. The division extracted itself from the salient and was relieved about
September 22, when the line had stabilized. It was moved west and again
came into line at Bezonvaux.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

4. From October 8 until about October 22 the division held the Bezonvaux
sector. It was then shifted northward to the area south of Etrayes,
where it remained until the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It did well at St. Mihiel, but in
its other sectors its conduct was mediocre.




                            195th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │101 Res. │6 Jag.   │101 Res. │6 Jag.   │101 Res. │6 Jag.
              │         │8 Jag.   │         │8 Jag.   │         │8 Jag.
              │         │233 Res. │         │233 Res. │         │14 Jag.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │(3 Sqn. 14 Uhlan   │2 Sqn. 14 Uhlan
              │                   │  Rgt.)            │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │260 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │260 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 260 F. A. Rgt.    │860 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │873 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │1282 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(195) Pion. Btn.:  │195 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 1 Co. 32 Res.     │ 1 Co. 32 Res.
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │                   │ 55 Res. Pion. Co. │ 55 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 195 T. M. Co.     │ 102 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 195 Tel. Detch.   │195 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 195 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 66 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │207 Ambulance Co.  │207 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │22 Field Hospital. │22 Field Hospital.
              │                   │347 Field Hospital.│347 Field Hospital.
              │                   │                   │231 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │860 M. T. Col.     │607 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │64 (?). M. G. S. S.│                   │
              │  Detch.           │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (6th and 8th Jägers: Various sections of Prussia. 233d Reserve Regiment:
                     11th Corps District—Thuringen.)


                                 1916.

1. The division was organized in July, 1916, in the Ruddervoorde region
with the following elements: (1) 233d Reserve Regiment, obtained from
the 51st Reserve Division; (2) the 6th Jägers (5th and 6th Battalions of
Jägers, 14th Battalion of Jägers—the last after arriving on the Russian
front was thereafter replaced by the 2d Reserve Battalion of Jägers);
(3) 8th Jägers (4th, 16th, and 24th Battalions of Reserve Jägers).


GALICIA.

2. It was shortly thereafter transferred to Galicia.

3. The division took part in the open warfare of August, 1916.

4. It next went into line with Austrian troops in the Zloczow sector.


                                 1917.


FRANCE.

1. It was transferred to the Western Front at the end of April, 1917.
(Itinerary: Leniky-Cracovie-Oppeln-Breslau-Leipzig-Halle-Paderborn-
Essen-Duesseldorf-Aix la Chapelle-Verviers-Liége-Louvain-Brussels-
Cambrai.)

2. The division was successively in line in the Ypres sector (May), in
the Wytschaete sector (June-July), and in the St. Quentin sector
(August).

3. During the month of August it rested in the Walincourt region.


FLANDERS.

4. From October 3 to 12 it fought in the Passchendaele sector. It
sustained heavy losses (more than 600 prisoners).

5. Relieved on October 12 the division was reorganized at Meulebecke
from the 14th to the 18th and was transferred by rail to Gand. At the
time it was relieved the 233d Reserve was reduced to 800 men (story of
deserter).

6. On about the 21st it entrained at Heydinge and was brought via
Brussels-Namur-Dinant-Givet-Charleville-Sedan-Montmedy and Conflans to
Haye, where it detrained on the 23d.


HAYE.

7. On October 28 it took over a sector to the southwest of Thiaucourt
(Flirey).


ITALY.

8. On November 11 the division was entrained at Metz for Italy. It
detrained at Trente on November 14, where it rested until the 24th. It
left Trente on December 3 without having participated in any engagement.
(Itinerary: Trente-Innsbruck-Munich-Carlsruhe-Offenberg-Friberg-
Mulhouse.)


ALSACE.

9. Arriving on December 6, it was billeted in the region of Sundgau,
where it stayed until February, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The division was very heterogeneous. The 233d came from Thuringen (11th
Corps District). The various jaeger regiments came from various depot
jaeger battalions (2d, 4th, 5th, 6th, and 11th Corps Districts).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 195th Division was sorely tried in Flanders in October, 1917. In
November, 1917, the greater part of its strength came from the classes
called during the war. The average age was 25. It can be classed as a
good division.


                                 1918.


CAMBRAI.

1. The 195th Division left Alsace, where it had been resting since its
return from Italy, the 5th and 6th of February, and proceeded to
Valenciennes. On the 27th a prisoner was captured near Bullecourt
(northeast of Bapaume), who stated that his battalion had relieved
another battalion of the same regiment during the night of the
25th–26th. The 195th Division had probably relieved the 16th Bavarian
Division some days before. It was relieved by the 16th Bavarian Division
on the 2d of March. It was very probably trained in open warfare, but
the fact has not been definitely established.

2. On the 21st it came back reenforcing the front near Noreuil
(northeast of Bapaume). The heavy fighting on this front did not come in
the first days of the offensive but a few days later the division was
heavily engaged, especially on the 28th and 31st near Bucquoy. This
represented an advance of only a few kilometers gained at the cost of
heavy losses in many attacks. It was relieved by the 17th Division
during the night of April 1–2.

3. On the 9th it relieved the 16th Bavarian Division in the Ayette
sector (northwest of Bapaume). It remained here fighting hard until
relieved by the 5th Bavarian Reserve Division about the 24th. In this
fighting the losses were very heavy, especially in the 233d Reserve
Regiment (the commander of which was awarded Pour le Merite) which was
dissolved soon after; its place was taken by the 14th Jaeger Regiment.
It was sent to the Cambrai region to rest and refit.


MARNE.

4. The first day of the battle of the Marne-July 15—it reenforced the
front near Chatillon sur Marne (northwest of Epernay). It was withdrawn
early in August and went to rest near Metz.


ST. MIHIEL.

5. On the 14th of September, after the line reached by the American
First Army had stabilized, the division entered line in the Haumont
sector (northeast of St. Mihiel). It was not heavily engaged and was
withdrawn about the 28th.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

6. The division then moved to the Champagne front, where it reenforced
the front in the St. Etienne à Arnes sector (south of Machault) on the
6th of October. It was opposed by French troops until the 24th; after
that it was opposite the Americans on account of a readjustment of
sectors. It was withdrawn on the 29th.

7. On the 2d of November it was thrown back into line near Verrieres
(northwest of Buzancy). Its losses were so heavy in this fighting, and
the division was in such a state of exhaustion, that although the
division was still in line on the 11th there were rumors that it was
soon to be dissolved.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 195th was rated a second-class division. Its conduct whenever
heavily engaged was such as to lead to the conclusion that it was one of
the better divisions of that class.




                            197th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[31]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │210.     │273 Res. │210.     │273 Res. │210.     │273 Res.
              │         │7 Jag.   │         │7 Jag.   │         │7 Jag.
              │         │  (Saxon).│         │         │         │  (Saxon).
              │         │32 Ldw.  │         │32 Ldw.  │         │28 Ers.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 14 Uhlan    │2 Sqn. 14 Uhlan    │2 Sqn. 14 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │261 F. A. Rgt      │(?) Art. Command:  │(?) Art. Command:
              │262 F. A. Abt.     │ 261 F. A. Rgt.    │ 261 F. A. Rgt.
              │  (Saxon).         │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│170 T. M. Co.      │197 Pion. Btn.:    │197 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 90 Res. Pion. Co. │ 90 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 2 Co. 32 Res.     │ 2 Co. 32 Res.
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │                   │ 415 T. M. Co.     │ 300 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 195 Tel. Detch.   │ 426 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 197 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │208 Ambulance Co.  │208 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │284 Field Hospital.│284 Field Hospital.
              │                   │532 Field Hospital.│532 Field Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport    │                   │1053 M. T. Col.    │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 31:

  Composition at the time of dissolution Nov. 1, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (273 Reserve Regiment; 10th Corps District—Hanover and Brunswick. 7th
 Jaeger; 12th and 19th Corps Districts—Saxony. 28th Ersatz; 14th Corps
                    District—Grand Duchy of Baden.)


                                 1916.

The 197th Division was created in August, 1916, on the Eastern Front by
the union of the following regiments: (1) 273d Reserve Regiment, formed
out of four battalions taken from the 362d Infantry (4th Ersatz
Division); the 368th Infantry (10th Ersatz Division); the 130th Reserve
(33d Reserve Division) which all came from France. (2) 7th Jaegers (13th
Battalion of Jaegers), 25th and 26th Battalions of Reserve Jaegers, all
Saxon, and also all coming from France. (3) The 32d Landwehr, which had
been under orders of the 33d Division in the Argonne.


GALICIA.

1. As part of the 2d Austrian Army (Boehm-Ermoli), the 197th Division
occupied in August 1916 the Zborow sector (northwest of Tarnopol) where
it met the offensive carried on by Broussilov. On August 10 the 7th
Regiment of Jaegers had 35 officers and 1,039 men out of action
(letter).

2. In September it was in line to the northeast of Zalosce and to the
north of Zborow and later in the vicinity of Zloczow.


                                 1917.


GALICIA.

1. The 197th Division stayed in this same Zloczow sector until July,
1917. While there it met the Russian attack of July 1, which reduced the
strength of the 1st Battalion of the 32d Landwehr to 160 men (letter).

2. The division participated in the German counteroffensive of July 19
and advanced by way of Zborow up to Husjatin (August), where it was
relieved to go into reserve.

3. It went back into line at the beginning of September at Hlesczawa
(region of Trembowla).

4. At the beginning of November the 32d Landwehr was replaced by the
28th Ersatz, taken from the Bavarian Ersatz Division, and originally
from the 14th Corps District (Grand Duchy of Baden). This replacement of
a mediocre regiment for a good one was the prelude of preparations for a
transfer to the Western Front.


                              RECRUITING.

This division had a composite make-up. The 7th Jaegers was Saxon; the
28th Ersatz was from Baden; and the 273d was formed from battalions
coming from the 7th, 9th, and 10th Corps District and got its
replacements in theory from the 10th Corps District.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 197th Division, coming from Galicia, appeared for the first time on
the Western Front in March, 1918. All the maneuvers executed in the rear
and at rest in Galicia tended to accustom the units to defensive warfare
methods (Verteidigungskrieg). (Interrogation of a prisoner of the 273d
Reserve on Mar. 13, 1918.)

This was also true of its stay in the Marchais region (February 1918).


                                 1918.


CHATEAU THIERRY.

The division held the quiet Chemin des Dames sector until the Aisne
offensive of May 27. Attack divisions passed through the 197th Division,
which followed up the attack in close reserve and was engaged on May 31
northwest of Chateau Thierry. It came in for some heavy local fighting
while opposite the 2d United States Division near Veuilly before it was
relieved on June 8.


VERDUN.

2. It was moved to Eastern Champagne, and on June 23 relieved the 15th
Bavarian Division in the Ornes sector. During July the division received
drafts. It held this sector without loss until about the 1st of August.


ST. QUENTIN-OISE.

3. On August 15 the division reenforced the front at Ribecourt. Until
September 10 it was constantly engaged in the Noyon fighting. After
resting nine days the division returned to line north of Gricourt, and
until October 19 resisted every foot of the way to Seboncourt.

4. After the withdrawal from line the division was broken up. The 273d
Reserve Regiment and the 28th Ersatz Regiment were disbanded, while the
7th Jaeger Regiment passed intact to the 241st Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was heavily engaged on an
active front for two months in 1918 during which fighting it suffered so
heavily in casualties and morale that it was dissolved in late October.




                            199th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │237 Res. │59 Ldw.  │114.     │59 Ldw.  │114.
              │         │4 Bav.   │         │357.     │         │357.
              │         │  Res.   │         │         │         │
              │         │9 Jag.   │         │237 Res. │         │237 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 14 Uhlan    │1 Sqn. 14 Uhlan    │1 Sqn. 14 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │263 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │263 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │ 263 F. A. Rgt.    │3 Abt. 2 Bav. Ft.
              │                   │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │927 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │1240 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │1241 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(199) Pion. Btn.:  │199 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 199 T. M. Co.     │ 6 Co. 23 Pions.
              │                   │ 330 Searchlight   │ 286 Pion. Co.
              │                   │  Section.         │
              │                   │ 199 Tel. Detch.   │ 199 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 38 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │199 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 199 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 10 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │209 Ambulance Co.  │209 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │Field Hospital.    │68 Field Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │339 Field Hospital.
              │                   │                   │244 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │609 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (114th Regiment: 14th Corps District—Southern part of the Grand Duchy of
    Baden. 357th Regiment: 2d Corps District—Pomerania. 237th Reserve
              Regiment: 8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1916.

The 199th Division was created in August, 1916, in the region of Stryj-
Halicz (Galicia), with troops coming from the Western Front. Until the
beginning of 1917 its infantry was made up as follows: The 237th Reserve
Regiment (coming from the 52d Reserve Division), the 4th Bavarian
Reserve Regiment (from the Bavarian Ersatz Division), and the 9th
Jaegers (12th and 13th Battalions of Reserve Jaegers (Saxon) and the 8th
Battalion of Jaegers).


GALICIA.

1. From the end of August to the beginning of November the 199th
Division was engaged in Galicia (Brzezany, Halicz, Zlota-Lipa) and
suffered heavy losses.

2. About November 1 the division was transferred to the Western Front.
(Itinerary: Lemberg-Cracaw-Breslau-Dresden-Leipzig-Coblenz-Treves-
Sedan.) It detrained at Dun and was billeted for three weeks in the
vicinity of Spincourt.


SOMME.

3. Sent to the Champagne district at the end of November and then in the
Bohain region, it went into line in the Rancourt-Saillizel sector (end
of December).


                                 1917.

1. At the beginning of 1917 the 114th and 357th replaced the 4th Reserve
and the 9th Jaegers.


SOMME.

2. The 199th Division stayed on the Rancourt front until March, 1917.


HINDENBURG LINE.

3. On March 27 it was identified to the east of Longavesnes; then at
Villers-Faucon, Lempire, in the new German positions (April).


ARTOIS.

4. Relieved about April 20, it was engaged to the southeast of Arras
(Wancourt-Vis en Artois-Cherisy) and suffered heavy losses (April 27,
May 3).

5. Coming back to the west of Catelet (Hargicourt-Bony) about the middle
of May, it left this line on June 8 to go to rest in the vicinity of
Ostend.


BELGIAN FLANDERS.

6. In the middle of July it took over the Nieuport-Lombartzyde sector,
which it occupied until the beginning of August and was at rest near
Ostend from August 10 to the middle of September.

7. It reappeared in the Lombartzyde sector until October 24. On November
10 after a short rest it was put in line to the north of Passchendaele,
where it was found, with the exception of some brief withdrawals for
rest, until February, 1918, when it went to rest near Courtrai.


                              RECRUITING.

Division with composite elements; a regiment from Baden (the 114th,
active), a regiment from Pomerania (the 357th, growing out of brigade
Ersatz Battalions), and a Rhenish regiment (the 237th).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 114th was considered the best in the division. The 237th Reserve did
not seem to have a very good combat value. It did not hold its ground
when opposed by the British at Cherisy (April, 1917). It is said that a
company of this regiment refused to come out of the trenches in the
month of July, 1917.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division left Flanders at the end of February and trained in the
Le Quesnoy area until the middle of March; left on the 17th for the
battle front. It marched to Escaromain, and on the 18th to Quievy. On
the day before the offensive the division marched via Caudry to Villers
Outreaux. It was not identified in the fight until the 25th at
Hardecourt. The next day it was at Maricourt wood, after which it
appears to have been withdrawn. On April 4 it relieved the 243d Division
south of Thennes.

2. After its relief the division marched by stages via Beaucourt en
Santerre-Vauvillers-Peronne to Templeux, la Fosse, where it rested for a
fortnight. The heavy losses incurred by the division during its last
time in line south of the Somme were made good chiefly by drafts of the
1919 class from the depots at Warsaw and Bruges. The division contained
a large proportion of this class and its fighting quality suffered in
consequence. On the 26th of April the division moved to Maurepas and
proceeded to Maricourt on the 28th; from there it marched into line in
the Morlancourt sector.

3. The division held the Morlancourt sector from about May 1 to 16. It
was relieved by the 107th Division and rested in the Valenciennes area
in June.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. It was engaged at Le Teton on July 15 and held a sector in that area
until the end of the month.


RHEIMS.

5. On August 3 it reenforced the battle front at Sapicourt west of
Rheims. It was engaged in that area except for a week’s rest until the
end of September.

6. After October 1 the division was engaged in Champagne in the region
of Orfeuil. It contested hotly the advance through Vaudy and Vouziers
until its relief in late October. It rested but a few days out of line
and after November 3 was engaged at St. Lambert, Roix-Terron, and Dom le
Mesnil (Nov. 10).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second-class. It was used as an attack
division in March and did well. Thereafter it saw almost constant
service in resisting allied pushes. In October’s fighting it was
frequently spoken of by the German official communique.




                            200th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │2 Jag.   │3 Jag. (4│2 Jag.   │3 Jag. (4│2 Jag.   │3 Jag.
              │         │  Btns.).│         │  Btns.).│         │
              │         │4 Jag.   │         │4 Jag.   │         │4 Jag.
              │         │5 Jag.   │         │5 Jag.   │         │5 Jag.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.│2 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.
              │                   │  (passed to 228   │
              │                   │  Div. in June,    │
              │                   │  1917).           │
              │                   │2 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.│
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │257 F. A. Rgt.     │(?) Art. Command:  │22 F. A. Rgt.
              │2 Mountain Art.    │ 257 F. A. Rgt.    │1 Abt. 26 Ft. A.
              │  Abt. (Bavarian). │                   │  Rgt. (1 and 3
              │                   │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │ 7 Mountain Art.   │843 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │  Abt.             │
              │                   │                   │1157 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │1161 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(220) Pion. Btn.:  │42 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 105 Pion. Co.     │ 105 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 282 Pion. Co.     │ 282 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 173 Mountain T. M.│ 173 T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Co.              │
              │                   │ 200 Tel. Detch.   │ 99 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │200 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 200 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 50 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │214 Ambulance Co.  │214 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │44 Field Hospital. │44 Field Hospital.
              │                   │370 Field Hospital.│19 Bav. Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │300 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │35 Landst. Inf.    │                   │
              │  Rgt.             │                   │
              │37 Landst. Inf.    │                   │
              │  Rgt.             │                   │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1916.


CARPATHIAN MOUNTAINS.

1. The 200th Division, composed of three regiments of Jaegers, was
formed in July, 1916, in Galicia with the 3rd Jaeger Regiment (4
battalions equipped with skis) coming from the Alpine Corps, with the
4th Jaegers (11th Battalion of Jaegers), 5th and 6th Battalions of
Reserve Jaegers, and with the 5th Jaegers (17th, 18th, and 23d
Battalions of Reserve Jaegers).


BUKOVINA.

The 200th Division, together with the 1st Division, formed the
Carpathian Corps. The division took part in the counteroffensive in the
Carpathians against the Russians and beginning in September 1, 1916,
occupied a sector to the north of Mont Tomnatik (Bukovina.)


                                 1917.


BUKOVINA.

1. The 200th Division stayed in the same part of the Carpathians (south
of Mt. Pnevié-Mt. Tomnatik) until July, 1917. At this time it took part
in the offensive waged in Bukovina and took a position north of the
Sereth. It was kept here until September.

2. At the end of September the 200th Division was entrained for Italy.
Its itinerary to Vienna was Kolomea-Lemberg-Cracaw.


ITALY.

3. Detraining in the vicinity of Laibach, it went toward the Italian
frontier, where it took about 15 days’ rest. On October 22 it drew near
the Italian frontier and on the 24th was engaged in the offensive on the
Isonzo and advanced by way of Cividale and Udine, where it fought the
Italian rear guards (Oct. 28–30). It reached Codroipo about November 3
and Quero on the Piave the 23d.


MONT TOMBA.

4. After a short period of rest it was again sent to the Mont Tomba
region in December.


                              RECRUITING.

The 200th Division had recruits from the various mountainous districts
of the empire—Upper Silesia, Harz, Black Forest, etc.—which gave it a
certain character in spite of the different sources of its recruiting.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Composed of young and vigorous men with high morale, the 200th was one
of the best divisions in the German Army (1918).


                                 1918.


FRANCE.

1. After having suffered heavy losses, the 200th Division was withdrawn
about the 1st of January, and went to rest for about a month southeast
of Bellune. Early in February, it entrained at Santa Lucia and traveled
via Rosenheim-Munich-Ulm-Freiburg-Colmar. It detrained at Bening and
went to rest and to be trained for about three weeks in the vicinity of
St. Avold.


MONTDIDIER.

2. The division entrained near Marsal (southwest of Dieuze) on the 26th
of March and, traveling via Thionville-Luxemburg-Namur, detrained at
Cambrai two days later. It rested in the caserne here until the 31st,
when it marched to Peronne, where it remained in the English barracks
the 2d and 3d of April, when it marched via Guillaucourt to Moreuil
(northwest of Montdidier). During the night of the 7th–8th it relieved
the 14th Division west of Moreuil. It was relieved on May 14 by the 192d
Division. It was reported near Quesnoy the end of May and in the Le
Cateau region early in June. Men of one of its regiments were reported
as having been seen near Fere en Tardenois on the 3d of June. Again,
parts of the division were reported near Caudry and Chateau Thierry
during June.


MARNE.

3. On the 15th of July the division attacked west of Dormans. It crossed
the Marne at Sailly, and was identified at Chapelle Monthod on the
following day. In this fighting, the division suffered very heavy
losses. The colonel and all the battalion commanders of the 3rd Jaeger
Regiment were lost. It was withdrawn from line on the 21st.

4. During the night of the 26th–27th it came back into line near
Roncheres (north of Dormans), its mission being to cover the retreat
between Sergy and the Meuniere wood. It was withdrawn about the 3d of
August and went to the Sedan area, where it rested for a fortnight.

5. During the night of the 22d–23d the division relieved the 22d Reserve
Division northwest of Souain. In the heavy fighting that followed the
division lost heavily. It was driven back to St. Etienne à Arnes, where
it was relieved by the 195th Division on the 6th of October.


WASSIGNY.

6. The division then moved by easy stages, with frequent halts, via
Rozoy-Montcornet-Origny-Escautpont-Le Nouvion-Beaurepaire-Barzy. During
the night of October 22–23 it relieved the 5th Reserve Division near
Oisy (east of Wassigny). It had not been withdrawn on the 11th of
November.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 200th was rated as a second-class division. Composed of Jaeger
units, which are good fighters, it distinguished itself in the East and
in Italy, and did well in the heavy fighting it was called upon to do on
the Western Front, though not brilliantly. It was one of the best of the
second-class divisions.




                            201st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[32]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │401.     │401.     │402.     │401.     │402.     │401.
              │         │402.     │         │402.     │         │402.
              │402.     │403.     │         │403.     │         │403.
              │         │404.     │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Sqn. 4 Mounted   │4 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.
              │                   │  Jag. Rgt. (?).   │
              │                   │4 Sqn. 7 Drag. Rgt.│
              │                   │  (?).             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │401 F. A. Abt.     │Art. Command:      │156 Art. Command:
              │402 F. A. Rgt.     │ 401 F. A. Rgt.    │ 402 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│401 Pion. Co.      │(201) Pion. Btn.:  │201 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 385 Pion. Co.     │ 385 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 401 Pion. Co.     │ 401 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 181 T. M. Co.     │ 358 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 50 Searchlight    │ 2 Res. Co. 7
              │                   │  Section.         │  Pions.
              │                   │ 201 Tel. Detch.   │ 50 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │ 181 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │ 201 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │401 Ambulance Co.  │401 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │401 Field Hospital.│401 Field Hospital.
              │                   │402 Field Hospital.│402 Field Hospital.
              │                   │66 Res. Field      │66 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │863 M. T. Col.     │611 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │201 Cyclist Co.    │201 Cyclist Co.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 32:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, November, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

    (401st Regiment; 20th Corps District. 402d Regiment; 17th Corps
             District. 403d Regiment, 5th Corps District.)


                                 1916.

The 201st is one of a series of divisions (numbered 201–204) created at
the beginning of July, 1916, at the time of the Russian offensive
conducted by Broussilov.

The 201st Division was formed out of recruits obtained from depots in
the 5th, 17th and 20th Corps Districts. The Allenstein (401st) Regiment
and the Danzig (402d) Regiment came from the Arys cantonment. The Glogau
(403d) Regiment and the Posen (404th) came from the Warthe cantonment.
Men taken from the front, convalescents from depots and a majority of
young men from the class of 1917 made up the initial strength, which was
230 to 240 men per company.


RUSSIA.

1. As soon as formed the division occupied a sector on the Russian front
(north of Baranovitchi) and stayed there from the beginning of July,
1916, to the beginning of December, 1917. During this period it only
took part in two local actions (November, 1916, and November, 1917).


                                 1917.

1. The 404th Infantry was taken away from this division in the beginning
of 1917 and was joined to the divisions in the neighborhood (the 18th
Landwehr Division and later the 4th Landwehr Division).


RUSSIA-FRANCE.

2. At the end of November, 1917, the 201st Division was relieved,
reassembled at Baranovitchi, and entrained for the Western Front.
(Itinerary: Baranovitchi-Brest-Litowsk-Warsaw-Chemnitz-Nuerenberg-
Heilbronn-Rastatt-Sarreguemines.)


LORRAINE.

3. Beginning on December 15, elements of the 201st Division were put in
line on the right bank of the Moselle opposite the Xon (northeast of
Pont a Mousson).


                              RECRUITING.

The eastern Provinces of the Empire.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 201st Division was composed to the extent of at least one-half of
young and vigorous men. It had not been exhausted physically and had in
no way lost its morale. Fraternization did not lessen its morale, but
rather raised it on account of their belief that war could be terminated
on the Western Front by an easy victory after peace was concluded with
Russia.

Since its return from Russia its regiments had undergone an intensive
training in trench and open warfare (February, 1918).


                                 1918.


WOEVRE.

1. The division held the Apremont sector (southeast of St. Mihiel) until
the end of May, when it was withdrawn. It rested and trained in the
Woevre (Sponville) until June 9. It entrained at Mars la Tour and moved
to Laon via Sedan and Liart. From there it marched to the Marne front
through Vailly-Lannoy-Brecy.


BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

2. It was in line on the Chateau Thierry-Vaux sector from June 15 to the
end of July. In the attacks of late July the division was hit hard. It
was thrown back on Bezu-St. Germain, Beuvardes, Pere en Tardenois and
relieved about July 30.

3. The division was moved to the Argonne in early August and about the
10th entered the Vacquois sector, which it held until the end of the
month.


BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. It returned to the Somme area and on the night of September 6–7
relieved the 6th Cavalry Division northeast of Fins. Until the 28th it
was engaged at Fins, Hendicourt, Gouzeaucourt, Villers, and Guislan.
Losses were very heavy, including 2,200 prisoners.


CAMBRESIS.

5. After a week’s rest, the division reentered line south of Cambrai on
October 5 and fought in this region until the 15th. Here it lost another
650 prisoners.

6. As a result of these extraordinary losses the division was dissolved
at Maubeuge on October 22.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its losses were unusually heavy
in prisoners whenever it was engaged in an active front. When it was
dissolved its effectives numbered less than 1,000 rifles.




                             202d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │405.     │406.     │408.     │406.     │97.
              │         │406.     │         │411.     │         │408.
              │         │407.     │         │412.     │         │411.
              │         │408.     │         │         │         │412.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │3 Sqn. 2 Gd. Uhlan
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │406 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │66 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 406 F. A. Rgt.    │ 406 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 65 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │                   │ 867 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 868 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1387 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(202) Pion. Btn.:  │202 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 383 Pion. Co.     │ 383 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 402 Pion. Co.     │ 402 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 182 T. M. Co.     │ 98 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 352 Searchlight   │ 182 T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Section.         │
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │202 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 202 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 91 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │403 Ambulance Co.  │403 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │403 Field Hospital.│403 Field Hospital.
              │                   │404 Field Hospital.│404 Field Hospital.
              │                   │302 Vet. Hospital. │302 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │867 M. T. Col.     │612 M. T. Col.
              │                   │983 M. T. Col.     │
              │                   │1387 M. T. Col.    │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd Units.   │                   │203 Cyclist Co.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

     (408th Regiment: Guard. 411th and 412th Regiments: 10th Corps
                           District—Hanover.)


                                 1916.

The 202d Division was formed in October, 1916, in the Lockstedt
cantonment (9th Corps District, Altona). The 405th and the 406th were
organized at the Lockstedt cantonment, the 407th at the Altengrabow
cantonment, and the 408th comes from Guard depots.


RUSSIA.

1. In the course of October, 1916, the 202d Division was sent to the
Russian front. Its organization was changed; it gave up the 405th to the
203d Division, the 406th and the 407th to the 205th Division. It was at
this time composed of the 408th and two regiments received from the 203d
Division, the 411th and the 412th (Hanover), which were formed at the
Munster cantonment as “coast-defense regiments.”


COURLAND.

2. In December, 1916, the 202d Division was identified in the region of
Riga.


                                 1917.

1. In March, 1917, and until the end of August, 1917, the 202d Division
occupied in Courland a sector in the vicinity of Toukkoum.


RIGA.

2. In the middle of September it was at the east of Riga. It was also
identified at Riga on October 29.

3. In November the 202d Division was entrained for the Western Front.
(Itinerary: Riga-Mitau-Insterburg-Koenigsberg-Thorn (408th)-
Schneidemuehl-Posen-Leipzig-Halle-Frankfort on the Main-Sarrebrueck-
Sarreguemines.) It detrained at Dieuze on November 20.


LORRAINE.

4. The division stayed in the rear of the front in the vicinity of
Dieuze until the middle of January, 1918 (six weeks’ training).


                              RECRUITING.

The 408th Regiment was built up out of depots of the Guard and was
recruited from all sections of Prussia. The 411th and 412th were
theoretically from Hanover, with some recruits furnished by the 9th
Corps District.


                                 1918.

1. The division held the Lorraine sector until May 19, when it was
relieved by the 3d Guard Division. It entrained near Moyenvic on May 19
and traveled via Metz-Spincourt-Longuyon-Sedan-Charleville-Marle to
Flavy le Martel, where it detrained on May 21.


OISE.

2. On the night of May 22–23 it relieved the 11th Division west of
Noyon. It was in line when the attack of June was made and advanced by
Orval as far as Bethencourt. Here it remained in sector until about July
10, when it exchanged sectors with the 105th Division at Autreches. In
this area it was struck by the Allied attack in mid-August and forced
back on Audignicourt. The losses were very heavy, including 2,000
prisoners. It was relieved on August 27.

3. The division was railed to the vicinity of Vouziers after its relief
in line. While resting at Sugny (Sept. 2–12) it was re-formed. The 412th
Regiment was dissolved and its effectives distributed between the 408th
and 411th Regiments. The 97th Regiment, from the dissolved 108th
Division, replaced the 412th Regiment in the division.

4. It was engaged in Champagne near Maisons de Champagne from September
12 to 24. After that it was in close support of the 42d Division until
the 27th, when it reentered line at Fontaine les Dormois. Until October
10 the division saw heavy fighting about Meuse and Challerange. It lost
very heavily, including more than 800 prisoners.

5. The division rested from October 11 to 21. It was reengaged southeast
of Vouziers (near Falaise) on the 21st, and after the 1st of November
retreated by way of Longwe (2d), Boult aux Bois (34d) to the Meuse
(8th).

When it appeared opposite the United States front on November 3, the
division had been completely shattered. The 411th Regiment, for
instance, had only three companies each with a rifle strength of 100 to
110 men.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. After the battle in eastern
Champagne in late September the division could be regarded as destroyed.




                             203d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │405.     │405.     │405.     │405.     │406.
              │         │409.     │         │409.     │         │409.
              │         │410.     │         │410.     │         │410.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │2 Sqn. Body Gd.
              │                   │                   │  Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │203 Art. Command:  │203 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 406 F. A. Rgt. (2 │ 403 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │  Abts.).          │
              │                   │ 403 F. A. Rgt.    │ 2 Abt. 8 Res. Ft.
              │                   │                   │  A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 778 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 969 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 977 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│403 Pion. Co.      │Pion. Btn.:        │417 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 403 Pion. Co.     │ 403 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 183 T. M. Co.     │ 1 Ers. Co. 23
              │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │ 20 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │ 183 T. M. Co.
              │                   │                   │203 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 203 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 152 Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │Ambulance Co.      │402 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │405 Field Hospital.│405 Field Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │406 Field Hospital.
              │                   │                   │303 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │202 Cyclist Co.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (406th Regiment; 3d Corps District—Brandenburg. 409th and 410th
           Regiments; 9th Corps District—Schleswig—Holstein.)


                                 1916.

The 203d Division was formed in Germany (September, 1916) and trained at
the Lockstedt cantonment (a great many men from the class of 1917; also
men previously wounded or sick and men taken from units at the front).


COURLAND.

1. On October 20 the 303d Division took over a sector on the Dvina
(region north of Dvinsk.)


                                 1917.


RIGA.

1. The division stayed on the Dvina until September, 1917. It
participated in the offensive on the Riga and fought to the north of
Friedrichstadt.

2. After the taking of the town the 203d Division occupied a sector at
Grenyn. Favored by calm conditions, it gave up men to the 75th Reserve
Division, which was preparing to go to France. On December 8 it was
billeted in Riga. About December 18 the 405th Regiment left the Division
and was replaced by the 406th, coming from the 205th Division. In the
meanwhile the division had brought up its strength by obtaining men from
the 332d Infantry, which did not intend to leave until March, 1918 (with
the 77th Reserve Division).


FRANCE.

3. At the end of December the 203d Division entrained for the Western
Front. The 410th left Riga on the 26th. (Itinerary: Eydtkuhnen-
Koenigsberg-Schneidemuehl-Berlin-Giessen-Coblenz-Treves-Thionville-
Charleville.) It detrained at Tournes in the night of January 1–2, 1918.


                              RECRUITING.

The 406th recruits in Brandenburg, Schleswig-Holstein, and, to a lesser
extent, Hanover and the Hanseatic cities; furnished the recruits for the
409th and the 410th. The changes effected in the personnel during the
last part of the stay on the Russian front left these units fairly
heterogeneous.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The offensive value of the 203d Division in February, 1918, was only
mediocre. Before leaving for the Western Front the 405th, which was to
have remained in (hardly glorious) Russia, changed all its young men for
the older men in the other two regiments. The 203d was said to have
played a part in the Riga offensive. Gen. von Luettwitz commanding the
division, was said to have been relieved of his command a short time
thereafter.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF REIMS.

The division continued to hold the sector east of Reims (near Beine)
until the German offensive of July 15. It attacked west of Prunay and
penetrated as far as the Vesle. In front of Beaumont it lost very
heavily. After the failure of the attack the division held the sector
from Prunay to east of Les Marquises until August 30, when it was
relieved by the 9th Division.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. It rested near Laon until October 1, when it was reengaged in
Champagne between Orfeuil and Marvaux. In 8 days of severe fighting it
lost very heavily and was obliged to retire from line.

3. The division was in army reserve until October 15, after which it was
engaged southeast of Vouziers near Olizy and Falaise. On November 1 it
was opposite the American front and took part in the final retreat of
the Meuse at Mohon.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. By the end of hostilities the
division was decimated and completely exhausted.




                            204th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │407.     │413.     │407.     │413.     │407.     │413.
              │         │414.     │         │414.     │         │414.
              │408.     │415.     │         │120 Res. │         │120 Res.
              │         │416.     │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Sqn. 19 Uhlan    │4 Sqn. 19 Uhlan
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │407 F. A. Abt.     │Art. Command:      │204 Art. Command:
              │408 F. A. Abt.     │ 27 Res. F. A. Rgt.│ 27 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 101 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │                   │ 1263 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1264 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1317 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│404 Pion Co.       │204 Pion Btn.:     │204 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 3 Res. Co. 13     │ 3 Res. Co. 13
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │                   │ 116 Pion. Co.     │ 116 Pion Co.
              │                   │ 184 T. M. Co.     │204 Signal Command:
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │ 204 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 75 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │563 Ambulance Co.  │563 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │407 Field Hospital.│252 Field Hospital.
              │                   │408 Field Hospital.│407 Field Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │249 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Odd units.   │                   │204 Cyclist Co.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (13th Corps District—Wurttemberg.)


                                 1916.

The 204th Division was formed in Germany in June and July, 1916. Its
original composition was the 407th Brigade (413th and 414th Infantry,
13th Corps District, Wurttemberg) and the 408th Brigade (415th and 416th
Infantry, 12th and 19th Corps Districts, Saxony).

1. The two brigades, which had respectively been trained at the
Muensingen cantonment in Wurttemberg (the 407th) and at Neuhammer (the
408th), were brought together at the end of July, 1916. The division was
then sent to Belgium. It detrained at Cortemarck on July 27.


FLANDERS.

2. Almost immediately put in line, the 204th occupied the Dixmude-
Bixschoote sector until October 1 and then the Ypres salient
(southeast). At the end of 1916 the 415th and the 146th Infantry were
taken from the front and transferred to the 212th Division and replaced
by the 120th Reserve Infantry (Wurttemberg), coming from the 58th
Division.


                                 1917.

1. After four weeks’ rest in the region of Ghent in February, 1917, the
division came back to the sector at the southeast of Ypres.

2. It was relieved on June 10, three days after the British attack
against the heights of Wytschaete-Messines. The division was only
partially subjected to this attack, but suffered some losses during the
artillery preparation.


ALSACE.

3. After having been at rest at Gheluvelt on about June 20, the 204th
Division was transferred to the vicinity of Sarreberg, then on July 8 to
the west of Basle, where it remained until July 20. From July 20 until
August 15 it held a sector in Upper Alsace (north of the Rhone-Rhine
Canal).


FLANDERS.

4. Again sent to Belgium, it went into line to the north of St. Julien,
southeast of Poelcappelle, at the end of August. No important
engagement.


CAMBRÉSIS.

5. Relieved from the Ypres front on September 13, it took over a sector
near Cambrai (Boursies-Demicourt; Sept. 24-Nov. 13).


FLANDERS.

6. Relieved about the middle of November, it went back to Flanders,
where it alternated with the 58th Division to the north of Poelcappelle
until the end of February.


                              RECRUITING.

The division has been entirely made up of Wurttemberg recruits since
December, 1916.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Fairly good division.


                                 1918.

1. After its relief northeast of Poelcappelle on February 28, the
division rested near Lille until March 21. Elements of the division were
in line at Fromelles on March 9 and others participated in a raid (the
13th) in the Boutillerie sector.

2. The division left the Lille area on March 21 and marched in stages to
Douai, arriving there on the 27th. It was in support northwest of Vitry
en Artois on the 29th. On the 30th it marched toward the battle front
south of the Somme via Inchy-Peronne (Apr. 1), Assevillers, Rosieres,
south of Moreuil.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

3. It was engaged in the Braches-Sauvillers sector from April 1 to May
11. It was relieved by an extension of the front of the neighboring
divisions and retired to rest and train near Chaulnes until June 5.


BATTLE OF THE OISE.

4. The division left Chaulnes about June 5 and marched in three days to
the Lassigny-Noyon front. It advanced in reserve on the 9th by Gury-
Mareuil-Lamotte. It was engaged south of Ribecourt near Bethancourt
until the 12th. From the 13th to the 18th the division was in reserve.
It was reengaged on the night of the 18th–19th and held the sector of
Vignemont-Antheuil until the 1st of August, when it was relieved by the
54th Division.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

5. It rested in the suburbs of Lassigny until August 8. It then marched
to Damery, arriving there on the 10th and immediately entering line. In
the next week the division was thrown back by Damery, Villery les Roye
to Goyencourt. The division suffered heavy losses, including about 370
prisoners near Roye.


LORRAINE.

6. The division was railed to Lorraine and rested near Blamont during
September. Drafts amounting to about 700 men were incorporated in the
division in mid-September.

7. The division left Lorraine on October 5 and detrained at Bertry on
the 7th. It was engaged on October 8 east of Catelet, and in the next 10
days fell back through Cremont, Maretz, Sains, Souplet, Catillon. Its
heavy losses, including 1,200 prisoners, led to its withdrawal on
October 18.

8. On October 22–23 the division was reengaged southeast of Le Cateau.
It held there until the breakdown of the line on November 5. Thereafter
it fell back on Maubeuge, through Favril, Limont, Fontaine.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Before the attack of August it
had about 2,700 rifles. The losses in August had a depressing effect on
the morale of the troops.




                            205th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1916             │            1917
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │              │406.          │403.          │406.
              │              │407.          │              │407.
              │              │439.          │              │427.
              │              │              │              │439.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │             (?)
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │405 F. A. Rgt.               │Art. Command:
              │                             │
              │                             │ 405 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│377 Pion. Co.                │(205) Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │ 377 Pion. Co.
              │                             │ 408 T. M. Co.
              │                             │ 205 Tel. Detch.
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │255 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │Field Hospital.
              │                             │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │615 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1918             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │              │405.          │403.          │405.
              │              │407.          │              │407.
              │              │439.          │              │329.
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │                             │2 Sqn. 13 Uhlan.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │405 F. A. Rgt.               │405 Field Art. Rgt. (Rgt.
              │                             │  Staff, 1 and 2 Abt.).
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │(?) Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │350 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │71 Searchlight Section.
              │                             │205 Div. Signal Command.
              │                             │205 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │255 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │215 and 216 Field Hospitals.
              │                             │305 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │615 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached.    │612 Landst. Inf. Rgt.        │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (405th, (?) 407th: 4th District-Prussian Saxony.) (439th: 15th District-
                                 Alsace.)


                                 1916.

The 205th Division was organized at the end of 1916, partly from new
regiments formed in the interior, partly from regiments taken from the
zone of the armies on the Eastern Front.


RUSSIA.

1. The end of November, 1916, the division was reported behind the front
(region northeast of Vilna). At that time it comprised the 406th and
407th Infantry, taken from the 202d Division, and the 439th Infantry
formed in the region of Vilna. With the 226th Division next to it, it
belonged to the reenforced 3d Reserve Corps (10th Army).


                                 1917.


COURLAND.

1. In January, 1917, the division was in line on the left bank of the Aa
(Courland). The 407th Infantry lost heavily in January and February.

2. The division then occupied the front east of Kalzeen (region of
Mitau) from April to September.

3. In October it was identified north of Lake Lobé. During the last
three months of 1917 many men were taken from this division for the
Western Front. In this manner it sent men to the 47th Reserve Division
in April, to the 14th Division at the end of October, and to the 75th
Reserve Division (before it left) in November.


                              RECRUITING.

The division from its origin was of a very mixed composition. This
diversity increased following the many drafts taken from it in 1917 and
the diversity of origin of the men sent in exchange.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

On the Russian front since its organization.

Fighting value mediocre.


                                 1918.


COURLAND.

1. In February the 205th Division was to the southeast of Riga.

2. In April it was in Livonia near Walk. About this time the commanding
general was decorated. Toward the beginning of June the division was
identified in the Narva region, where it remained until the end of the
war, with the exception of the 439th Regiment, which was transferred to
the 94th Division about the middle of September.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated third class.




                            206th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │2 Res.   │359.     │2 Res.   │359.     │2 Res.   │359.
              │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │
              │         │394.     │         │394.     │         │394.
              │         │4 Res.   │         │4 Res.   │         │4 Res.
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │2 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.│5 Sqn. 10 Drag.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │265 F. A. Rgt.     │206 Art. Command:  │206 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 265 F. A. Rgt.    │ 265 Field Art.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 1 Abt. 27 Foot
              │                   │                   │  Art. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (Btries. 2 to 4).
              │                   │                   │781, 1215, and 1230
              │                   │                   │  Light Mun. Cols.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(206) Pion. Btn.:  │206 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 6 Co. 30 Pions.   │ 2 Res. Co. Pion,
              │                   │                   │  Btn. No. 27.
              │                   │ 2 Ldw. Co. 18     │ 6 Co. 30 Pion.
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Btn.
              │                   │ 167 T. M. Co.     │204 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 206 Tel. Detch.   │206 Div. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command.
              │                   │                   │206 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │142 Div. Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │210 Ambulance Co.  │210 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │157 Field Hospital.│156 and 157 Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospitals.
              │                   │158 Field Hospital.│306 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │306 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │781 M. T. Col.     │616 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

      (359th Infantry: 3d District—Brandenberg. 394th Infantry: 9th
 District—Schleswig—Holstein. 4th Reserve Ersatz: 10th District—Hanover.)


                                 1916.

The 206th Division was organized in Belgium at the beginning of 1916. It
was composed of three infantry regiments—the 359th (9th, 10th, and 120th
Brigade Ersatz Battalions), the 394th, composed of men taken from the
17th Reserve Division, and the 4th Reserve Ersatz (36th, 37th, and 38th
Reserve Brigade Ersatz Battalions).


SOMME.

1. After holding for some time in September the sector of Dixmude
(359th), the division was sent to the Somme in October, where it was
engaged at four different times (region of Péronne, La Maisonnette, and
vicinity of Marchelepot) and suffered heavy losses.


ALSACE.

2. Relieved November 25 and entrained near St. Quentin for Alsace. Took
over the sector of Ban de Sapt until the beginning of January, 1917.


                                 1917.


LORRAINE.

1. Sent to rest in the region of Chateau Salins and went into line about
the middle of February, 1917, between the forest of Bezange and
Leintrey. Remained there until April 20.


CHEMIN DES DAMES.

2. Sent to the Laonnois, where it was stationed near Mont Cornet from
April 22 to 30, then at Laon from April 30 to May 4. Then went to the
Chemin des Dames (Laffaux, west of the Oise-Aisne Canal). Relieved June
10, after suffering very heavy losses.


LORRAINE.

3. After a month’s rest in Lorraine at Blamont-Sarrebourg, the division
was in reserve about the middle of July in the region of Romagne-
Montfaucon.


HILL 304.

4. At the end of July it took over the sector of Hill 304-Pommerieux,
where its losses were very heavy during the French attack of August 20
(1,074 prisoners). Relieved in haste two days after this attack and sent
to rest behind the Reims front until the middle of September, and
received about 1,000 replacements taken from the Russian front.


REIMS.

5. The division then held the Berru-Cernay sector, where it did not take
part in any important operations (middle of September to Nov. 24).


ST. QUENTIN.

6. About November 28 sent to the St. Quentin front (Pontruet sector).


                              RECRUITING.

“Regiments from Hanover, Schleswig-Holstein, and Brandenburg,” according
to a German communique which designated in this fashion the 4th Reserve
Ersatz, the 394th Infantry, and the 359th Infantry.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division attacked energetically May 24, 1917, at the Panthéon, and
June 6 at La Royere. Composed of men from the active army, the reserve
and the Ersatz. It is a good division. Its three regiments gave proof of
good fighting qualities during the many local attacks at the Chemin des
Dames.

It should, however, be noted that in front of Verdun the division did
not offer any resistance to the French attack of August 20, 1917. As
early as August 14 two regiments of this division had already had 100
deserters.

The sanitary conditions of this division were bad at this period (many
cases of dysentery).


                                 1918.

1. The 206th Division was withdrawn from line in the sector northwest of
St. Quentin early in February, and went to rest in the region of Fresnoy
le Grand. After a short stay here it moved to the Fourmies area, where
it received intensive training in open warfare.


PICARDY.

2. On March 16 the division began marching toward the front via
Wassigny-Fresnoy le Grand-Fonsommes-Fontaine Uterte. On the 20th it
rested in the Hindenburg Third Line. On the 22d it started out again via
Lesdins-Fayet, crossed the old front lines northwest of St. Quentin, and
spent the night in the former British lines in the Holnon wood. The
following day it marched to Martigny, where it spent the night in tents.
On the 24th it crossed the canal; the 4th Reserve Regiment encamped at
Voyennes; the 394th Regiment marched to Bethencourt and attacked along
the canal without suffering heavy losses. On the 26th, the 394th
proceeded by Damery and Andechy without being engaged; the 359th was
engaged at Guérbigny, and the 4th Ersatz reached the former German
trenches near Roye. During the night of the 27th–28th the division
entered Montdidier. The 28th, the 4th Ersatz was engaged at Mesnil-St.
Georges, leaving many prisoners in the hands of the French. On the 30th
the division attacked at Fontaine sous Montdidier. It was relieved
during the night of the 12th–13th of April by the 6th Bavarian Reserve
Division and went to rest in the region of Gruny, Sept-Fours and
Languevoisin. Here it was reconstituted.

3. During the night of the 14th–15th it relieved the 45th Reserve
Division near Assainvillers (southeast of Montdidier). It was relieved
by the 222d Division on May 9, and was sent to the Nesles, where it was
identified on the 26th. Three days later it received 700 replacements
from its depot. It was also trained during the period spent here. Toward
the end of May it came to the vicinity of Baboeuf (east of Noyon); eight
days later it was near Bussy; then on June 8 in the Boulogne area.


OISE.

4. On the 11th of June it came into line reenforcing the 19th Division
near Belloy (southeast of Montdidier). It was still in line at the time
of the attack of August 8, during the course of which it was forced back
with heavy losses as far as Boulogne le Grasse. It was withdrawn near
here on the 15th.

5. After a brief rest it came back into line on the 22d near Pontoise
(southeast of Noyon). It was withdrawn on the 30th.

6. On the 6th of September it came back into line near Fresnes (south of
Peronne). It was relieved by the 105th Division on the 20th.


CAMBRAI.

7. On the 3d of October it relieved the 3d Naval Division, north of
Rumilly (south of Cambrai). From the 8th until the division was
withdrawn (about the 11th) it was heavily engaged and severely punished,
losing some 1,200 prisoners; it was forced back to Carnières (east of
Cambrai).

8. The division rested and refitted for a fortnight and then reenforced
the front on November 1 near Villers-Pol (southeast of Valenciennes). It
continued in line but was made to fall back; prisoners were captured on
the 11th at Hyon (south of Mons).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 206th was rated a second-class division. The division commander was
decorated after the battle of the Somme. On the other hand, the brigade
commander issued an order (Oct. 6) to remedy straggling in the division.
On the whole, however, the division did well, though not brilliantly.




                            207th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │89 Res.  │413.     │89 Res.  │98 Res.  │89 Res.  │98 Res.
              │         │209 Res. │         │209 Res. │         │209 Res.
              │         │213 Res. │         │213 Res. │         │213 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │(?) Sqn. 7 Uhlan   │4 Sqn., 7th Uhlan
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │268 F. A. Rgt.     │(?) Art. Command:  │207 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 268 F. A. Rgt.    │ 75 Field Art. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 38 Ft. Art. Btn.
              │                   │                   │834, 1217, and 1330
              │                   │                   │  Light Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│236 Pion. Co.      │(207) Pion. Btn.:  │207 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 4 Co. 14 Pions.   │3 Ers. Co. Pion.
              │                   │                   │  Btn. No. 24.
              │                   │ 336 Pion. Co.     │168 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 169 T. M. Co.     │190 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 207 Tel. Detch.   │207 Div. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command.
              │                   │                   │207 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │98 Div. Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │211 Ambulance Co.  │211 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │240 (?) Ambulance  │159 and 160 Field
              │                   │  Co.              │  Hospitals.
              │                   │159  Field         │307 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │160  Field         │
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │307 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

        (98th Reserve: 16th District—Lorraine. 209th Reserve: 2d
  District—Pomerania. 213th Reserve: 9th District—Schleswig—Holstein.)


                                 1916.

1. The 207th Division was organized in Belgium toward the end of
September, 1916. The 45th Reserve Division furnished the 209th Reserve
and the 46th Reserve Division the 213th Reserve. Its third regiment, the
413th, which came from the 204th Division, was replaced by the 98th
Reserve (from the 212th Division) at the beginning of 1917.


FLANDERS.

2. Assembled in October on the Belgium coast (Zeebrugge-Blankenberg) and
went into line before Ypres toward the end of November (Zonnebeke-Ypres
road to the Ypres-Comines Canal).


                                 1917.

1. Held the Ypres front until the end of April, 1917.


ARTOIS.

2. At the beginning of May it fought in Artois (Bullecourt, south of
Pronville).


MESSINES.

3. Relieved about June 3 and went back into line in the region of Ypres,
east of Messines, June 12 to July 6. Did not have heavy losses in spite
of serious fighting.

4. In July sent to rest in the vicinity of Roubaix.


YPRES.

5. Beginning on the night of August 1–2, it was again engaged east of
Ypres in the vicinity of Hollebeke and Zandvoorde, and counterattacked
to recapture Hollebeke. Remained in this sector until October 8.


LENS.

6. On October 20 took over the sector north of Lens, where it alternated
with the 220th Division.


                              RECRUITING.

A composite division. The 98th Reserve got replacements principally from
Westphalia; the 209th Reserve from Pomerania; the 213th Reserve from
Schleswig-Holstein.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

This division has only a moderate fighting value.


                                 1918.


LENS.

1. The division continued to hold the quiet Loos sector until April 13,
when it was relieved by the 220th Division.


LA BASSEE CANAL.

2. It was engaged north of the La Basse Canal on the night of April
13–14. The 98th Reserve Regiment attacked on the 18th on the canal.
After the attack the three regiments held the line to the south of the
canal until the end of April.

3. The division rested in early May. On the 18th it was engaged south of
the La Basse Canal, near Hulluch and Anchy les La Basse. It held this
sector without event until it was relieved on the night of July 1–2 by
the 10th Erzsatz Division. The regiment marched to Wahagnies, entrained
at Libercourt on the 3d and detrained near Bac St. Maur on the same day.


VIEUX BERQUIN-CAMBRAI.

4. It relieved the 44th Reserve Division during the nights of July 3–4
and 4–5 near Vieux Berquin. After a month it exchanged sectors (between
Aug. 6 and 8) with the 52d Division which had been holding a sector
south of Lens. The sector continued quiet in August and September. The
division was relieved on the night of the 24th–25th by the 111th
Division and reenforced the front northwest of Cambrai on September 28.
After three days of severe fighting and heavy losses it was obliged to
withdraw.


BELGIUM.

5. The division was taken to Deynze about October 8 and came into line
on the 14th near Thielt between Pittem and Iseghem. It was pushed back
toward Denterghem (18th–19th) and later toward the line Courtrai-Ghent
(Deynze, Tulte, Waereghem, Oct. 21 to Nov. 1). The division withdrew to
reserve on November 1 and thereafter was out of line.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. Its morale was reported to be
indifferent at the end of October.




                            208th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │185.     │25.      │185.     │25.      │185.     │25.
              │         │185.     │         │185.     │         │185.
              │         │65 Res.  │         │65 Res.  │         │65 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1 Sqn. 6 Res.      │1 Sqn. 6 Res.
              │                   │  Dragoon Rgt.     │  Dragoon Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │267 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │267 Field Art. Rgt.
              │                   │ 267 F. A. Rgt.    │157 Foot Art. Btn.
              │                   │                   │819, 1284, and 1357
              │                   │                   │  Light Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(208) Pion. Btn.:  │208 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 252 Pion. Co.     │252 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 338 Pion. Co.     │338 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 16 T. M. Co.      │16 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 291 Searchlight   │28 Searchlight
              │                   │  Section.         │  Section.
              │                   │ 208 Tel. Detch.   │208 Div. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command.
              │                   │                   │208 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │80 Div. Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │113 Ambulance Co.  │113 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │78 Field Hospital. │78 and 300 Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospitals.
              │                   │300 Field Hospital.│308 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │308 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │618 M. T. Col.     │618 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (25th: 8th District—Rhine Province. 185th: 14th District—Grand Duchy of
            Baden. 65th Reserve: 8th District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1916.

The 208th Division was organized in the region of Sissonne at the
beginning of September, 1916. Its three infantry regiments came from
older divisions—the 25th from the 15th Division, the 185th from the
185th Division, the 65th Reserve from the 16th Reserve Division.

Before being transferred to the 208th Division these regiments were
engaged in the battle of the Somme, where the 18th Infantry especially
was particularly tried (July 5–18).


GALICIA.

1. On September 3 the division was sent to the Eastern Front, via
Luxemburg-Aix la Chapelle-Berlin-Leipzig-Cracow-Lemberg.

2. Fought at Brzezany and Halicz from the middle of September to the end
of October.


FRANCE.

3. About the beginning of November it returned to the Western Front, via
Lemberg-Budapest-Vienna-Salzburg-Rosenheim-Munich-Frankfurt-Cologne-Aix
la Chapelle-Liege. Detrained November 13 at Caudry.


SOMME-ANCRE.

4. On November 18 it went into line north of the Ancre, where it was
seriously engaged in a series of local attacks.

5. Relieved December 12 and went to rest northeast of Ghent.


                                 1917.


FLANDERS.

1. At the beginning of February, 1917 the division took over the sector
Ypres-Comines Canal, which it held until February 25.

2. After a month’s rest in the region north of Ghent it returned to the
front (sector Bixschoote-Langemarck) from March 28–29 to middle of
April.


ARTOIS.

3. April 24 the division was engaged before Arras between Gavrelle and
Roeux and was severely tried during the British offensive.


HINDENBURG LINE (OISE).

4. Withdrawn from the Artois front May 8 and went into line in a quiet
sector south of St. Quentin, between Berthenicourt and Moy, where it
remained for more than three months, May 14–15 to August 18. Received
about 1,000 replacements, among others from the 616th Infantry
dissolved, in May.


FLANDERS.

5. About August 23 went to Flanders, via Origny-Le Cateau-Mons-Ghent-
Deynze-Lichtervelde. September 4–5 it went into the sector of
Langemarck. Though already sorely tried by artillery fire, it was
subjected to the British attack of September 20, which again caused it
very heavy losses. The 1st and 3d Companys of the 185th Infantry were
entirely destroyed or captured; the rest of the 1st Battalion was
reduced to a handful of men (letter).


ST. MIHIEL.

6. Left the Flanders front September 29 and went to Lorraine where it
took over the St. Mihiel sector.


CAMBRAI-ST. QUENTIN.

7. November 26 it entrained for the region of Cambrai where the 25th
Infantry fought on the 30th in support of the 34th Division. The
division then held the sector southwest of Villers Guislain-north of
Epehy until the beginning of February, 1918. Relieved at that time, and
at the beginning of March took over the sector west of Bellenglise,
northwest of St. Quentin.


                              RECRUITING.

The 185th Regiment is a Baden regiment (German communiqué of Nov. 26,
1916). The other two regiments are from the Rhineland, and thus the
division may at times be designated under the general appellation of
“Rhenish troops.”


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division took part in many battles on different fronts and generally
did well.

When it was put in line at Ypres in September, 1917, 25 per cent of its
fighting forces belonged to the 1918 class, and these young elements
seem at this time to have weakened the fighting spirit of the division.
(Information from the British, October, 1917).


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was in the Bellenglise line sector when the attack of
March 21 began. By the evening of the 21st it had advanced as far as le
Vergnier. The next day it advanced via Bernes and Catigny and entered
Peronne on the following day, remaining there until the 25th, when it
crossed the Somme near Biaches. On the 26th the division advanced 4
kilometers encountering slight opposition, and on the 27th advanced 12
kilometers without opposition. It reached Framerville on the 28th after
some fighting and on the 29th was engaged against a British
counterattack between Cayeux and Beaucourt. A day or so later it was
retired from the front near Marcelcave. The casualties of the division
in the offensive were estimated by the British as 70 per cent.


HANGARD.

2. It rested near Clery, in the vicinity of Peronne, from April 1 to 18.
It came into line north of Hangard (night of Apr. 21–22) and was heavily
engaged until May 4. Again the division suffered very heavy losses.


WOEVRE.

3. The division went to rest in the Valenciennes area on May 7. About
June 4 it entrained and traveled via Mons-Namur-Charleville-Conflans to
Chambley, where it detrained a day later. On the night of June 4–5 it
entered line of the quiet St. Mihiel sector and stayed there until the
end of July.


SECOND BATTLE OF PICARDY.

4. Relieved on July 28, at St. Mihiel, the division was transported to
the Noyon area, and on August 12 was engaged near Belval (south of
Lassigny). In the next two months the division was constantly being
pressed back. The line of its retreat was through Beaurains-Genvry-
Guiscard-Berlancourt-Ville Selves-Crigny-Flavy le Martel-Benay-Cerisy
(south of St. Quentin). It was relieved by the 1st Reserve Division on
September 30.

5. After hardly a week’s rest, the division reentered lines near Cambrai
(southwest of Merguies, later Haussy) about October 8. It held in that
sector until the 23d. Few days later it was reengaged between
Valenciennes and Le Quesnoy (Ruesnes), but after a few days in line
retired from the front.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It took a prominent part in the
March offensive and thereafter was a strong defensive division. Although
its effectives were greatly diminished in the fall, its morale remained
above the average.




                            211th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[33]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │27.      │211.     │27.      │211.     │27.
              │         │75 Res.  │         │75 Res.  │         │75 Res.
              │         │103 Res. │         │390.     │         │390.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.│1 Sqn. 2 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │269 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │(?) Art. Command:
              │                   │ 269 F. A. Rgt.    │ 269 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(211) Pion. Btn.:  │1 Res. Co. 2 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Btn. No. 27.
              │                   │ 1 Res. Co. 27     │421 T. M. Co.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 268 Pion. Co.     │211 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 421 T. M. Co.     │
              │                   │ 211 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │222 Ambulance Co.  │222 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │170 Field Hospital.│170 Field Hospital.
              │                   │173 Field Hospital.│171 Field Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │173 Field Hospital.
              │                   │                   │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transports.  │                   │M. T. Col.         │M. T.Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 33:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, August, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

         (27th; 4th District—Prussian Saxony. 75th Reserve; 9th
        District—Schleswig—Holstein and Hansa towns. 390th; 18th
                        District—Hesse—Nassau.)


                                 1916.

The 211th Division was organized September 15, 1916, at Tournai.

The 27th Infantry came from the 27th Division (4th Army Corps), the 75th
Reserve from the 17th Reserve Division (9th Army Corps), the 103d
Reserve (which was replaced by the 390th in January, 1917) came from the
23d Reserve Division (Saxon). These three regiments fought in July to
August, 1916, in the battle of the Somme before being assigned to the
211th Division.

1. About September 20, its organization being completed, the division
was sent north of the front of the Somme, to put up defensive works in
the region of Nurlu-Manancourt.


SOMME.

2. October 14 it went into line at the St. Pierre-Vaast wood, from where
it was relieved November 6.


SOISSONS.

3. It then took over the sector north and west of Soissons (Nov. 20).


                                 1917.

1. In January, 1917, the 103d Reserve was transferred to the 58th
Division (Saxon) and replaced by the 390th, recruited in the Rhineland
and Hessa, coming from the 16th Reserve Division, which had been formed
from drafted companies as well as from elements of the 21st and 25th
Divisions and 25th Landwehr Brigade.


AISNE.

2. The division, thus composed, held the Soissons sector until about
March 20. On this date it retired through Terny, Margival, to
Vauxaillon, where it established its lines and opposed the French attack
of April 16.


LAFFAUX.

3. Temporarily withdrawn from the front on April 20, the division went
to the north of Laffaux, south of Vauxaillon, from May 10 to 25. During
these two periods on the Aisne front the division suffered heavy losses
(especially the 27th, which had already received men from the 1918
class, among other reenforcements, at the end of April). It was
reorganized partly from the dissolution of the 625th Infantry (Hessian).


FOREST OF ST. GOBAIN.

4. June 25 the division held the forest of St. Gobain (sector of
Bassoles-Aulers). At the end of July it took over the sector of Cerny-
Malval Farm.

5. At the end of December it went to rest and train at Gizy (west of
Liesse) and vicinity for four weeks.


                              RECRUITING.

The three infantry regiments came from three different Prussian
Provinces-Prussian Saxony (27th Infantry), Schleswig-Holstein and Hanse
towns (75th Reserve), Hesse-Nassau, 390th Infantry. The reenforcements
from the Russian front in 1917 also gave a certain number of Hanoverians
from the 411th Infantry.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division had many losses on the Aisne in April to May, 1917, and was
completed by reenforcements containing a strong proportion of the 1918
class. These young soldiers, according to prisoners’ statements, showed
only mediocre military qualities (counterattacks at Laffaux).

During the four weeks which it spent in the vicinity of Liesse the
division took part in several training exercises (breaking through
maneuvers on an 8-kilometer front with simulated enemy tanks).
(Interrogation of prisoners, Mar. 7, 1918.)


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division was relieved the 8th of March in the Chamouille area and
went to rest and train near Laon until the 19th. It marched toward the
jumping off point east of La Fere by Crepy en Laonnois, arriving there
on the 20th. It followed up the attack at La Fere, crossing the Oise
near Travecy, until the 22d, when it was engaged west of Travecy. It
advanced through Farguiers-Quessy-Liez-Chauny-Quierzy-Varesnes,
suffering heavy losses, until the line stabilized near the Aisne Canal
at Manicamp and Champs. It held this sector until May 27.


OISE.

2. When the French retired on the front, following the German advance to
the Marne, the division advanced as far as Moulin sous Touvent-Nampcel
(May 27–31). It held that sector until the beginning of July. It
withstood a French attack on July 3, lost 666 prisoners, and was at once
relieved by the 15th Division.


SOISSONS.

3. The division rested until mid-July southeast of Soissons. It was
brought back on the 20th at Mercin-Vauxbuin to oppose the Allied
counterthrust and was in line until August 3.

4. After its withdrawal the division was taken to the neighborhood of
Charleville and dissolved. The 390th Regiment and 75th Reserve Regiment
were broken up and sent as drafts to the 42d Division and the 87th
Division. The 27th Regiment replaced the dissolved 32d Reserve Regiment
in the 113th Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was in line almost without
interruption from February to August, 1918. When the effective strength
had reached a minimum the division was dissolved.




                            212th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │57.      │20.      │212.     │415.     │         │182.
              │         │114.     │         │416.     │         │
              │         │98 Res.  │         │182.     │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │2 Sqn. 18 Uhlan    │5 Sqn. 18 Hussars.
              │                   │  Rgt.             │
              │                   │                   │Staff, 2 Bav. Uhlan
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │1 to 4 Sqns. 2 Bav.
              │                   │                   │  Uhlan Rgt.
              │                   │                   │M. G. Sqn. 2 Bav.
              │                   │                   │  Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │279 F. A. Rgt.     │67 Art. Command:   │67 Artillery
              │  (Saxon).         │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 279 F. A. Rgt.    │ 279 Field Art.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Ldw. Pion. Co.   │(212) Pion. Btn.:  │212 Div. Signal
   Liaisons.  │  (14 C. Dist.).   │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 3 Res. Co. 22     │ 212 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 422 T. M. Co.     │
              │                   │ 212 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │225 Ambulance Co.  │177 Field Hospital.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │177 Field Hospital.│312 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │757 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (12th and 19th Districts—Saxony.)


                                 1916.

The 212th Division was organized between the 5th and 15th of September,
1916, in the region of St. Quentin. At that time it comprised the
following three infantry regiments, taken from already existing
divisions: The 20th from the 6th Division, the 114th from the 29th
Division, and the 98th Reserve from the 10th Reserve Division. Later its
infantry composition was completely changed until the division from
being Prussian became entirely Saxon.


SOMME.

1. From September 15 to October 3–5 the division was engaged north of
the Somme (sector of Cléry to Béthune-Péronne road).

2. Withdrawn from the front October 5 and sent to rest in the region of
St. Quentin. Went back into line about the 25th, south of the Somme,
between Genermont and Ablaincourt. Suffered heavy losses (the 3d
Battalion of the 98th Reserves lost 297 prisoners).


CHAMPAGNE.

3. The division left the Somme November 23–25 and went to rest (end of
November to beginning of December). Then went to the Champagne front
(sector of Prosnes—south of Ste. Marie a Py).


                                 1917.

1. In January, 1917, the division was reorganized. The 98th Reserve and
the 20th went to the 207th Division and the 5th Guard Division,
respectively, and were replaced by the 9th Jäger Regiment (from the
199th Division) and the 415th (from the 204th Division). These were
Saxon regiments and they were joined a short time after by the 416th
(also from the 204th Division and Saxon), in place of the 114th,
assigned to the 199th Division.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Thus composed the division continued to hold the Prosnes sector until
the end of March, 1917.


ROUMANIA.

3. Relieved about March 25, before the attacks began and sent to
Roumania.

At this time the 9th Regiment of Jägers left the division and went to
the 101st Division, in Macedonia. The 415th and 416th were sent to the
Russian-Roumanian front (region of Braila in July, then Focsani-
Tecuciu). The division was brought up to three regiments by the
assignment of the 182d (from the 216th Division), a Saxon regiment. The
division suffered heavy losses, especially the 182d Infantry, on
September 9.

4. In December the division was relieved from the sector west of
Tecuciu. The 415th and 416th were identified southeast of Panciu
December 14; the 182d, northwest of Namoloasa, on the 20th.


                              RECRUITING.

The division at the end of 1917 was entirely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Remained on the Roumanian front during a part of 1917 and the beginning
of 1918. Moderate fighting value.


                                 1918.

1. The division was still in Rumania on the 15th of April.


UKRAINE.

2. Toward the end of May the division was identified north of Kherson.
All the younger men were sent to the Western Front, but the remainder of
the division did not leave this region.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                            213th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │37 Res.  │149.     │37 Res.  │149.     │37 Res.  │149.
              │         │368.     │         │368.     │         │368.
              │         │74 Res.  │         │74 Res.  │         │74 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 5 Res. Hus. │2 Sqn. 5 Res. Hus. │2 Sqn. 5 Res. Hus.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │272 F. A. Rgt.     │213 Art. Command:  │213 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 272 F. A. Rgt.    │ 272 Field Art.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 79 Foot Art. Btn.
              │                   │                   │733, 1104, and 1127
              │                   │                   │  Light Mun. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│284 Pion. Co.      │(213) Pion. Btn.:  │213 Pion Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │423 T. M. Co.      │ 2 Res. Co. 28     │ 2 Res. Co. Pion.
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Btn. No. 18.
              │                   │ 284 Pion Co.      │ 284 Pion Co.
              │                   │ 378 T. M. Co.     │ 423 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 423 T. M. Co.     │ 118 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │ 234 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │313 Div. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command.
              │                   │                   │ 213 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 26 Div. Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │220 Ambulance Co.  │220 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │68 (*) Field       │168 and 169 Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospitals.
              │                   │168  Field         │313 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │169  Field         │
              │                   │  Hospital.        │
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │179 M. T. Col.     │623 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

      (149th: 2d District—Pomerania. 368th and 74th Reserves: 10th
                           District—Hanover.)


                                 1916.

The 213th Division was formed near Spincourt, northeast of Verdun, at
the beginning of September, 1916. Its three infantry regiments came from
already existing divisions, the 149th from the 4th Division, the 74th
Reserves from the 19th Reserve Division, and the 368th (former Brigade
Ersatz Battalions 37 (Osnabrueck), 38 (Hanover), 39 (Hildesheim), from
the 10th Ersatz Division.)


SOMME.

1. Although apparently destined for the Roumanian front, the division
was sent in all haste to the Somme on September 14. It fought beginning
the 18th east of Combles and suffered heavily.


AISNE.

2. Withdrawn from the front at the end of September and moved to Bohain
by stages and from there was transported on October 1 to Coucy le
Chateau. On the same day it took over the Nouvron-Vingre sector north of
Vic sur Aisne. It remained there until the end of October, and after a
short rest went back into line in the same region (Moulin sous Touvent-
Autreches) at the beginning of November.


                                 1917.

1. About January 4, 1917, the division was relieved from the Aisne front
and sent for a rest and training to the camp at Sissonne (region of
Lappion). Maneuvers with a view to open warfare.


OISE.

2. After three weeks training it entrained at St. Erme on January 22;
detrained the same day at Apilly, near Chauny, and went into line
between the Oise and Quennevieres (Bailly-Pracy le Val).

3. On March 17 it retired north of the Ailette in the direction of
Chauny and went in reserve in the region of Laon.


AISNE.

4. An emergency call was sent for it at Sissonne April 16 and it was
brought to St. Erme and engaged beginning April 16–17 east of Craonne
(north of Ville aux Bois). Counterattacked violently in the region of
Juvincourt, but suffered considerable losses, which necessitated its
retreat, on April 21–22.

5. Sent to rest near Amifontaine and reorganized (replacements
especially from the 617th Regiment (Stettin and vicinity), which was
dissolved) April 26 it was reengaged south of Corbeny and again suffered
heavily from the French attack of May 8 and from its counteroffensive of
the 10th.

6. Left the Craonne front May 29 and went to rest by the Meuse
(Spincourt).


HILL 304.

7. At the end of July, after two months’ rest, went into line east of
Hill 304. Only the 149th was engaged during the French attack of August
20, and it suffered heavy losses.


CHAMPAGNE.

8. Relieved August 25 and sent to Champagne (5 weeks’ rest near Asfeld),
then went into line before Brimont on October 5.


                              RECRUITING.

Two of the regiments, the 74th Reserves and the 368th were from Hanover.
The 149th which as a rule was recruited in the second district
(Pomerania), was as a matter of fact very mixed, like the other
regiments of this district.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

A good division. However, the 149th, in line east of Hill 304, offered
no resistance to the French attack of August 20, 1917. The two other
regiments gave no assistance.

Relatively small proportion of 1918 class men in August, 1917.

During its stay in the rear (January, 1918) the division was trained for
open warfare. (Examination of prisoners, March, 1918.)


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

1. The division continued to hold the quiet Brimont Courcy sector until
May 10, when it was relieved by the 242d Division. It rested near Asfeld
until the 24th, when it returned to the Brimont sector on the night of
the 24th–25th, and attacked on the 27th. It advanced through Loivre,
Merfy, and Guex until the line stabilized west of Reims (Vrigny-Ormes-
Champigny). It held that sector until September 27.

2. It was moved in motor trucks on the 27th to south of Arnes, and the
next day was engaged near Ste. Marie a Py. The division was engaged
without pause until the armistice. In the first week of October it was
pushed back to Ste. Etienne a Arnes, losing 560 prisoners. From then it
retreated to east of Machault, between Vouziers and Attigny and later to
the region northeast of Attigny (Le Chesne-Louvergny). It was last
identified at Louvergny on November 6.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its morale remained fairly high,
and the division did well in the Ardennes in September-October.




                            214th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │50.      │214.     │50.      │214.     │50.
              │         │358.     │         │358.     │         │358.
              │         │363.     │         │363.     │         │363.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │        (z)        │1 Sqn. 16 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │(z) Art. Command:  │214 Art. Command.
              │                   │ 44 F. A. Rgt.     │44 Field Art. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │1 Abt. 15 Foot Art.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt. (Btries. 1
              │                   │                   │  to 3).
              │                   │                   │922, 1246, and 1300
              │                   │                   │  Light Mun. Cols.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(214) Pion. Btn.:  │214 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Res. Co. 23     │2 Res. Co. Pion.
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Btn. No. 23.
              │                   │ 341 Pion. Co.     │341 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 424 T. M. Co.     │47 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 214 Tel. Detch.   │214 Div. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command.
              │                   │                   │214 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │112 Div. Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │224 Ambulance Co.  │224 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │25 Field Hospital. │25 and 274 Field
              │                   │                   │  Hospitals.
              │                   │274 Field Hospital.│314 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │624 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │22, 59, and 20 M.
              │                   │                   │  G. Sec. Abt.
              │                   │                   │4 Btry. 18 Foot
              │                   │                   │  Art. Regt.
              │                   │                   │150 Saxon Balloon
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │268 Aviation Detch.
              │                   │                   │ (Oct. 29, 1918.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (50th: 5th District—Posen. 358th: 2d District—Pomerania. 363d: 8th
                       District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1916.

The 214th Division was formed in Lorraine in September, 1916. Two of its
regiments came from the Ersatz Divisions—the 358th, former Brigade
Ersatz Battalions Nos. 1, 2, 5, and 50; from the Ersatz Guard Division;
the 363d, former Brigade Ersatz Battalions Nos. 29 (Aix la Chapelle), 30
(Coblentz), and 31 (Trèves), from the 8th Ersatz Division. These two
regiments were for two years in the Haye. The 50th Infantry was taken
from the 10th Division (Verdun front).


SOMME.

1. Started for the Eastern Front September 10, 1916, but was stopped at
Frankfort on Main and brought back to France to oppose the offensive on
the Somme. Hastily engaged at Rancourt September 19–20, but lost that
village. Lost heavily (600 prisoners) and was relieved October 2.


BOIS LE PRÊTRE.

2. From October 15 to November 25 the division held the Bois le Pretre
sector.


SOMME.

3. At the beginning of December it again went to the Somme in the region
of Bapaume (Gueudecourt).


                                 1917.

1. The division was withdrawn from the Somme about February 6, 1917, and
went to rest; obtained replacements from the 609th Infantry (Rhineland).


CHAMPAGNE.

2. About February 20 the division was north of Nouroy-Moronvilliers. Its
regiments were successively put in line beginning with the first part of
March, then were placed all together in line April 15. April 17 and 18
the division opposed the French attacks on the Nauroy-Auberive front.
Its losses were considerable (19 officers and 1046 unwounded prisoners).
Losses of the 12th Company of the 50th Infantry, 129 men (document).

3. On the night of the 18th–19th the division was relieved and sent to
rest southwest of Monthois and reorganized. The 5th Company of the 363d
Infantry received at least 134 replacements, mostly from the 1918 class,
some of them with only three months’ training.


ARGONNE.

4. About May 4–5 the division went back into line south of Rouvroy
(Cernay en Dormois) and stayed there until July 22 or 23. No important
action during this period.


FLANDERS.

5. During the first days of August the division was sent to Flanders via
Charleville, Namur, Brussels, and Ghent. It went to the Bixschoote-
Langemarck sector, where it fought until August 17 (battle of Flanders,
French attack of August 16).


CAMBRAI.

6. After a rest on the coast it went to Douai August 23 and took over
the Oppy-Gavrelle sector (September to November). November 22 it went in
all haste to oppose the advance of the British army southwest of
Cambrai, and fought until December 4. At that date it was sent to rest
near Valenciennes.


                              RECRUITING.

A composite division. The 50th (5th District) and the 358th (2d
District) had a pretty large proportion of Poles, and some
Brandenburgers to counterbalance them. The 363d was a Rhenish regiment,
as well as the field artillery of the division.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 214th Division must be considered as a good division. However, it
should be noted that in Champagne during the attack of April 17, it was
more or less demoralized by the losses suffered. A large number of men
are said to have fled during the preparatory artillery fire.

At Ypres in August, 1917, the 358th and 363d opposed great resistance,
particularly where there were enough officers to hold the men under the
artillery fire.

Of the three regiments of the division, the 50th was the worst; many
Poles.


                                 1918.


BELGIUM.

1. The division held the Dixmude sector until April 5, when it was
relieved by the 6th Bavarian Division. It was withdrawn to Couckelaere
and Ichteghem, when it entrained on the 6th and 7th and traveled via
Thourout-Lichtervelde-Roulers-Coutrai to Lauwe, from where they marched
to Halluin.


LYS.

2. It was engaged north of Armentieres from April 10 to 13 (Ploegsteert-
Neuve Eglise). It was relieved on the 13th–14th and went to rest near
Lille until May 19. On May 6 some elements of the division reenforced
the Alpine Corps at Locre for a short time.


ARRAS.

3. On May 19–20 the division came in line east of Arras (Feuchy-Monchy
le Preux) and held that quiet sector until the British attacked them on
August 27. The division lost 1,171 prisoners and was relieved on the
28th.


PICARDY.

4. The division rested until September 24, when it entered line
southwest of Douai (Sailly Ostrevent Biache, St. Vaast) and held there
until October 8. It retreated between Douai and Valenciennes as far as
east of St. Awand. It withdrew from line near Conde on the 24th. A day
later it was reengaged south of Valenciennes (Famars) and in line until
November 5. On the first 10 days of November the division lost 750
prisoners.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. In 1918 it played a rather
colorless rôle. Its hardest fighting was in October in the Cambrai
battle.




                            215th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │61 Res.  │60 Res.  │61 Res.  │71 Ldw.  │61 Res.  │224 Res.
              │         │2 Res.   │         │224 Res. │         │2 Res.
              │         │  Ers.   │         │         │         │  Ers.
              │         │40 Ers.  │         │2 Res.   │         │
              │         │  (Saxon).│         │  Ers.   │         │
              │61 Res.  │71 Ldw.  │         │         │         │
              │         │2 Res.   │         │         │         │
              │         │  Ers.   │         │         │         │
              │         │40 Ers.  │         │         │         │
              │         │  (Saxon).│         │         │         │
              │         │244 Res. │         │         │         │
              │         │  (Saxon).│         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┬┴─────────┴────────┬┴─────────┴────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 8 Res. Hus. │3 Sqn. 8 Res. Hus. │
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │274 F. A. Rgt.     │274 F. A. Rgt.     │274 Field Art. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │1413 Light Mun.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(215) Pion. Btn.:  │6 Co. Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  No. 29.
              │                   │ 249 Pion. Co.     │115 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │ 6 Co. 29 Pions.   │215 Div. Signal
              │                   │                   │  Command.
              │                   │ 425 T. M. Co.     │215 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │221 Ambulance Co.  │221 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │166 Field Hospital.│315 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │174 Field Hospital.│
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │625 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │21 Res. Jag. Btn.  │
              │                   │  (Until fall of   │
              │                   │  1917.)           │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (224th Reserve Infantry Regiment: 18th Corps District—Hesse—Nassau. 2d
         Reserve Ersatz and 71st Landwehr Regiments: 11th Corps
                District—Thuringia and Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1916.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. The 215th Division, formed about September, 1916, and comprising at
this time the 40th Ersatz Regiment, taken from the 19th Ersatz Division;
the 2d Reserve Ersatz, from the 1st Reserve Ersatz Brigade; the 60th
Reserve, from the 13th Landwehr Division, was identified for the first
time on September 29, 1916, on the Champagne front, east of Auberive. It
occupied the sector of Prosnes, south of Ste. Marie a Py, until the end
of November.

2. Relieved in Champagne, the 215th Division was transferred to the
Eastern Front, leaving the 60th Reserve Regiment in France as a part of
the 221st Division and taking with it the 71st Landwehr Regiment from
the 13th Landwehr Division.


RUSSIA.

3. Arriving in Russia at the beginning of December, the 215th Division
formed a part of the 22d Reserve Corps (Army of the Bug) and was
reenforced by the addition of the 244th Reserve Infantry Regiment from
the 53d Reserve Division.


                                 1917.


VOLHYNIA.

1. At the beginning of 1917 the composition of the 215th Division was
again changed—the 244th Reserve Infantry Regiment went over to the 119th
Division and was replaced by the 224th Reserve Infantry Regiment from
the 48th Reserve Division.

2. During the year 1917 the 215th Division occupied, in Volhynia, the
sector situated east of Gorokhov (northwest of Berestiecko).

3. Its composition was once more modified—the 40th Ersatz Regiment was
transferred to a newly formed Saxon division, the 96th.


                              RECRUITING.

The 215th Division was fairly homogeneous. It was mostly recruited from
the 11th and to some extent from the 18th Corps Districts (Thuringia,
the Electorate of Hesse, and Hesse-Nassau).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division had been in Russia since December, 1916, and was only
mediocre.


                                 1918.


UKRAINE.

1. Early in the year the division was still in Russia. It was identified
near Kiev on the 12th of March and in the Kharkov region in April. Early
in May the division had advanced to the Sea of Azov. Early in September,
all unmarried men less than 35 years of age (Alsace-Lorrainers included)
were sent to the Western Front, which probably explains the many reports
of the division having been sent to France. In all probability the
division never left the Ukraine.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                            216th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │182.     │177.     │42.      │(?)      │42.
              │         │354.     │         │354.     │         │354.
              │         │21 Res.  │         │59.      │         │59.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │                   │205 Cav. Sqn.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │54 F. A. Rgt.      │54 F. A. Rgt.      │216 Art. Command:
              │                   │                   │ 54 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 3 Abt. 10 Ft. A.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt. (Staff, and
              │                   │                   │  9 and 11 Btries.)
              │                   │                   │ 762 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Gd. Ldw. Pions.  │(216) Pion. Btn.:  │217 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Ldw. Co. Gd.    │ 247 Pion. Co.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 216 Tel. Detch.   │ 2 Ldw. Co. Gd. C.
              │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │                   │ 78 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │216 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 216 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 167 Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │260 Ambulance Co.  │260 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │53 Field Hospital. │324 Field Hospital.
              │                   │324 Field Hospital.│332 Field Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │257 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (42d Infantry Regiment; 2d Corps District—Pomerania. 59th Infantry
   Regiment; 20th Corps District—Eastern part of West Prussia. 354th
            Infantry Regiment; 6th Corps District—Silesia.)


                                 1916.

The 216th Division was formed in Galicia in July, 1916, by drafts upon
regiments of other divisions. At the time of formation it comprised the
182d Infantry Regiment, from the 123d Division (Saxon), the 354th
Infantry Regiment from the 38th Division and the 21st Reserve Infantry
Regiment from the 217th Division.


GALICIA-TRANSYLVANIA.

1. In Galicia (Brzezany) beginning of October, the 216th Division was
transferred to the Transylvanian front (valley of the Olt) on November
8.


ROUMANIA.

2. It took part in the Roumanian campaign.

3. At the end of December it was south of Rimnicu-Sarat.


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA.

1. In January, 1917, the 216th Division was in line east of Focsani,
where it remained until August.

2. It took part in the attacks north of Focsani in August, where the
182d Infantry Regiment lost especially heavily.

3. At this time the 42d and 59th Infantry Regiments, filled up in June
by men borrowed from the 76th Reserve Division, then in the rear of the
Roumanian front replaced the 182d Infantry Regiment, transferred to the
212th Division and the 21st Infantry Regiment, sent to the Macedonian
front.

4. With this composition the 216th Division occupied the line north of
the mouth of the Buzeu. It was still there at the end of December. The
354th Infantry Regiment was identified on December 28 by fraternizing.


                              RECRUITING.

The 42d Infantry Regiment, Pomeranian, and the 59th Infantry Regiment,
from Posen, also contained contingents from the 2d, 5th and 20th Corps
Districts, and since 1915 have contained a large number of Alsace-
Lorrainers. The 354 Infantry Regiment, formed from mobile depot
battalions of the former Breslau Garrison, replaced its 3d Battalion
(Saxon) by Prussians, and consisted almost entirely of drafts from
Silesia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 216th Division fought and held sectors almost entirely on the
Roumanian front.


                                 1918.

1. On the 1st of April the division started for the Western Front. It
traveled via Bucharest-Budapest-Prague-Dresden-Leipsig-Erfurt-Frankfort-
Thionville-Luxemburg-Namur-Mons-Valenciennes, and detrained at Orchies
and Somain from April 12 to 20.


KEMME.

2. It entered line at Kemme on May 9 and with the exception of the first
week in June held that sector until June 18.

3. The division rested and underwent training north of Courtrai
(Oostroosebeke-Marialoop) until July 23. It was then railed to Laon and
marched toward the front south of Fismes through Urcel, Brenelle,
Bozoches, Mont St. Martin. It was in reserve northeast of Cierges on
July 28–29.


VESLE-AISNE.

4. It was engaged near Cierges and west of the Bois Meuniere on July 29
and 30. The next day it returned north of Cierges and later to the Vesle
east of Fismes (Magneux). The division lost heavily in their retreat. It
held the sector on the Vesle until September 5, when it fell back
through Merval toward the line of the Aisne. It held on the line west of
Revillon, south of Villers en Prayeres until October 10. Again it gave
way before the Allied pressure and retired through Bouconville, north of
Aubigny (11th–12th), Montaigu (13th) toward Liesse-Sissonne. In this
area the division was withdrawn from line on October 23.


CHAMPAGNE.

5. Without having had an opportunity to rest, the division was returned
to line northwest of Chateau Porcien on October 25 and fought until
November 5.

6. At the time of the armistice the division was considered in reserve
of 5th Army.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its conduct during the retreat to
the Vesle was good. The three months of constant service in line greatly
fatigued the troops and lowered the morale of the division.




                            217th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │45.      │18 Ldw.  │9 Res.   │18 Ldw.  │9 Res.
              │         │9 Res.   │         │22 Ldw.  │         │22 Ldw.
              │         │22 Ldw.  │         │29 Bav.  │         │21 Res.
              │  Nov. to Jan. 1   │         │         │         │
              │         │9 Res.   │         │         │         │
              │         │22 Ldw.  │         │         │         │
              │         │21 Res.  │         │         │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │47 Res. Cav. Detch.│47 Res. Cav. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │65 Res. F. A. Rgt. │274 F. A. Rgt. (2d
              │                   │                   │  Abt.).
              │                   │                   │65 Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (except 3d Btry.
              │                   │                   │  and 2 Abt. Staff
              │                   │                   │  and 4 and 6
              │                   │                   │  Btries.).
              │                   │                   │1049, 1056, and
              │                   │                   │  1073 Light. Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Res. Co. 17      │(217) Pion. Btn.:  │2 Res. Co. 17
   Liaisons.  │  Pions.           │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │ 2 Res. Co. 17     │130 Searchlight
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Section.
              │                   │ 174 T. M. Co.     │217 Signal Command:
              │                   │ 427 T. M. Co.     │ 217 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 217 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │Ambulance Co.      │237 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │58 Field Hospital. │149 Field Hospital.
              │                   │149 Field Hospital.│317 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │317 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │1044 M. T. Col.    │
              │                   │1094 M. T. Col.    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

    (9th Reserve Infantry Regiment: 2d Corps District—Pomerania. 22d
   Landwehr Regiment: 6th Corps District—Upper Silesia. 29th Bavarian
             Infantry Regiment: Mixed—Prussia and Bavaria.)


                                 1916.

The 217th Division was formed on the Eastern Front about August, 1916.


ROUMANIA.

1. Composed of the 9th Reserve Infantry Regiment from the 3d Reserve
Division, the 45th Infantry Regiment from the 101st Division, and the
22d Landwehr Regiment from the 4th Landwehr Division, the 217th Division
left the Brest-Litowsk area at the beginning of October, 1916, to take
part in the Roumanian campaign.

2. It was in Dobroudja about the end of October; in the area south of
Bucarest in November. At the beginning of November the 45th Infantry
Regiment, which returned to Macedonia, was replaced by the 21st Infantry
Regiment from the 36th Reserve Division.

3. At the end of December elements of the 9th Reserve Infantry Regiment
occupied the front south of Isaccea (Dobroudja).


                                 1917.


BRAILA.

1. In January, 1917, the 217th Division was in the Braila area; in
February, at the mouth of the Buzeu.


ODOBESTI.

2. In the month of May the division left the Braila front and went into
line northwest of Odobesti in the vicinity of Focsani. At this time it
acquired its definite organization: 9th Reserve, 29th Bavarian, and 22d
Landwehr Infantry Regiments.


PANCIU.

3. From July to December the 217th Division remained in line northwest
of Panciu.


                              RECRUITING.

The 217th Division was one of the most heterogeneous.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division had been on the Roumanian front since October, 1916, and
was mediocre.


                                 1918.


ROUMANIA.

1. Early in April the division was still on the Roumanian front, but was
leaving shortly for another theater.


UKRAINE.

2. At the beginning of May the division was in the Kherson region.


CRIMEA.

3. The middle of the month the division was near Sebastopol.


GEORGIA.

4. About the middle of July elements of the division were identified at
Poti and Tiflis.


SERBIA.

5. Early in October the division having moved to the vicinity of Nish
opposed the advance of the Serbian and allied troops.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                            218th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[34]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │204 Res. │62.      │204 Res. │         │256 Res.
              │         │256 Res. │         │256 Res. │         │5 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │         │  (2d
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Btn.).
              │         │5 Ldw.   │         │5 Ldw.   │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Sqn. 1 Gd. Drag. │4 Sqn. 1 Drag. Rgt.
              │                   │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │85 F. A. Rgt.      │85 F. A. Rgt.      │85 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │  (except 2 Abt.
              │                   │                   │  Staff, 4 and 6
              │                   │                   │  Btries.; 3d Abt.
              │                   │                   │  Staff, 7 and 9
              │                   │                   │  Btries.).
              │11 Mountain F. A.  │                   │
              │  Btry.            │                   │
              │                   │                   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(218) Pion. Btn.:  │218 Signal Command:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Res. Co. 26     │ 218 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 388 Pion. Co.     │
              │                   │ 428 T. M. Co.     │
              │                   │ 267 Searchlight   │
              │                   │  Section.         │
              │                   │ 218 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │121 Ambulance Co.  │121 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │145 Field Hospital.│145 Field Hospital.
              │                   │96 Field Hospital. │318 Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │367 Field Hospital.│
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │628 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 34:

  The below comprises only the elements under 308th Postal Sector (Nov.
  13, 1918). The 62d Infantry Brigade, and elements of the 5th Landwehr
  Regiment were in the 310th Postal Sector and are carried as attached
  to other divisions.


                                HISTORY.

 (204th Infantry Regiment: Guard. 256th Reserve Infantry Regiment: 7th
      Corps District—Westphalia. 5th Landwehr Regiment: 17th Corps
                        District—West Prussia.)


                                 1916.

The division was formed on the Eastern Front about September, 1916.


GALICIA.

1. Concentrated, beginning of October, in the Brest-Litovsk area, the
218th Division was transferred to Galicia, in the Brody, sector in the
middle of October.


ROUMANIA.

2. Beginning of December the 218th Division was sent to the Roumanian
front. It was then composed of the 204th Infantry Regiment, taken from
the 43d Reserve Division; the 256th Reserve Infantry Regiment, from the
Mitau Group; and of the 5th Landwehr Regiment, taken from the 11th
Landwehr Division. It occupied the sector of Oitoz (December).


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA.

1. The 218th Division remained in line between the valleys of the Trotus
and of the Putna (south of Ocna, northwest of Panciu) until July, 1917.

2. At the end of July it was engaged in its sector in front of Kezdi-
Vasarhely and retired to the south bank of the Putna on July 29.

3. In August and until the end of the year 1917 the 218th Division
remained in line in the vicinity of Soveja.


                              RECRUITING.

The 204th Reserve Infantry Regiment was recruited from the whole of
Russia; the 256th Reserve Infantry Regiment from Westphalia and the
Rhine Districts; the 5th Landwehr Regiment from West Prussia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 218th Division had been on the Roumanian front since December, 1916,
and was mediocre.


                                 1918.


ROUMANIA.

In June the division was still in Roumania. Men under 35 years of age
were sent to the Western Front, which gave rise to the report of the
division’s presence in the Lille-Armentières region early in June. The
256th Reserve Regiment was identified in Macedonia early in July, but
the remainder of the division was still in Roumania the middle of
October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                            219th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │47 Ers.      │101 Res.     │47 Ers.      │101 Res.
              │             │391.         │             │391.
              │             │431.         │             │431.
              │             │(100 Ldw.).  │             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │            (?)            │4 Sqn. 19 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │            (?)            │45 Saxon Ers. F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │767 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │768 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │785 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(219) Pion. Btn.:          │205 Pion. Btn. Rgt.
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 254 Pion. Co.             │ 377 Pion. Co.
              │ 54 Bav. Pion. Co.         │ 78 Res. Pion. Co.
              │ 416 T. M. Co.             │ 222 Searchlight Section.
              │ 219 Tel. Detch.           │219 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 219 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │444 Ambulance Co.          │404 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │111 Field Hospital.        │111 Field Hospital.
              │153 Field Hospital.        │153 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │226 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transports.  │M. T. Col.                 │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                (12th and 19th Corps Districts—Saxony.)


                                 1917.

The 219th Division (Saxon) appeared to have been formed in January,
1917.


LORRAINE.

1. Concentrated in Lorraine and comprising the 431st Infantry Regiment,
made up of drafts from various Saxon Regiments, the 101st Infantry
Regiment, from the 23d Reserve Division, and the 100th Landwehr
Regiment, a surplus regiment of the 19th Ersatz Division, the 219th
Division occupied the sector of Blamont in February, 1917.

2. It remained on the Lorraine front in the vicinity of Leintrey-
Badonviller until June 10.


ARTOIS.

3. Sent to the north of France, it relieved the 79th Reserve Division
north of La Bassée (Neuvechapelle-Fromelles) on July 8. With the 42d
Landwehr Division, it exchanged the 100th Landwehr Regiment for the
391st Infantry Regiment, Saxon also.


RUSSIA.

4. About the end of September the 219th Division was withdrawn from the
front and transferred to Russia at the beginning of October.


RIGA.

5. It was in the Riga area in October and November.


                              RECRUITING.

The division was entirely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 219th Division had been in Russia since October, 1917, and was a
fairly good division.


                                 1918.


LIVONIA.

1. The 219th Division took part in the occupation of Livonia; on the
17th of March it arrived at Dorpat.


SERBIA.

2. The 101st Reserve and the 431st Landwehr Regiments were identified at
Nish on the 9th of October. The 391st Regiment was seen at Walk in
Livonia at the beginning of October, when the men said they were leaving
for the western theater (the regiment was never identified there). The
whole of the 219th Division had thus left the Russian front and two
regiments at least went to Serbia.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class.




                            220th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │4 Gd.    │55 Res.  │4 Gd.    │190.     │4 Gd.    │190.
              │         │99 Res.  │         │55 Res.  │         │55 Res.
              │         │207 Res. │         │99 Res.  │         │99 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │4 Sqn. 14 Uhlan    │4 Sqn. 14 Uhlan
              │                   │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │51 F. A. Rgt.      │220 Art. Command:  │220 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 51 F. A. Rgt.     │ 51 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 87 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │                   │ 938 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1326 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1327 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │220 Pion. Btn.:    │220 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Res. Co. Gd.    │ 2 Gd. Res. Pion.
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Co.
              │                   │ 88 Bav. Pion. Co. │ 88 Res. Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 417 T. M. Co.     │ 417 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 220 Tel. Detch.   │ 189 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │220 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 220 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 124 Wireless
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │40 Ambulance Co.   │40 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │55 Res. Field      │55 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │74 Res. Field      │74 Res. Field
              │                   │  Hospital.        │  Hospital.
              │                   │276 Vet. Hospital. │276 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │630 M. T. Col.     │630 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (190th Infantry Regiment and 55th Reserve Infantry Regiment; 7th Corps
    District—Westphalia. 99th Reserve Infantry Regiment; 15th Corps
                           District—Alsace.)


                                 1916.

The 220th Division was formed at the end of 1916 with regiments taken
from divisions then in line on the Somme and south of Artois. The 207th
Reserve Infantry Regiment coming from the 44th Reserve Division, the
55th Reserve Infantry Regiment and the 2d Reserve Guard Division and the
99th Reserve Infantry Regiment from the 26th Reserve Division.


                                 1917.


ARTOIS.

1. Concentrated at Boyelles (west of Croisilles) on February 6, 1917,
the 220th Division went into line at Ransart, south of Arras. About
March 18 it took part in the retirement of the German forces and
established its position at Hénin sur Cojeul, Ecoust St. Menin,
Croisilles. It was engaged, in April, between Croisilles and Arras. In
April the 190th Infantry Regiment replaced the 207th Reserve Infantry
Regiment.

2. Withdrawn from the Arras front at the end of April, the 220th
Division was sent to rest in the vicinity of Montagne du Nord, then to
Belgium between May 6 and 15.

3. It came back to its old sector in Artois (Fontaine les Croisilles,
Bullecourt) about May 29, and remained there until about July 6.


LENS.

4. After a rest in the rear of Douai, northwest of Lens, from the
beginning of July to the middle of August, the division was engaged near
Lens from August 16 to 22.


YPRES.

5. At the beginning of October it was sent to Belgium. On the 12th it
went into line east of Zonnebeke.


CAMBRAI.

6. Sent to rest about October 15 in the vicinity of Bruges, it then
fought on the Cambrai front, south of Crèvecoeur, at the end of November
(German counterattack).

7. It was sent to rest in December.


                              RECRUITING.

The 220th Division may be considered as Westphalian since two of its
regiments were normally filled up from the 7th Corps District, and since
the 99th Reserve Infantry Regiment, like a number of regiments in
Alsace, received most of its men from there.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The regiments of the 220th Division did not appear to have any great
offensive value.

The division lost quite heavily in the sector of Lens at the beginning
of 1918.


                                 1918.


LA BASSÉE.

1. During the night of December 31-January 1 it relieved the 1st Guard
Reserve Division in the Hulluch-Loos sector (south of La Bassée). On the
27th it was relieved by the 1st Guard Reserve Division.

2. A day or two later it relieved the 207th Division in the sector to
the right of the one it had just held. During the night of the 18th–19th
of February it was relieved by the 207th Division.

3. It went back to the Lens sector then and relieved the 1st Guard
Reserve Division on the 20th. It was not withdrawn until April 25, when
it was relieved by the 42d Division. During these three months the
division had about 1,600 casualties (mainly gas), and so now a week or
so was spent refitting in the region north of Douai.

4. On May 6 it relieved the 44th Reserve Division southeast of Locon
(west of La Bassée). This front had been stabilized by now, but still
there was a great deal of artillery activity and constant raiding. The
division was withdrawn about the 1st of August, the neighboring
divisions extending their fronts.


BAPAUME.

5. After a fortnight’s rest the division reenforced the front in the
Biefvillers sector (northwest of Bapaume) about the 20th of August. It
was withdrawn about the 3d of September after losing some 600 prisoners.


CAMBRAI.

6. It rested again for a fortnight, and then reenforced the front near
Blécourt (north of Cambrai) about the 29th of the month. It was heavily
engaged here and suffered severely; withdrawn on the 13th of October.


VALENCIENNES.

7. About the 21st it reenforced the front near Anzin (northwest of
Valenciennes). It was withdrawn on November 4.

8. On the 7th it was put back into line near Elouges (southwest of
Ghislain); it was not withdrawn before the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 220th Division was not used in any of the German offensives during
1918; on the contrary, its rôle seems to have been that of a holding
division. The 55th Reserve Regiment was mentioned as having displayed
“marked gallantry” in the German communiqué of October 2. It is rated as
a second-class division.




                            221st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │1 Res.   │41.      │1 Res.   │41.      │1 Res.   │41.
              │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │
              │         │60 Res.  │         │60 Res.  │         │60 Res.
              │         │1 Res.   │         │1 Res.   │         │45.
              │         │  Ers.   │         │  Ers.   │         │
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 2 Res. Uhlan│1 Sqn. 2 Res. Uhlan│5 Sqn. 8 Uhlan Rgt.
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │273 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │221 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 273 F. A. Rgt.    │ 273 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 40 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                   │                   │  (Staff, and 1, 2,
              │                   │                   │  and 3 Btries.).
              │                   │                   │ 126 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1276 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1345 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(221) Pion. Btn.:  │(221) Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Res. Co. 21     │ 1  Res. Co. 25
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │                   │ 1 Res. Co. 25     │ 2  Res. Co. 21
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Pions.
              │                   │ 431 T. M. Co.     │ 431 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 221 Tel. Detch.   │ 200 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │221 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 221 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │                   │ 71 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │223 Ambulance Co.  │223 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │161 Field Hospital.│161 Field Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │163 Field Hospital.
              │                   │                   │321 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │631 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │                   │7 Art. Observation
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │82 Carrier Pigeon
              │                   │                   │  Loft.
              │                   │                   │21 M. G. S. S.
              │                   │                   │  Detch.
              │                   │                   │1 Btry. 39 Ft. A.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │2 Btry. 39 Ft. A.
              │                   │                   │  Rgt.
              │                   │                   │119 Balloon Sqn.
              │                   │                   │238 Reconnaissance
              │                   │                   │  Flight.
              │                   │                   │ Elements attached
              │                   │                   │  Sept. 29, 1918.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (41st Infantry Regiment: 1st Corps District—East Prussia. 60th Reserve
  Infantry Regiment: 21st Corps District—Lorraine, 1st Reserve Ersatz
                        Regiment: Guard Depots.)


                                 1916.

The 221st Division was formed in the Ardennes (vicinity of Mouzon) in
October, 1916, by taking the 41st Infantry Regiment from the 1st
Division, the 60th Reserve Infantry Regiment (21st Corps District) from
the 1st Bavarian Landwehr Division, and the 1st Reserve Ersatz Regiment
(Guard Depots) from the 1st Reserve Ersatz Brigade.


SOMME.

1. A short time after its formation the 221st Division was transferred
south of the Somme. On October 21–23 it went into line east of Berny; it
remained there during the entire winter of 1916–17 and launched only a
few local attacks.


                                 1917.


HINDENBURG LINE.

1. At the end of March, 1917, the division withdrew with the German Army
to the new positions on the Hindenburg Line, northwest of St. Quentin.


ARTOIS.

2. Relieved about April 8, it rested for 10 days near Tournai, and on
April 27 went into line in the sector of Guémappe-Monchy le Preux
(southeast of Arras). It was seriously engaged against the British
offensive until May 8–9.

3. About May 28 it returned to the Hindenburg Line between Moeuvres and
Havrincourt.


FLANDERS.

4. On July 12 it left this sector for Flanders, where it was sent into
reserve near Winckel-St. Eloi. It did not take part as a whole in the
British attack of July 31. On August 1 the entire division was engaged
in the sector of Zonnebeke, where it launched a violent counterattack,
in the course of which it lost heavily.

5. The 221st Division was relieved from the Ypres front during the night
of August 3–4, but left some units in line until the 10th. Transferred
to Champagne, it went into line east of Auberive on August 17, without
having had any rest. It there filled up its effectives (with
replacements comprising a large proportion of the 1918 class). Its
activity was not manifested there except by a few raids.


CAMBRAI.

6. On November 7 the division left the Champagne front, was transferred
to Belgium, and remained at rest at Deynze until November 23. On this
date it was taken by railroad to the Cambrai front, attacked by the
British troops. Sent into line between Bourlon and Fontaine-Notre Dame
on the 27th, it took part in the German counterattack. Relieved on
December 7, it rested for a month in the vicinity of Douai.


                              RECRUITING.

The division was very mixed. The 1st Reserve Ersatz Regiment,
originating in the Guard depots, was recruited from the entire Province
of Prussia; the 41st Infantry Regiment (from East Prussia) was one of
the regiments of the Prussian Army which had received the most
replacements because of losses; the 60th Reserve Infantry Regiment
comprised a majority of Westphalians and men from the Rhine Province,
but also a large number from other corps districts.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 221st Division always gave a good account of itself in the battles
in which it took part. The 1st Reserve Ersatz Regiment, especially, in
the course of the attacks of November, 1916, showed great tenacity on
the defensive and great vigor on the offensive.

The morale of the 221st Division was good in November, 1917. The general
commanding the division and the major commanding the 41st Infantry
Regiment both received the order “Pour le Merite.”


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division continued to hold the sector near the Arras-Cambrai road
until shortly before the March offensive. It was withdrawn, given a
short rest, and attacked on the 21st at Queant. In two days it advanced
as far as Ervillers (north of Bapaume). From the 25th of March to April
16 it rested in close support.

2. On April 16 the division was engaged the second time in the battle.
It entered south of Arras in the Boyelles sector and remained there
until May 25, when it was relieved by the 5th Bavarian Division.

3. The division rested and trained for almost two months in the locality
east of Douai (Bruille, Somain, Aniches). The 45th Regiment, coming from
the Macedonian front, replaced the 1st Reserve Ersatz Regiment, which
was dissolved. Toward the end of July the division marched by stages to
Noyon. It was held in reserve west of that place from July 30-August 8.


BATTLE OF THE SANTERRE AND SECOND BATTLE OF PICARDY.

4. On August 9 the division was engaged at Arvillers-Hangest. In two
days it was thrown back on Andechy, west of Roye. It was re-formed to
the north and then to the southwest of Nesle (Aug. 11–17). It was
reengaged on the 18th, and between that and the 27th fought north and
south of the Avre near Roye (St. Mard-Sancourt). Again it was pushed
back on the Canal du Nord at Buverchy-Libermont (Aug. 26–27). Its
retreat continued toward Ham (Sept. 3–4) and St. Quentin (5th–8th).
After that the division was in line near Fontaine les Cleres and Dallon
until September 28. About 1,000 prisoners were taken from the division
in this last sector.

5. The division was reengaged almost immediately south of Joncourt,
Levergies, and Sequehart (Sept. 30). By October 10 it had reached
Fresnoy le Grand. It was withdrawn on the 10th and rested a week near
Bergues sur Sambre.

6. On the 18th it was engaged in the sector of the forest d’Antigny
(near Wassigny). It retreated across the Sambre Canal on the 19th and
passed into reserve. On the 24th it was reengaged near the Serre River
(west of La Ferte Chevresis). In the final retreat it fell back through
La Herie la Vieville, Laigny, and east of Vervins. It was in line on
November 11.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as second class. It was used as an attack
division in the March offensive and as a counterattack division in the
last three months of the war. It was noted for its energetic higher
command. When called in to oppose the French attack near Roye in August,
the division had a rifle strength of 4,000. By the end of October this
had been reduced to about 1,000. The 45th Regiment was reduced to four
small companies by October 24. The 41st and 60th Reserve Regiments had
but three companies to a battalion.

The division fought very well in spite of its losses and fatigue in the
final months.




                             222d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[35]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │7.       │193.     │7.       │193.     │7.       │193.
              │         │81 Res.  │         │81 Res.  │         │397.
              │         │397.     │         │397.     │         │81 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │3 Sqn. 2 Res. Uhlan│
              │                   │  Rgt.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │278 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │222 (?) Art.
              │                   │                   │  Command:
              │                   │ 278 F. A. Rgt.    │ 278 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│2 Res. Co. 27      │Pion. Btn.:        │2 Res. Co. 2 Pion.
   Liaisons.  │  Pions.           │                   │  Btn. No. 27.
              │                   │ 2 Res. Co. 27     │345 Pion. Co.
              │                   │  Pions.           │
              │                   │ 345 Pion. Co.     │432 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 432 T. M. Co.     │222 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 222 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │231 Ambulance Co.  │231 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │162 Field Hospital.│162 Field Hospital.
              │                   │175 Field Hospital.│175 Field Hospital.
              │                   │322 Vet. Hospital. │322 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │1071 M. T. Col.    │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 35:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, October, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (81st Reserve Regiment: 18th Corps District—Hesse—Nassau. 193d Reserve
  Regiment: 7th Corps District—Westphalia. 397th Reserve Regiment: 2d
                       Corps District—Pomerania.)


                                 1916.

Formed about September 11, 1916, behind the front north of Verdun, the
222d Division took two of its regiments from existing divisions—the 81st
Reserve Regiment from the 21st Reserve Division, and the 193d Reserve
Regiment from the 192d Division. Its third regiment, the 397th, was
formed at Stenay from elements of the 16th and 53d Reserve Regiments
(13th Reserve Division), of the 159th Regiment (14th Reserve Division),
of the 118th Infantry Regiment (56th Division), and especially from the
140th Infantry Regiment (4th Division).

1. From September 15 to October 24, 1916, the 222d Division was at rest
in Alsace in the vicinity of Rouffach.


SOMME.

2. Entrained on October 25, it was transferred to the vicinity of
Cambrai by way of Sarrebruecken, Aix la Chapelle, Brussels, Tournai.
About November 5 it went into action on the Somme front near Lesboeufs,
Le Transloy, and remained in line until December 7–8.

3. After a few days of rest it was sent by railroad into the Laonnois.
Detraining at St. Erme between December 15 and 29 it took over the
sector of the Ville aux Bois (southeast of Craonne), which it occupied
until February 15, 1917.


                                 1917.

1. Upon its release the 222d Division was employed in defensive works
behind the Aisne-Oise front (north of La Fère, St. Gobain, Laffaux,
Chavignon).


AISNE.

2. About March 16, 1917, it was engaged east of Soissons (Vregny-Combe
Plateau); counterattacked on March 21 north of Missy sur Aisne; retired
in the direction of the Laffaux Mill-Jouy-Aizy (at the beginning of
April) and fought on this front April 18 to 21.

The 193d Infantry Regiment, sent as reenforcement troops to Soupir,
suffered serious losses there and retired by way of Ostel on April 20.

3. The 222d Division, having established its position between Laffaux
Mill and Malmaison Farm, was again severely tried during the attacks of
May 5 and 6.

4. Withdrawn from the Aisne front on May 13, it was sent to rest in the
area Marle-Vervins and reorganized.

5. At the end of June the division took over its former sector
(Laffaux), where the attack of July 8 was the only important action in
which it took part during this time, which lasted until the beginning of
August.

6. After a short rest in the vicinity of Montigny, it came back into
line (Ailles—north of Hurtebise) about September 5 and remained in this
sector until November 2. At this time it took part in the withdrawal and
occupied new positions north of the Ailette.

7. On November 28, the 222d Division was relieved in the sector of
Chermizy and sent to rest at Laon and in the vicinity of Marle (one
month’s training).

8. At the end of December it occupied the front Brancourt-Anizy.


                              RECRUITING.

The 81st Reserve Infantry Regiment and the 193d Infantry Regiment were
recruited in the Rhine districts (Hesse-Nassau, Rhine Province, and
Westphalia). Many elements from these same regions were in the 397th
Infantry Regiment in addition to Pomeranians.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Although it had suffered only slight losses since the beginning of
November, 1917, the 222d Division was exhausted by a stay of more than
seven months in the different sectors of the Aisne. It is a mediocre
division (January, 1918).

During its rest in December the division received continual but moderate
training, like the maneuvers of peace times. (Interrogation of prisoner,
Feb. 4, 1918.)


AILETTE.

1. This was a very quiet sector and the division remained here without
incident until the Somme offensive was well under way. However, the
division took part in the attacks of April 7 and 8, when the enemy
endeavored to squeeze out the new salient of Coucy le Château, which was
developed by the progress of the main advance toward Montdidier. It
suffered heavily in several attacks but gained little ground.


MONTDIDIER.

2. About the 3d of May the division was withdrawn and sent to the front
southeast of Montdidier, where the main battle line had stabilized, but
where infantry was still continuing, and during the night of the
9th–10th relieved the 206th Division in the Assainvillers sector.
However, the sector soon grew quiet. The division remained in line and
took part in the battle of the Oise on June 9, advancing via Courcelles
to Mery. The division made but little headway (it will be remembered
that this whole offensive failed) and suffered heavy losses in several
days of hard fighting. It was relieved by the 11th Division about the
8th of July and went to rest near Coucy le Château.


SOISSONS.

3. During the night of the 25th–26th the division reenforced the front
near Nouvron (northwest of Soissons). Here it was subjected to the full
weight of the attack of the 18th of August and was driven back to
Audignicourt and the Ailette. After having suffered very heavy losses
(1829 prisoners), it was withdrawn about the 27th and went to rest near
Laon. About the middle of September it was disbanded, the 81st Reserve
Regiment going to the 21st Reserve Division, the 193d Regiment going to
the 14th Division, and the 397th Regiment going to the 45th Reserve
Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 222d was rated a second-class division. It took little part in
offensive operations but was not incapable of putting up a tenacious
defense. In June two of its regiments threatened to leave the trenches
if they were not relieved, but the difficulty seems to have been
smoothed over though there was no relief until July 8. It is interesting
to note that the divisions receiving regiments when the 222d was
disbanded were all second-class units.




                             223d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[36]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │67.      │144.     │67.      │144.     │67.      │144.
              │         │173.     │         │173.     │         │173.
              │         │29 Ers.  │         │29 Ers.  │         │29 Ers.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 3 Res. Drag.│(2 Sqn. 3 Res.     │2 Sqn. 3 Res. Drag.
              │  Rgt.             │  Drag. Rgt.).     │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │280 F. A. Rgt.     │Art. Command:      │(z) Art. Command:
              │                   │ 280 F. A. Rgt.    │ 280 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│343 Pion. Co.      │(223) Pion. Btn.:  │5 Co. 23 Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 5 Co. 23 Pions.   │343 Pion. Co.
              │                   │ 343 Pion. Co.     │433 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 433 T. M. Co.     │223 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 223 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │232 Ambulance Co.  │232 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │164 Field Hospital.│164 Field Hospital.
              │                   │170 Field Hospital.│176 Field Hospital.
              │                   │176 Field Hospital.│Vet. Hospital.
              │                   │Vet. Hospital.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │M. T. Col.         │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 36:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, October, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

  (144th Infantry Regiment: 16th Corps District—Lorraine. 173d Infantry
 Regiment: 16th Corps District—Lorraine. 29th Ersatz Regiment: 14th Corps
                     District—Grand Duchy of Baden.)


                                 1916.

The 223d Division was concentrated at Mulhousen at the beginning of
October, 1916. Its regiments formerly belonged to other divisions. The
144th Infantry Regiment was taken from the 3d Division on the Verdun
front; the 173d from the 34th Division, then at Thiaumont; the 29th
Ersatz from the 39th Bavarian Reserve Division, on the Lorraine front.

1. Entraining at Mulhousen on October 26, 1916, the 223d Division was
transferred to the north by way of Sarrelouis-Treves-Aix la Chapelle-
Louvain-Brussels-Valenciennes, and detrained north of Cambrai on October
28. During the night of November 11–12 it came to the Ancre front
(Serre-Grandcourt) and lost heavily there.

2. Relieved about November 25, it was sent to rest in the area east of
Cambrai. Elements of the 173d Infantry Regiment were sent on detached
service south of Bapaume (Ligny-Tilloy).


                                 1917.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. At the end of January, 1917, the 223d Division left the Cambrai area
for Champagne. It occupied the sector north of Rheims (Witry les Rheims,
March and April).

2. About April 27 it was engaged south of Nauroy at Mont Cornillet and
lost heavily between April 30 and May 8.


GALICIA.

3. Withdrawn from the Champagne front about May 18, the 223d Division
was transferred to Galicia. (Itinerary: Amagne (May 21)-Sedan-
Thionville-Sarrebruecken-Frankfort-Leipzig-Breslau-Cracow-Lemberg.) It
detrained at Zloczow, May 26.

4. At the beginning of July it opposed the Russian offensive in the
vicinity of Brzezany; on July 18, it took part in the Austro-German
counterattack and marched in the direction of Husiatyn, which it reached
on the 30th and remained in line there until the middle of December. It
was sent in reserve on this date, and prepared to leave for the Western
Front, borrowing men from the regiments of the 83d Division.


                              RECRUITING.

The 223d Division was recruited from Westphalia and the Rhine Province
so far as concerns the 144th and 173d Infantry Regiments. The 29th
Ersatz Regiment came from the Grand Duchy of Baden.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 223d Division may be considered good.


                                 1918.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

1. The division rested in a camp at Sissonne until March 19, after which
it was railed to La Fere, arriving there on March 21.

2. On the second day of the attack it was engaged near Tergnier-Chauny
and advanced to the Guiscard region by the 24th. Shortly after its
withdrawal from Guiscard (25th) it took over the Morlincourt-Appilly
sector on the Oise (east of Noyon) and held it until May 1.


EAST OF OISE.

3. It rested near Guiscard during the first half of May. On the 15th it
was engaged in front of Noyon (Larbroye-Mont Renaud-Pont l’Eveque) until
the 30th. It took part in the Oise offensive of June, crossing the river
and advancing in the Bois de Carlepont in the direction of Caisnes and
Cuts. It established itself on the line Bailley-Tracy le Val-Oise and
held that sector until the French attack of August 18.


OISE-AISNE.

4. The French attack of the 18th threw the division back on Salency. It
was relieved on the 22d and railed to Anizy le Chateau the same day.
From there it was taken to north of Soissons and reengaged on the 29th
on the line Chauvigny-Juvigny. In these two engagements the division
lost 688 prisoners.

5. The division had lost heavily in March and in the August fighting.
Its morale was poor. The authority of the officers was low and
desertions were frequent. As a result the division was dissolved in
September. Its effectives were turned into the 52d, 103d, and 115th
Divisions.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Prior to the March offensive it
had been regarded a good division.




                            224th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │       1918
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │         │19 Ldw.  │216.     │19 Ldw.  │216.     │19 Ldw.
              │         │61 Ldw.  │         │61 Ldw.  │         │61 Ldw.
              │         │429 Ldw. │         │429 Ldw. │         │429 Ldw.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │(?) Sqn. 10 Mounted│4 Sqn. 10 Mounted
              │                   │  Jag. Rgt.        │  Jag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │284 F. A. Rgt.     │224 Art. Command:  │224 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 284 F. A. Rgt.    │ 284 F. A. Rgt.
              │                   │                   │ 795 Light Am. Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1015 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
              │                   │                   │ 1029 Light Am.
              │                   │                   │  Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │224 Pion. Btn.:    │423 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 2 Co. 27 Pions.   │ 2 Co. 27 Pions.
              │                   │ 434 T. M. Co.     │ 3 Landst. Co. 9 C.
              │                   │                   │  Dist. Pions.
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │ 251 Searchlight
              │                   │                   │  Section.
              │                   │                   │224 Signal Command:
              │                   │                   │ 224 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │234 Ambulance Co.  │234 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │181 Field Hospital.│336 Field Hospital.
              │                   │330 Field Hospital.│324 Field Hospital.
              │                   │324 Vet. Hospital. │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │794 M. T. Col.     │
              │                   │795 M. T. Col.     │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Attached.    │                   │1 Landst. Pion. Co.│
              │                   │  (8 C. Dist.).    │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (429th Landwehr: 3d Corps District—Brandenburg. 19th Landwehr: 5th Corps
    District—Posen. 61st Landwehr: 17th Corps District—West Prussia.)


                                 1916.


RUSSIA.

1. Upon its formation the 224th Division appeared on the Eastern Front
about October, 1916.

2. At this time it was near the 31st Division, north of Lake Narotch.


                                 1917.


VOLHYNIA-SVINIOUKI.

1. At the beginning of February, 1917, the composition of the 224th
Division appeared to be as follows: 19th Landwehr Regiment taken from
the 18th Landwehr Division; 61st Landwehr Regiment, from the 85th
Landwehr Division, and the 429th Landwehr Regiment, a new formation
(1916).

2. The 224th Division then occupied the sector of Sviniouki in Volhynia.
It remained there during the entire year of 1917, during the latter
months furnishing important replacements to the Western Front, to such a
degree that in November the companies of the 429th Landwehr did not have
more than 100 men left (Russian interrogation).


                              RECRUITING.

The 224th Division was recruited from Brandenburg and the eastern
Provinces of the empire.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was on the Russian front from its formation and was of
mediocre combat value.

In December, 1917, in Volhynia, 50 men of the youngest classes were
taken from each company of the 429th Landwehr Regiment to be sent to the
Flanders front.

In January, 1918, the companies of the 61st Landwehr Regiment were
composed of men of the Landsturm. (Prisoner’s statement, Jan. 13.)


                                 1918.


VOLHYNIA.

At the beginning of March the division left the Sviniouki region and
went via Pinsk to Gomel.


UKRAINE.

2. Toward the end of April the division was identified in the Vorojva
region (southwest of Koursk). On the 9th of September the division was
identified a little farther to the north in the Delgorod region.


WOEVRE.

3. On September 29 the division was relieved (probably by the 45th
Landwehr Division) and, entraining at Sadtowo, traveled via Kubiantz-
Kharkov-Kiev-Kovel-Kattovitz-Dresden-Frankfort on the Main-Saarbrueken-
Metz-Batilly, where it detrained on October 12. Resting here until the
16th, it marched via Bruville-Mars la Tour-Chambley and relieved the
88th Division during the night of the 16th–17th south of Dampvitoux. The
division was identified by prisoners on November 7 here and does not
seem to have been withdrawn before the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was a very poor one. About the middle of the summer the
best men were chosen to be sent to the Western Front. They were paraded
before the commanding general and when they reached the place where he
was standing they dropped their guns and went back to the caserne. Later
when the whole division was to come to the west, the men were far from
satisfied, not being entirely consoled when they were informed that they
were to enter a quiet sector.




                            225th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[37]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Ers.   │18 Res.  │5 Ers.   │18 Res.  │5 Ers.   │373.
              │         │217 Res. │         │217 Res. │         │18 Res.
              │         │373.     │         │373.     │         │217 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 13 Uhlan    │3 Sqn. 13 Uhlan    │3 Sqn. 13 Uhlan
              │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.             │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │225 Art. Command:  │225 Art. Command:
              │                   │ 47 F. A. Rgt.     │ 47 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(225) Pion. Btn.:  │259 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │
              │                   │ 259 Pion. Co.     │413 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 344 Pion. Co.     │225 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 413 T. M. Co.     │
              │                   │ Tel. Detch.       │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │259 Ambulance Co.  │240 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │155 Field Hospital.│259 Ambulance Co.
              │                   │172 Field Hospital.│155 Field Hospital.
              │                   │265 Vet. Hospital. │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │                   │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 37:

  Composition at the time of the dissolution, September, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

  (18th Reserve: 18th Corps Division—East Prussia. 217th Reserve: 7th
      Corps District—Westphalia. 373d Infantry Regiment: 1st Corps
                        District—East Prussia.)


                                 1916.

The 225th Division, including the 18th Reserve Infantry Regiment (from
the 1st Reserve Division), the 217th Reserve Infantry Regiment (from the
47th Reserve Division), and the 373d Infantry Regiment (from the 10th
Landwehr Division), was formed on the Eastern Front in the vicinity of
Wladimir-Volynski about September, 1916.


ROUMANIA-TRANSYLVANIA.

1. In November, 1916, the 225th Division was transferred to the
Roumanian Carpathians. It was there in December in the valley of the Uz.


                                 1917.


ROUMANIA.

1. During the first half of 1917 the 225th Division occupied the calm
sectors in the vicinity of Uz (Hills 1031 and 1640).

2. In July the 373d Infantry Regiment was transferred to the valley of
the Putna to withstand the Russo-Roumanian offensive. The division took
part in the Austro-German counterattack and established its positions
near Ocna in September and October.


FRANCE.

3. Relieved about November 11, it went to Bereczk, where it entrained on
the 18th for the Western Front. (Itinerary: Kronstadt (Brasso)-Budapest-
Vienna-Munich-Carlsruhe-Sarrebruecken.) It detrained on November 25 at
Vallieres-Vantoux, near Metz, and from there was transferred to the
vicinity of Vigneulles (Cote de Meuse).


COTES DE MEUSE.

4. On December 4–5, it took over the sector of Chevalierswood, south of
Vaux les Palameix-Seuzey.


                              RECRUITING.

Two regiments were drawn from East Prussia (18th Reserve and 372d
Infantry Regiment), the 217th Reserve from Westphalia.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 225th Division which comprised drafts from Baden, Alsace,
Westphalia, East Prussia, and the Rhine was not homogeneous and was not
considered as a fighting division.

The 18th Reserve Regiment had a bad reputation. On January 6, 1917, it
refused to attack at Hill 1298 in Hungary. (Interrogation of prisoners
Feb. 3 and Mar. 17, 1918.)

The division included a large number of Poles. However, men of the young
classes gradually replaced the older men, who still made up a large part
of the division in 1917; consequently, the combat value of the division
may have improved.


                                 1918.

1. The division held the Woevre sector until the beginning of May. It
entrained at Jeandelize about May 15 and was railed by Sedan, Givet,
Dmant, Namur, Charleroi, Mons, and Cambrai. It detrained near Peronne
and marched toward the Avre front by Chaulnes, Rosieres en Santerre.


BATTLE OF THE SANTERRE.

2. It was engaged north of Moreuil (east of the Villers aux Erables-
Thennes) on May 22. The Allied attack struck the division and threw it
back on Beaufort, losing 2,358 prisoners. It was relieved on the 10th
and rested 15 days. Reengaged on the 25th east of Albert (Contalmaison,
Montauban) the division again lost heavily. It was withdrawn on the
30th.

3. After its withdrawal the division was dissolved to the profit of the
1st Reserve Division and 2d Division.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. In the August fighting in Picardy
it did not make a strong resistance. In the two engagements in August
the division lost 3,593 prisoners.




                            226th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────┬───────────────────
              │       1916        │       1917        │     1918[38]
 ─────────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────┼─────────┬─────────
              │Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.│Brigade. │Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────
 Infantry.    │5 Ldw.   │2 Ldw.   │5 Ldw.   │2 Ldw.   │5 Ldw.   │2 Ldw.
              │         │9 Ldw.   │         │9 Ldw.   │         │9 Ldw.
              │         │         │         │         │         │  Rgt.
              │         │439.     │         │427.     │         │427.
 ─────────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────┼─────────┴─────────
 Cavalry.     │                   │1 Sqn. 4 Mounted   │1 Sqn. 4 Mounted
              │                   │  Jag. Rgt.        │  Jag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Artillery.   │                   │64 Res. F. A. Rgt. │(?) Art. Command:
              │                   │                   │ 64 Res. F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Engineers and│                   │(226) Pion. Btn.:  │2 Ers. Co. 18
   Liaisons.  │                   │                   │  Pions.
              │                   │ 2 Ers. Co. 18     │Searchlight
              │                   │  Pions.           │  Section.
              │                   │ (?) T. M. Co.     │430 T. M. Co.
              │                   │ 26 Searchlight Co.│226 Tel. Detch.
              │                   │ 226 Tel. Detch.   │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Medical and  │                   │257 Ambulance Co.  │257 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                   │                   │
              │                   │Field Hospital.    │Field Hospital.
              │                   │262 Vet. Hospital. │262 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────
 Transport.   │                   │471 M. T. Col.     │635 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────

Footnote 38:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, May, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

                     (2d Corps District—Pomerania.)


                                 1916.

The 226th Division was formed about December, 1916.


RUSSIA.

1. At the end of December it was identified on the Eastern Front in the
vicinity of Smorgoni, forming, with the 205th Division, the 3d
(reenforced) Reserve Corps of the 10th Army.


                                 1917.

1. The 226th Division included in 1917 the 2d and 9th Landwehr Regiments
(5th Landwehr Brigade), taken from the 35th Reserve Division, and the
439th Infantry Regiment, formed in 1916.


SMORGONI.

2. The division occupied the sector of Smorgoni-Krevo from January until
August, 1917. In this sector it received the Russian attacks of July 2
and 23, which caused it very heavy losses, in consequence of which
Emperor William II called himself commander of the 2d Landwehr Regiment.

3. About the beginning of August the 226th Division was relieved south
of Smorgoni and replaced the 123d Division south of Lake Svir. In
November the 2d Landwehr Regiment sent men to reenforce the 121st
Division and the 9th Landwehr to reenforce the 2d Guard Division.


LAKE NAROTCH.

4. In December the division was in line north of Lake Narotch, relieving
the 31st Division, which was sent to the Western Front.


                                 1918.

1. The division was still there in January, 1918. It was dissolved in
June.


ROUMANIA.

2. The presence of the headquarters of the 226th Division at Targovistea
was reported early in October. These headquarters apparently had under
its order the 58th Reserve Field Artillery Regiment, of which the
headquarters and three batteries are at Bucharest, the remaining
batteries at Durnu Margurelf, Targovistea, and Cantulung.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                            227th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │49 Ldw.      │417.         │49 Ldw.      │417 and 477.
              │             │441.         │             │
              │             │477.         │             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │            (?)            │1 Sqn. 10 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │92 F. A. Rgt.              │227 Art. Command:
              │                           │ 92 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 3 Abt. 20 Ft. A. Rgt. (9
              │                           │  and 11 Btries.).
              │                           │ 853 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1102 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 113 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│227 Pion. Btn.:            │227 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 339 Pion. Co.             │ 339 Pion. Co.
              │ 347 Pion. Co.             │ 347 Pion. Co.
              │ 162 T. M. Co.             │ 162 T. M. Co.
              │ 227 Tel. Detch.           │ 213 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │227 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 227 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 155 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │65 Ambulance Co.           │65 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │278 Field Hospital.        │278 Field Hospital.
              │285 Field Hospital.        │285 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │208 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                 │637 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (417th Infantry Regiment; 14th Corps District—Grand Duchy of Baden.
    441st Infantry Regiment; 18th Corps District—Hesse—Nassau. 477th
         Infantry Regiment; 8th Corps District—Rhine Province.)


                                 1917.

The 227th Division, formed in March, 1917, was composed of three newly-
formed regiments—the 417th (Baden), the 441st (18th District-Hesse), the
477th, formed by drafts upon the units of the 38th and 13th Divisions
and upon the 16th Corps, then attached after its formation in the autumn
of 1916 to the 33d Division of this corps.


ARGONNE.

1. The 227th Division was identified for the first time on March 27,
1917, on the Argonne front. It occupied the calm sector of the Fille-
Morte until May 26.


AISNE.

2. About June 1 it went into line south of the Aisne (La Neuville-Godat)
and extended its sector, at the beginning of July, to Hill 108
(Sapigneul).

3. Relieved about August 5, it was sent for rest and training to the
Asfeld area. On August 20 it went into line north of Berry au Bac,
between the Miette and Hill 108, from which it was withdrawn on August
2.

The division did not take part in any important engagement on the Aisne
front. Its losses were very slight.


FLANDERS.

4. On October 5 and 6 the 227th Division entrained at Amagne (east of
Rethel), and was transferred to Belgium by way of Hirson-Toumai-
Courtrai-Thielt. Detraining at Pitthem on October 6 and 7, it reached
the front north of Poepcappelle on the night of the 8th–9th, was in
action for a week and suffered very heavy losses.

5. The division left the Ypres front about October 15 to go to Ghent
(two days), then into the Champagne in the vicinity of Aussonce. It was
filled up with three replacements, the most important of which was made
up of 1,200 men taken from units on the Eastern Front, especially from
the 12th Landwehr Division, from the same Provinces as the 227th
Division (end of October).


CHAMPAGNE.

6. At the beginning of November the 227th Division went into line north
of Cornillet.


                              RECRUITING.

The 227th Division was recruited from the Rhine Districts (Baden, Hesse-
Nassau, the Rhine Province), which gives rise to a certain homogeneity.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 227th Division lost very heavily in Flanders and received as
replacements a certain number of men coming from the Russian front whose
combat value was mediocre (October, 1917).

The 227th Division was of only mediocre offensive value.


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. About the middle of January the 227th Division was relieved by the
28th Division and went to the Juniville area, where it was intensively
trained in open warfare with a view to its being used as an assault
division.

2. On February 16 it relieved the 28th Division. It was withdrawn toward
the end of March.


PICARDY.

3. About the 10th of April it relieved the 5th Guard Division near Canny
sur Matz (west of Lassigny). The battle of the Somme had come to end by
this time, and so, although there was still considerable artillery
activity here, the division was not seriously engaged in infantry
attacks, and remained in line until relieved by the 75th Reserve
Division during the night of May 16–17, when it went to rest and be
trained in the region of Ham.


OISE.

4. On June 7 it started to march to the front via Ognolles-Champien
Wood-Beuvraignes-Crapeaumesnil. On the 9th it attacked through the line
and succeeded in passing Ricquebourg, Ressons, and Marqueglise. This
advance cost the divisions heavy losses, and it suffered still more
heavily when the French counterattacked in force on the 12th. The
following day it was relieved by the 17th Reserve Division and marched
by stages to the region east of St. Quentin.


WOEVRE.

5. About the 20th it entrained at Origny and traveled via Charleville-
Sedan-Longuyon-Conflans-Dampvitoux, where it detrained the 21st and 22d.
It relieved the 8th Bavarian Reserve Division in the St. Baussant-
Richecourt sector (south of Thiaucourt) on the 27th. It was relieved by
the 10th Division on the 22d of August.


SOISSONS.

6. About the 30th it reenforced the front in the Terny-Sorny sector
(north of Soissons). It was withdrawn about the 8th of September.


AISNE.

7. There was some talk of dissolving the division at this time, but it
was not done, and it came back into line, relieving the 17th Division in
the Pont-Arcy sector (east of Vailly) on the 17th. It remained in line,
falling back via Monchâlons-Coucy les Eppes-Pierrepont-Montcornet-
Ebouleau-Renneval-Jeantes la Ville. It had not been withdrawn on the
11th.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 227th was rated a third-class division. It was in no heavy fighting
during 1918 until June, when it did not distinguish itself, neither
advancing far nor holding its ground in counterattack. Its conduct,
however, can not be characterized as poor. It is to be noted, moreover,
that the division commander was awarded “Pour le Mérite” in July.




                            228th. Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │104.         │35 Fus.      │104.         │35.
              │             │48.          │             │48.
              │             │207 Res.     │             │207 Res.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.        │1 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │228 Art. Command:          │228 Art. Command:
              │ 39 F. A. Rgt.             │ 39 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 92 Ft. A. Btn. (Staff, and
              │                           │  1, 2, and 3 Btries).
              │                           │ 1143  Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1144  Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1145  Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(228) Pion. Btn.:          │228 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 389 Pion. Co.             │ 389 Pion. Co.
              │ 395 Pion. Co.             │ 395 Pion. Co.
              │ 197 T. M. Co.             │ 197 T. M. Co.
              │ Tel. Detch.               │ 116 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │228 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 228 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 56 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │567 Ambulance Co.          │567 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │63 Field Hospital.         │63 Field Hospital.
              │260 Field Hospital.        │260 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │55 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport    │M. T. Col.                 │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                    (3d Corps District—Brandenburg.)


                                 1917.

The 228th Division appears to have been formed in the Sedan area in May,
1917. Its three regiments belonged to the 3d Corps District—the 35th
Fusileer Regiment was taken from the 56th Division, the 48th Infantry
Regiment from the 113th Division, and the 207th Reserve Regiment from
the 220th Division.


VERDUN.

1. On June 22, 1917, the 228th Division was identified on the Verdun
front in the sector of Les Chambrettes (35th Fusileers). It was still in
line on the right bank of the Meuse (Louvemont) when the French attacks
of August 20–24 were launched. It lost heavily there. “Our regiment has
only two companies left” (letter from a man of the 48th Infantry
Regiment, Aug. 23).


CÔTES DE MEUSE.

2. Relieved about August 24, it was sent to rest for a few days, then
into line again about September 6 on the Côtes de Meuse (between
Moulainville and Damploup). It was reorganized in both men and material.
At the end of September 900 men came as replacements from the 1st Corps
District (returned wounded for the most part). The 35th Fusileer
Regiment, decimated in August, remained in the rear for reorganization.


                              RECRUITING.

The division was purely Brandenburg (infantry and field artillery).

For its reorganization after the attacks of August 20–24, 1917, the
228th Division received replacements from the 1st Corps District. A
replacement unit was formed from the 3d Corps District, but the men are
said to have refused to leave for the Western Front. In default of men
from Brandenburg, they called upon the 1st Corps District.
(Interrogation of prisoner, Sept. 30, 1917.)


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

This was a fairly good division.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved northeast of Verdun in mid-February and
went to rest and train southeast of Montmedy (near Marville) until March
17. It was then railed to Picardy via Montmedy, Sedan, Hirson, Aulnoye.
From there it moved toward the front by Croix, Maurois, Beaurevoir,
Bellicourt, Roisel, Maurepas, Bray, arriving there on the 27th.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was engaged on the 29th–30th near Le Hamel, north of Marcelcave,
and participated in heavy fighting about Hamel until April 13. All three
regiments lost heavily in the attack. The 207th Reserve Regiment was too
weak to hold more than 160 yards of front. The 35th Fusileer Regiment
lost 700 men in killed and wounded. After resting from April 13 to 18
the division was reengaged on the 18th. It attacked at Villers-
Bretonneux on the 24th without success. After suffering very heavy
losses the division was withdrawn on April 27–28.


CHAMPAGNE.

3. On the 28th it entrained east of Peronne and was railed to
Valenciennes, where it rested until May 6–7. From rest the division
proceeded to south of Vouziers (May 7) and entered line near Tahure on
the 13th and held that quiet sector until July 15. It did not attack in
the offensive in Champagne, but remained behind in reserve of the 88th
Division. Later it was used by battalions in support of units in line
until the end of the month.

4. From the end of July to September 12 the division held a quiet sector
of the line near Maisons de Champagne.

5. On the 12th it was moved to Spincourt by Mezieres, Sedan, Montmedy,
Longuyon. It rested and trained until the 28th, when it marched toward
the front at Romagne sous Montfaucon (Sept. 28 to Oct. 2).

6. The division was engaged near Cunel on October 8. Four days later it
shifted to the right bank of the Meuse (east of Sivry sur Meuse) and
held there until November 5. It retreated toward Fontaine and Ecurey
after that date. The division was still in line on the day of the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. After its failure on the Somme in
the spring it was used on unimportant sectors until October. It did not
distinguish itself in the Meuse-Argonne battle.




                            231st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │231.         │442.         │231.         │442.
              │             │443.         │             │443.
              │             │444.         │             │444.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │                           │1 Sqn. 9 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │3 Gd. Res. F. A. Rgt.
              │ 3 Gd. Res. F. A. Rgt.     │90 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                           │910 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │912 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1135 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(231) Pion. Btn.:          │231 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 353 Pion. Co.             │ 353 Pion. Co.
              │ 354 Pion. Co.             │ 354 Pion. Co.
              │ 358 (?) T. M. Co.         │ 181 Searchlight Section.
              │ 418 T. M. Co.             │231 Signal Command.
              │ 231 Tel. Detch.           │ 231 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 57 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │243 Ambulance Co.          │243 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │183 Field Hospital.        │184 Field Hospital.
              │184 Field Hospital.        │217 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │227 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │641 M. T. Col.             │641 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                                (Guard.)


                                 1917.

The 231st Division was formed on January 15, 1917, at the Zossen Camp,
near Berlin. Its infantry regiments (442d, 443d, and 444th) were formed
from the depots of the Guard and the 43d Reserve Division, likewise a
subsidiary of the Guard. Initial effectives: 235 to 240 men per company,
one-half of the 1918 class, one-fourth of returned sick and wounded,
one-fourth men withdrawn from the front. The composition is practically
the same for the divisions Nos. 231 to 242, as regards infantry and
pioneers.


HAYE.

1. The 231st Division left the Zossen Camp on March 30, 1917, detrained
at Audun le Roman on April 3, and went into line on the 13th at Flirey
(Haye). It did not show any activity there and left the front on May 12.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. Entraining at Jaulny on May 16, it was concentrated in the vicinity
of Epoye, northeast of Rheims, and went into line on May 18–19 north of
La Pompelle.


MONT HAUT.

3. In the middle of June it went into line in the Nauroy sector, between
Cornillet and Mont Haut, and suffered the French attack of the 18th,
which caused it heavy losses (especially in the 443d Infantry Regiment,
where the 10th Company had only 1 officer and 10 men left). It was
relieved about July 6.

4. After two weeks’ rest in the vicinity of Rethel the division was sent
into line at Bermericourt on July 21.


                              RECRUITING.

The 231st Division was recruited from the entire extent of Prussian
territory, the same as the Guard from whose depots it was formed.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

At the time of the formation of the 231st Division 40 per cent of the
men were of the 1918 class. In consequence of replacements, the
proportion of the men of this class appeared to be 50 per cent in
November, 1917.

The 231st Division opposed an honorable resistance to the French assault
of June 18, 1917, at Le Cornillet.

However, taking into consideration that it has never given proof of
offensive qualities, it seems impossible to class it among the good
divisions.


                                 1918.


CHAMPAGNE.

1. Early in February the 231st Division was relieved by the 213th
Division and went to the Givet-Namur area for training in open warfare.


PICARDY.

2. On the 21st of March it was in support behind the 45th Reserve
Division. Two days later it attacked southwest of Ham in the direction
of Esmery-Hallon, suffering heavy losses. It was in reserve near Roye on
the 28th. Early in April it was resting near Laon, and later in the
month it moved to the Marle area, where it was reconstituted.


AISNE.

3. It then relieved the 3d Reserve Division in the Bouconville sector
(southeast of Laon) early in May. On the 27th other divisions attacked
through its sector, the 231st following up in reserve via Fismes and
Fère en Tardenois. It became engaged on the 30th near Beuvardes and
advanced through Verdilly to Château Thierry; relieved by the 201st
Division about the 16th of June. It refitted in the Laon region,
entrained at Sissonne, and traveled via Asfeld to Dun sur Meuse.


VERDUN.

4. About the 1st of July it relieved the Bavarian Ersatz Division in the
Avocourt sector (northwest of Verdun). It was relieved by the 37th
Division on the 7th of August.


PICARDY.

5. The division traveled via Sedan-Laon-Chauny and reenforced the front
near Appilly (east of Noyon). In the fighting that followed the division
was forced to withdraw through Lagny, Champagne, Villeselve, Artemps,
Mont d’Origny, and Hauteville. It was withdrawn about the 20th of
October.

6. After having rested about a week it came back into line west of Guise
about the 28th. Again it fell back, being identified east of Guise and
southeast of Etreux. It was still in line on the 11th of November.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division did not distinguish itself during the battle of the Somme,
but, on the other hand, it did not do badly, for soon afterwards the
division commander was granted “Pour le Mérite.” After the Aisne
offensive the brigade commander also received it. The division was
mentioned in the German official communiqués of September 4 and October
31. Its losses necessitated the reduction of the battalions to three
companies but did not lower the morale to any great extent. It should be
considered as a good second-class division.




                             232d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │232.         │445.         │232.         │445.
              │             │446.         │             │446.
              │             │447.         │             │447.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.        │4 Sqn. 1 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │37 F. A. Rgt.              │232 Art. Command:
              │                           │ 37 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 776 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 981 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1093 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(232) Pion Btn.:           │232 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 355 Pion Co.              │ 346 Pion. Co.
              │ 356 Pion Co.              │ 356 Pion. Co.
              │ 419 T. M. Co.             │ 419 T. M. Co.
              │ 232 Tel. Detch.           │ 119 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │232 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 232 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 162 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │244 Ambulance Co.          │244 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │185 Field Hospital.        │185 Field Hospital.
              │186 Field Hospital.        │186 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │267 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │642 M. T. Col.             │642 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (445th Infantry Regiment: 1st Corps District—East Prussia. 446th and
 447th Infantry Regiments: 20th Corps District—Eastern section of West
                               Prussia.)


                                 1917.

The 232d Division belonged to the series of divisions 231 to 242, formed
in January, 1917, by drafts upon the depots (1918 class) and upon the
front. It was recruited principally from the 1st and 20th Corps
Districts (East Prussia).

After its formation the division was sent for training to the Arys Camp
and then, on April 3, 1917, to the Eastern Front.


COURLAND.

1. On April 6 the 232d Division went into line in the vicinity of
Illukst; it remained there until July.


SMORGONI.

2. Relieved by the 2d Division, coming from Flanders on July 7, it
entrained on the 9th, was transferred by railroad to Soly on July 11,
and from there went to the sector of Smorgoni-Krevo, where it suffered
the Russian attack of July 22.


GALICIA.

3. On July 31 the 232d Division left the Smorgoni front for Galicia. It
went into line northeast of Tarnapol, west of Zbaraz. It was identified
there on December 25 (fraternization with the Russians). It was during
this rest period, in November and December, that the division received
its first reenforcements of the 1919 class, which it later took to
France.


                              RECRUITING.

The 232d Division was recruited from East and West Prussia, with a
certain number of Alsace-Lorrainers.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Having always occupied the Eastern Front from its formation (beginning
of 1917) until March, 1918, the 232d Division was of mediocre combat
value (April, 1918).

In the 445th Infantry Regiment the majority of men were very young; many
belonged to the 1919 class (April, 1918). (Interrogation of prisoner.)

In the 2d Company of the 1st Battalion of the 447th Infantry Regiment,
one-third belonged to the 1919 class (May, 1918). (Interrogation of
prisoner.)


                                 1918.

1. The division held the sector west of Vaudesincourt until about May
10, when it went to rest in the Juniville-Neuflize area. While there the
division was trained for mobile warfare.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

2. On May 22 the division left the region of Juniville and moved in
three marches to Lor and Le Thour (north of Asfeld). On May 26 the
division left Lor and advanced toward the battle front, following the
86th Division. It passed the former French first line near Juvincourt,
arrived near Treslon-Bouleuse on May 29, and on the 30th was engaged to
the right of the 86th Division, near Sarey, where it relieved the troops
of the 7th Reserve Division.

3. After that date the division was in the sector on the west bank of
the Ardre near Chambrecy. The division losses were small during the
first three days of the offensive, but later it suffered seriously,
especially in its unsuccessful attack on Bligny on June 4. The division
was relieved on the 18th by the 123d Division.

4. It marched by stages to Asfeld and was railed to Montmedy. On the
night of June 28–29 it relieved the 19th Ersatz Division in the Beaumont
sector. It held the quiet sector until August 18, when it was withdrawn.
On the night of August 26–27 the division entrained and traveled via
Montmedy-Sedan-Charleville-Revin-Charleroi-Mons-Valenciennes-Cambrai,
detraining near Etricourt and Manancourt on August 28 after a journey of
28 hours.


BAPAUME.

5. The division was engaged in the Bapaume area (Le Forest,
Bouchavesnes, Moislains) on August 29. It lost 1,500 prisoners before it
was withdrawn on September 9.

6. It rested in the Le Cateau area until September 21, when it
reenforced the battle front northwest of Hargicourt. After four days it
was relieved by the 54th Division and rested near La Capelle. It had
been there but 10 days when it was hurried to the Oise front by motor
trucks.

7. On October 6 it was engaged at Lesdins, with the exception of the
447th Regiment, which remained at rest at Pont a Bucy and joined the
division later. It continued in line until about the end of the month,
when it retired from the Villers le Sec vicinity. It was considered in
reserve of the German 18th Army at the time of the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as 4th class. By October its morale was very low
and its combat value small. On October 25 the division had but 850
infantrymen, 300 machine gunners, and 120 trench mortar effectives.
After August there were but three companies to a battalion and but two
battalions to the 446th Regiment in October. Influenced by Bolshevists,
elements of the division refused to go into action in October.




                             233d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │         1918[39]
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │243.         │448.         │243.         │448.
              │             │449.         │             │449.
              │             │450.         │             │450.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │                           │3 Sqn. 9 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │81 F. A. Rgt.              │233 Art. Command:
              │                           │ 81 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(233) Pion. Btn.:          │233 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 357 Pion. Co.             │ 357 Pion. Co.
              │ 358 Pion. Co.             │ 358 Pion. Co.
              │ 420 T. M. Co.             │ 420 T. M. Co.
              │ 233 Tel. Detch.           │ 233 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │245 Ambulance Co.          │245 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │187 Field Hospital.        │187 Field Hospital.
              │188 Field Hospital.        │188 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │268 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │880 M. T. Col.             │643 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────

Footnote 39:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, September, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

 (448th and 449th Infantry Regiments: 2d Corps District—Pomerania. 450th
          Infantry Regiment: 17th Corps District—West Prussia.)


                                 1917.

The 233d Division, formed at the Hammerstein Camp in January, 1917,
recruited its infantry (448th, 449th, 450th Regiments) from the 2d and
17th Corps Districts. It then contained 40 per cent of the 1918 class
and 40 per cent returned wounded.

1. After six weeks in training at Hammerstein, the 233d Division was
transferred to Beverloo, where it continued its training from the end of
February to the beginning of April.

2. About April 10 it occupied a calm sector between La Fère and
Alaincourt.


FLANDERS.

3. On May 16 it left the Oise front and went to Flanders. Sent into line
at Ypres, on both sides of the Ypres-Roulers road (May 19–20), the
division had very heavy losses in this sector toward the end of July,
during the artillery preparation which preceded the British attack of
the 31st. “In the course of the nine weeks passed in Flanders the 450th
Infantry Regiment lost 900 men, more than half of whom were killed.”
(Letter of Aug. 6.)

4. Relieved on the eve of the attack, the 233d Division was brought back
by railroad into the Guise area and sent to rest for two weeks.

5. From the middle of August until September 28 it occupied the sector
of St. Quentin (Gauchy), after having pillaged the city the same as
several other divisions.


FLANDERS.

6. On October 2 it entrained for Flanders and was sent by way of Origny,
Le Cateau, Maubeuge, Mons, Ath, Ghent, Deynze. From October 5 to 12 it
was engaged southeast of Sonnebeke and lost very heavily during the
British attacks of October 6 and 9.


LORRAINE.

7. The division was withdrawn from the Ypres front on October 12, sent
to rest for four days at Sottegem, then sent to Lorraine by way of
Brussels, Namur, Hirson, Charleville, Sedan, Metz. Detraining at
Sarreburg, it rested from the 20th to the 29th, then went into line
south of Blamont.


                              RECRUITING.

The 233d Division was recruited from Pomerania and West Prussia, with a
certain admixture from the neighboring Provinces (3d and 5th Corps
Districts).


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

A German official document of June 12, 1917, gives the following
appreciation of the troops of the 233d Division engaged at that moment
in the Ypres sector: “These men are too young to be able to furnish
prolonged resistance and to have great endurance in a critical
situation. Nevertheless, their conduct is generally good. One cannot say
that this organization is in a good condition; it is not suited for
trench warfare.” (Report from the 2d Battalion of the 450th Regiment.)

It is to be noticed, however, that the 233d Division was left in line
northeast of Ypres until July 29.

Since that time the division took part in numerous battles and improved.

It contained a certain number of Poles and some Alsatians.

From January 20 to February 24, 1918, it received special training for
the warfare of movement, in the vicinity of Zabern-Haguenau.

It was a fairly good division.


                                 1918.


KEMMEL.

1. The division was railed to Flanders in the middle of April and
detrained at Zarren (southwest of Thourout). It marched toward the front
south of Ypres through Ardoye, Tourcoing. It was engaged on April 25 at
Mount Kemmel and took part in the heavy fighting there until May 3. Its
losses were heavy in this engagement.

2. The division rested near Sottegem in Belgium until May 19. It was
then transferred to Peronne. During June a regiment of the division came
into line southwest of Morlancourt for a short period and reenforced the
54th Division. The rest of the division rested at Caudry, Bretigny,
Morcourt until July 6.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

3. It was engaged on that date north and south of Alvert, where it was
still in line at the time of the British attack of August 22. It was
thrown back on Fricourt, La Boisselle, Bazentin le Grand, Montauban,
where it was relieved on August 30, after losing 1,422 prisoners.

4. Following the heavy losses in August the division was dissolved. The
448th Regiment was transferred to the 107th Division, replacing the
227th Reserve Regiment, dissolved. The 405th Regiment replaced the 22d
Reserve Regiment, dissolved in the 117th Division; while the men of the
449th Regiment were allotted to the 448th and 450th Regiments.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class.




                            234th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │234.         │451.         │234.         │451.
              │             │452.         │             │452.
              │             │453.         │             │453.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │1 Sqn. 13 Dragoon Rgt.     │1 Sqn. 13 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │234 Art. Command:
              │ 4 F. A. Rgt.              │ 4 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │3 Abt. 21 Ft. A. Rgt. (7
              │                           │  and 9 Btries.).
              │                           │841 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │847 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1340 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(234) Pion. Btn.:          │234 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 359 Pion. Co.             │ 359 Pion. Co.
              │ 360 Pion. Co.             │ 360 Pion. Co.
              │ 429 T. M. Co.             │ 201 Searchlight Section.
              │ 234 Tel. Detch.           │234 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 234 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 126 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │246 Ambulance Co.          │246 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │189 Field Hospital.        │189 Field Hospital.
              │190 Field Hospital.        │190 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │269 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                 │644 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (451st and 452d Infantry Regiments: 3d Corps District—453d Infantry
             Regiment: 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                 1917.

The 234th Division was formed on January 6, 1917, at the camp of
Altengrabow. Its infantry regiments were recruited from the 3d and 4th
Corps Districts (Berlin-Magdeburg) and were composed of men of the 1918
class (50 per cent) and of returned wounded and men withdrawn from the
front (50 per cent).


ST. QUENTIN.

1. After three months’ training at Altengrabow, the 234th Division
entrained, on March 28, for the Western Front. Going by way of
Magdeburg-Aix la Chapelle-Liége-Brussels-Mons, it detrained on March
30–31 at Le Cateau, from which place it marched to the sector of Fayet,
northwest of St. Quentin (on the Hindenburg Line) on April 8.

On April 14 the division was attacked by British troops and lost heavily
(451st Infantry Regiment, 400 prisoners). This regiment again suffered
seriously in the course of violent battles with the French east of
Fayet, August 9 to 11.


YPRES.

2. About September 1 the 234th Division was relieved northwest of St.
Quentin and sent to Roulers, by way of Bohain, Le Cateau, Denain, Lille,
Courtrai, and Menin. In reserve first near Hooglede, on the Ypres front
at the time of the British attack, it counterattacked on September 20,
northeast of St. Julien. On September 23–24 it again went into reserve
and after the British attack of the 26th sent some of its elements into
action southeast of Zonnebeke on September 27.

3. Exhausted by these battles the division left the Ypres front for the
Lille area. It had lost about one-half of its effectives.


LA BASSÉE.

4. It went into line north of La Bassée Canal on October 7, remained
there six weeks, and about November 24 went to the Cambrai area.


ARTOIS.

5. On December 7 it took over the sector north of Bullecourt.


                              RECRUITING.

The 234th Division was recruited from Brandenburg and Prussian Saxony.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 234th Division lost very heavily at Ypres in September, 1917; these
losses had some effect upon its morale. At all events, it acquired a
certain combat experience in the course of these engagements.

The 451st Infantry Regiment seemed to be considered the best one in the
division by the German High Command.

In the 453d Infantry Regiment, September, 1917, many officers belonged
to the Reserve and to the Landwehr; some of these, during the war, were
retired for inefficiency (document).


                                 1918.


PICARDY.

1. The 234th Division remained in the Bullecourt sector until relieved
by the 111th Division on the 8th of February, when it went to rest in
the Douai area.

2. About the end of the month it relieved the 111th Division. On the
opening of the Somme offensive on the 21st of March, although not
engaged in the initial attack, the division was severely engaged in the
fighting around Croisilles, and on the 31st some of its elements carried
out a costly and unsuccessful attack against Boisleux-St. Mare. It was
relieved about the 7th of April by the 231st Division.

3. The division rested a fortnight and then relieved the 111th Division
in the Ayette sector on the 20th. During the night of the 24th–25th of
May it was relieved by the 17th Division.

4. About June 21 it relieved the 17th Division. When the British
attacked on the 21st of August, the division was thrown back upon
Hamelincourt with heavy losses (including 1,585 prisoners). It was
withdrawn on the 24th to the Douai region.

5. On the 22d of September it reenforced the front in the Gavrelle
sector, being withdrawn a few days later.

6. On the 30th it came into line north of Cambrai in the Tilloy sector.
Withdrawn about the 15th of October.

7. On the 18th it reenforced the front near Raches (northeast of Douai).
It was relieved by the 35th Division about the 10th of November.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 234th was rated a third-class division. In the fighting around Arras
in the spring it acquitted itself fairly well, and its commanding
general received the “Pour le Mérite.” Its conduct during the rest of
the year was mediocre.




                            235th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │         1918[40]
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │235.         │454.         │235.         │454.
              │             │455.         │             │455.
              │             │456.         │             │456.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │5 Sqn. 9 Dragoon Rgt.      │5 Sqn. 9 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │235 Art. Command:          │235 Art. Command:
              │ 6 F. A. Rgt.              │ 6 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│235 Pion. Btn.:            │235 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 361 Pion. Co.             │ 361 Pion. Co.
              │ 362 Pion. Co.             │ 362 Pion. Co.
              │ 435 T. M. Co.             │ 435 T. M. Co.
              │ 235 Tel. Detch.           │ 235 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │247 Ambulance Co.          │247 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │191 Field Hospital.        │191 Field Hospital.
              │192 Field Hospital.        │192 Field Hospital.
              │                           │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │961 M. T. Col.             │645 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────

Footnote 40:

  Composition at the time of dissolution, August, 1918.


                                HISTORY.

  (454th and 455th Infantry Regiments: 5th Corps District—Posen. 456th
            Infantry Regiment: 6th Corps District—Silesia.)


                                 1917.

The 235th Division was formed in January, 1917, in the camps of the
Warta and of Neuhammer, with elements from the 5th and 6th Corps
District. Its regiments were made up mostly of men from the 1918 class
(50 per cent) and the remainder from returned sick and wounded and men
withdrawn from the front (initial strength, 230 to 235 men per company).

1. After six weeks of intensive training, the 235th Division was
concentrated at Posen and sent to the Western Front on February 20, by
way of Dresden-Aschaffenburg-Frankfort-Aix la Chappelle-Namur. It passed
a new period of training in the Sissonne Camp, and on March 15 was sent
to the St. Quentin area.


ST. QUENTIN.

2. At the beginning of April it went into line in the Itancourt sector.
Its losses were enormous, principally from the attack of April 13, which
necessitated replacements of 2,216 men during the following weeks.

3. Relieved at the beginning of July, it was sent to rest east of St.
Quentin (Fontaine Notre Dame).


YPRES.

4. On July 25 it entrained at Guise for Belgium. Concentrated in the
vicinity of Iseghem-Roulers, it went to the Ypres front on July 28–31,
east of Wieltje, received the artillery preparation and the British
attack of the 31st, which caused it very heavy losses. The 454th
Infantry Regiment had very heavy losses (4th Company was reduced to 31
men) and was filled up hastily from the resources of the large depot at
Beverloo (about 60 men per company).

5. The 235th Division was withdrawn from the front on August 1 and spent
a week at rest in Flanders.

6. In the course of August it was transferred to Laonnois, in the
vicinity of Montcornet.


AISNE.

7. About September 10 it took over the sector of Juvincourt-Corbeny,
where the French attack of November 21 again occasioned it serious
losses (400 prisoners). A prisoner of the 456th Infantry Regiment
declared that in this company not more than one-fourth of the men were
left who composed it in January.


                              RECRUITING.

The 235th Division was recruited from the Provinces of Posen and of
Silesia; consequently, contained a large number of Poles.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 235th Division appeared to have only mediocre offense value.

Following the battle of November 21, 1917, in the Juvincourt sector, the
commander of the 456th Infantry Regiment and the commander of the 2d
Battalion of the same regiment were relieved in disgrace.

The division received training in the warfare of movement during January
and February, 1918.


                                 1918.

1. The division entrained at Sierentz (Alsace) April 4–5 and traveled
via Mulhausen, Strasbourg, Treves, Cologne, Lille, Brussels, and Ghent.
It detrained at St. Andre, north of Lille, on the 8th–9th and rested in
that vicinity until the 22d.


FLANDERS.

2. It entered line east of Robecq on the night of April 22–23 and
remained in that sector until May 11. During this engagement the
division lost very heavily.

3. The division entrained at Lille on the 12th and was railed via Ghent,
Brussels, Namur, Charleville, and Sedan. It detrained north of Briey on
the 14th.


WOEVRE.

4. It was engaged on the heights of the Meuse (Vaux les Palameix-Bois
des Chevaliers) from May 24–25 to August 8. It was withdrawn from north
of St. Mihiel on the 8th and dissolved at Conflans.

5. The 545th Regiment was drafted to the 10th Division. The 11th
Division and 82d Reserve Division received elements of the 456th
Regiment.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its only active service in 1918
was near Armentieres, for which the division was commended by the Kaiser
in his order dissolving the division.




                            236th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │236.         │457.         │236.         │457.
              │             │458.         │             │458.
              │             │459.         │             │459.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 13 Drag. Rgt.       │4 Sqn. 13 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │7 F. A. Rgt.               │7 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │3 Abt. 16 Ft. A. Rgt. (11
              │                           │  and 13 Btries.)
              │                           │956 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1337 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1343 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│363 Pion. Btn.:            │363  Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 363 Pion. Co.             │ 363 Pion. Co.
              │ 364 Pion. Co.             │ 364 Pion. Co.
              │ 436 T. M. Co.             │ 436 T. M. Co.
              │ 236 Tel. Detch.           │ 202 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │236 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 236 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 125 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │248 Ambulance Co.          │248 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │193 Field Hospital.        │193 Field Hospital.
              │194 Field Hospital.        │194 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col                  │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (457th and 458th Infantry Regiments; 7th Corps District—Westphalia.
        459th Infantry; Regiment; 16th Corps District—Lorraine.)


                                 1917.

The 236th Division was formed at the Senne Camp at the end of December,
1916 and the beginning of January, 1917. Recruited from the 7th and 16th
Corps Districts its regiments were composed of men belonging to the 1918
class (40 per cent) and of returned wounded.


CAMBRESIS.

1. The 236th Division entrained at the Senne and Paderborn Camps on
April 11 1917, and went to Cambrai by way of Dusseldorf-Aix la Chapelle-
Liége-Namur-Charleroi-Valenciennes. Detraining at Caudry on April 13, it
went into line southwest of Cambrai (Trestault-Gouzeaucourt) on the
18th. On April 24 it was attacked by British troops, lost the village of
Villers Plouich, and suffered heavily (340 prisoners).

2. On May 9 it was sent to rest in the vicinity of Cambrai.


ARTOIS.

3. It then occupied the sector of Cherisy (southeast of Arras) from June
4 to September 2, and did not go into any serious action during this
period.


FLANDERS.

4. The division left Artois at the beginning of September, was sent to
rest at Courtrai until the 17th, went to Iseghem by railroad, then
marched to Roulers. Until September 20 it remained in reserve as a
counterattacking division. Between the 20th and 26th, it was in a
violent battle east of Ypres, toward the Polygon wood and between this
wood and Zonnebeke to oppose the British advance. Before going into
line, on September 20, the 2d Battalion of the 459th Infantry Regiment,
had lost more than 200 men from artillery fire; on the 22d, the 8th
Company had only 15 men left.

5. Withdrawn from the Flanders front, during the night of September
28–29, the 236th Division was sent to rest in the vicinity of Douai.


ARTOIS.

6. On October 6 it went into line north of the Scarpe, between the Roeux
and the Gavrelle; it enlarged its sector toward the north at the
beginning of November. It was filled up by replacements taken from the
Russian front; 400 men coming from the 32d Landwehr Regiment (197th
Division) arrived in November.


                              RECRUITING.

The 236th Division was recruited from Westphalia and the Rhine Province.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 236th Division had serious losses while fighting at Ypres and its
morale was weakened in consequence. It may be considered a mediocre
division (February, 1918).

According to a deserter’s statement (Jan. 23, 1918), the 236th Division
was a shock division in 1917.


                                 1918.

1. The division was engaged from March 21 to April 3. On the March Somme
offensive, first at Cherizy, later at Heninel. It was relieved south of
Arras on the night of April 3–4 and moved to Passchendaele by way of
Aubigny au Bac, Iseghem, and Meulebeke.


YPRES.

2. It entered line at Passchendaele on April 6 and held a sector in this
vicinity until June 22, when it was relieved by the 31st Division. The
division rested during July at Deynze. It again held the sector
southwest of Ypres from August 10 to September 13.


LORRAINE.

3. The division moved from Flanders by way of Tourcoing-Brussels-
Liége—Aachen-Cologne-Bonn-Bingen-Coblenz-Kreuznach to Strasburg. It did
not detrain there, but was suddenly ordered to Metz, where it arrived on
September 24 in the afternoon. It marched to Loringen, stayed one night
and marched to Mars la Tour on September 26. The next morning it marched
to Jarny and entrained there, going to Dun sur Meuse (via Longuyon and
Montmedy). From Dun it marched through Doulcon to Villers, then to
Cunel, and then forward into position.

4. The division was heavily engaged from September 29 to its retirement
on October 17. It distinguished itself particularly, fighting stubbornly
and successfully for many days in succession. It lost only 413 prisoners
but its casualties were very heavy, estimated at 3,000. On November 4
the division was reengaged south of Beaumont and continued in line until
the armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Apart from the fighting on the
Meuse, the division did not do anything notable.




                            237th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │244.         │460.         │244.         │460.
              │             │461.         │             │461.
              │             │462.         │             │462.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 13 Uhlan Rgt.       │4 Sqn. 13 Uhlan Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │83 F. A. Rgt.              │83 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │3 Abt. 23 Ft. A. Rgt. (7
              │                           │  and 9 Btries.).
              │                           │783 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1013 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1057 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(237) Pion. Btn.:          │237 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 365 Pion. Co.             │ 365 Pion. Co.
              │ 366 Pion. Co.             │ 360 Pion. Co.
              │ (437) T. M. Co.           │ 124 Searchlight Section.
              │ 237 Tel. Detch.           │237 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 237 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 25 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │249 Ambulance Co.          │249 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │195 Field Hospital.        │195 Field Hospital.
              │196 Field Hospital.        │196 Field Hospital.
              │272 Vet. Hospital.         │198 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │551 M. T. Col.             │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Attached.    │4 Landst. Pion. Co. (10 C. │
              │  Dist.).                  │
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

      (8th and 21st Corps Districts—Rhine Province and Lorraine.)


                                 1917.

The 237th Division was formed in January, 1917, at the Elsenborn Camp
(one-half men of the 1918 class; the rest, returned sick and wounded and
men taken from the front).


RUSSIA.

1. Detraining in Russia in the vicinity of Baranovitchi in March, 1917,
the 237th Division went into line south of Vichnev, on the Little
Berezina, about the beginning of April.


GALICIA.

2. Relieved on June 25, it was transferred to Galicia by way of Brest-
Litowsk. On July 7 it was sent into line in the vicinity of Konioukhi.

3. It was engaged on July 21 northwest of Zbrow, and pursued the
Russians by way of Trembowla (July 26) as far as Husiatin, where the
front became stabilized. The division continued to occupy various
sectors in this area until the end of 1917. It was identified south of
Husiatin on December 12 (fraternization).


                              RECRUITING.

The 237th Division was recruited principally from the Rhine District.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 237th Division occupied the Russian front from its formation until
the beginning of January, 1917.

Its combat value was mediocre.


                                 1918.

1. On the 4th of January the division was relieved by Austrian troops
and marched by easy stages to Buckas, in the direction of Lemberg. On
March 4 it entrained between Brody and Lemberg and traveled via Lemberg-
Brest-Litowsk-Warsaw-Kalisz-Goerlitz-Leipzig-Frankfort on the Main-
Thionville-Sedan, detraining at St. Juvin on the 12th. It went into
cantonments at St. Georges.


ARGONNE.

2. During the night of the 14th–15th it relieved the 80th Reserve
Division west of Avocourt. While here it exchanged its Alsace-Lorrainers
for more trustworthy men of the 9th Landwehr Division. It was withdrawn
about the middle of May.


AISNE.

3. On the 26th and 27th the division entrained at Grandpre and St.
Juvin, went through Sedan and Charleville and detrained at Bucy les
Pierrepont (north of Sissonne) on the 27th and 28th. The division then
marched via Sissonne—the Plateau de Californie-Fismes-Dravegny-Monthiers
(northwest of Château Thierry). On the 1st of June it attacked in the
Belleau wood, as a result of which it suffered heavy losses. It was
withdrawn about the 22d.


ARGONNE.

4. The division entrained at Athies (east of Laon) and detrained near
St. Juvin on the 30th. The division remained here a few days and then
relieved the 240th Division in the Vauquois sector. While in line here
the division received more than 2,000 replacements. It was withdrawn on
August 14.


AILETTE.

5. It entrained at St. Juvin and went to St. Quentin and Ham; then it
went by truck to the Coucy wood, and then to St. Paul aux Bois (south of
Chauny). On the 21st it reenforced the 1st Bavarian and the 222d
Divisions near St. Aubin. It was withdrawn early in September, after
having fallen back upon Coucy le Château. It rested then for a fortnight
in the St. Gobain forest.


SERRE-OISE.

6. On the 25th of September it relieved the 34th Division in the Servais
sector (south of La Fère). The division remained in line until the end
of the war, falling back through Deuillet-Anguilcourt-La
Ferté—Chevresis-Villers le Sec to the La Capelle region, and suffering
very heavy losses.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The 237th was rated a fourth-class division. While it was in line in the
Argonne in the spring the men (encouraged by their officers) fraternized
with the French troops opposing them. Its morale was influenced to a
most surprising extent by the measure of success of the German forces.
The result was that while it was high in the spring it became low as
soon as the tide turned. On August 22, while the division was in line on
the Ailette, 80 men, armed and with ammunition, surrendered to 4 French
soldiers. In this engagement (about 10 days) more than 900 prisoners
were lost. While the division was in line the last time it lost over
1,000 prisoners. At the end of October the division had only about 800
rifles.




                            238th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │238.         │463.         │238.         │463.
              │             │464.         │             │464.
              │             │465.         │             │465.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. 13 Drag. Rgt.       │2 Sqn. 13 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │238 Art. Command:          │238 Art. Command:
              │ 62 F. A. Rgt.             │ 62 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 53 Ft. A. Rgt. (Staff and
              │                           │  1, 2, and 4 Btries.).
              │                           │ 944 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1211 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1233 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│238 Pion. Btn.:            │238 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 367 Pion. Co.             │ 367 Pion. Co.
              │ 438 T. M. Co.             │ 368 Pion. Co.
              │ 238 Tel. Detch.           │ 205 Searchlight Section.
              │ 368 Pion. Co.             │238 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 238 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 30 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │250 Ambulance Co.          │250 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │197 Field Hospital.        │197 Field Hospital.
              │198 Field Hospital.        │198 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │273 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │648 M. T. Col.             │648 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

  (463d Infantry Regiment: 9th Corps District—Hanseatic cities. 464th
      Infantry Regiment: 9th Corps District—Schleswig—Holstein and
  Mecklemburg. 465th Infantry Regiment: 10th Corps District—Hanover.)


                                 1917.

The 238th Division was formed at the beginning of January, 1917, at the
Lockstedt Camp, near Hamburg. Its infantry regiments were recruited from
the 9th Corps District (Schleswig-Holstein, Hanseatic cities, and
Mecklemburg) and from the 10th Corps District (Hanover), and were
composed in part (50 per cent) of men of the 1918 class.

1. After a training of almost three months, the 238th Division entrained
at Lockstedt, on April 13, 1917, by way of Hamburg, Trèves, Sedan,
Namur, Cambrai; it went to Caudry and Bertry (north), where it detrained
on the 16th.


HINDENBURG LINE.

2. On April 20 it went into line in the sector of Vendhuille-Bellicourt,
which it left on May 20 to go to rest in the vicinity of Douai (until
May 28).


ARTOIS.

3. At the end of May it took over the sector of Roeux-Gavrelle, north of
the Scarpe. It remained on this part of the front until September 27 and
was not in any serious engagement. On June 6, however, the 463d Infantry
Regiment suffered heavy losses in its 3d Battalion, which the two others
hastily filled up (letter of June 10), and left 170 prisoners.


FLANDERS.

4. Sent to Flanders, the division remained at rest for a few days at
Roulers, then in reserve in the vicinity of West-Roosebeke. On October
13 it went into line southwest of Passchendaele. Having suffered heavily
from the British attack of October 30, it was hastily relieved on the
31st.


ST. QUENTIN.

5. It entrained on November 6 at Ledeghem. Detraining at Geise, it went
to Macquigny, and after a few days of rest occupied the sector south of
St. Quentin-Itancourt (Nov. 11–12).


                              RECRUITING.

The 238th Division was recruited the same as the 111th Division, from
Schleswig-Holstein, Mecklemburg, the Hanseatic cities, and Hanover.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 238th Division was of mediocre value, but better than the majority
of the divisions of this series.

The large proportion of young recruits in the ranks of the 238th
Division gave rise to the nickname “The Division of the First
Communicants.”


                                 1918.

1. The division rested and underwent training in the vicinity of Origny-
St. Benoite from the 1st of February to March 19. It was brought up to
the front south of St. Quentin during the night of March 19–20.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. On the 21st the division attacked at Grugies and in two days advanced
by Grand-Serancourt and across the canal near St. Simon. From the 23d to
the 29th it advanced in reserve by Libermont-Beaulieu les Fontaines-
Beuvraignes. It was reengaged on the 29th at Rollot and Boulogne la
Grasse until mid-April. The division suffered heavy casualties in the
Somme battle.


RHEIMS.

3. The division was engaged southeast of Rheims (Cernay les Rheims,
northeast of St. Leonard) from April 18 to July 20. It carried out a
local attack on Rheims on May 30 and June 1. The division did not take
part in the offensive of July 15 except by artillery activity.

4. The division rested at Boult sur Suippe from July 20 to 28. From the
end of July to August 20 it held its former sector at Cernay les Rheims.
Relieved in that sector, it marched by stages toward Brancourt-Coucy le
Chateau via Neufchatel sur Aisne, Marchais, Bruyeres (Aug. 21–28).


AISNE.

5. On August 31 the division was engaged at Leuilly-Terny. After
September 10 it fought in the vicinity of Quincy-Basse-Aulers until
October 12. On that date it retired toward Crepy and withdrew from line.
The division started for Marle to rest but was alerted on the 14th and
taken in trucks to east of Mart d’Origny. On the 15th it was again in
the first line. Two of the regiments had but two battalions and the
infantry effectives totaled 1,800. The period between the 18th and 24th
of October was relatively quiet on the divisional sector. Following
French attacks of October 25 and 26, the division fell back on a
prepared position in front of Guise. Here it held until November 5, when
it began a retreat by Audigny in the direction of La Capelle.

The last identification was at Buironfosse on November 6.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its morale was mediocre, and its
effectives few during the latter half of 1918.




                            239th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │239.         │466.         │239.         │466.
              │             │467.         │             │467.
              │             │468.         │             │468.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 9 Drag. Rgt.        │4 Sqn. 9 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │55 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 55 F. A. Rgt.             │78 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                           │909 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1239 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │1293 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(239) Pion. Btn.:          │239 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 369 Pion. Co.             │ 369 Pion. Co.
              │ 370 Pion. Co.             │ 370 Pion. Co.
              │ 439 T. M. Co.             │ 439 T. M. Co.
              │ 239 Tel. Detch.           │ 89 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │ 237 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │239 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 239 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 11 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │251 Ambulance Co.          │251 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │199 Field Hospital.        │199 Field Hospital.
              │200 Field Hospital.        │200 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │239 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                 │649 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (466th Infantry Regiment: 11th Corps District—Electorate of Hesse. 407th
     Infantry Regiment: 11th Corps District—Thuringia. 468th Infantry
               Regiment: 18th Corps District—Hesse—Nassau.)


                                 1917.

The 239th Division belonged to the series of 12 divisions (231st to
242d) formed in Germany at the beginning of 1917, a strong proportion
(50 per cent) of the 1918 class. It includes the 466th, 467th, and 468th
Infantry Regiments recruited from the 11th and 18th Corps Districts
(Electorate of Hesse, Thuringia, and Hesse-Nassua, and the Grand Duchy
of Hesse).

1. From the beginning of January, 1917, to the middle of February, the
239th Division was in the training camps Ohrdruf and of Darmstadt. It
entrained on February 17 and went to Rethel. It continued its training
for some time behind the Champagne front.


CHAMPAGNE.

2. The entire division went into line north of Souain (Somme Py) on
March 27. It remained there until May 15 without any important
engagement. One battalion of the 467th Infantry Regiment was sent to
Auberive as a reenforcement at the time of the French attack on April
16.

3. The division was at rest in the vicinity of Machault and at Asfeld
from the end of May to the beginning of June.

4. About June 10 it went into line northeast of Reims (Cernay sector),
then at the beginning of August northeast of Courcy. It occupied this
sector until October 6 without having any important battle.


FLANDERS.

5. Transferred to Flanders by way of Hirson and Courtrai, the 239th
Division went into line northeast of Poelcappelle on October 23. It lost
heavily during the British attack of November 26 and continued to hold
this sector, alternating with the 3d Naval Division.

6. Relieved about November 24, the 239th Division was sent to rest
northeast of Ghent, then to the vicinity of Lille, at the beginning of
September.


                              RECRUITING.

The 466th Infantry Regiment came from the Electorate of Hesse; the 467th
Regiment was called Thuringian in an official document; the 468th
Regiment came from Hesse-Nassau.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 239th was a fairly good division.

Considering the missions which have been assigned to it by the German
High Command, it seems that the 239th Division is better than most of
the divisions of this series.


                                 1918.

1. The division trained in the Bourghelles area until March 17. On that
date the division marched toward the front via Bersee-Douai-Estrees-
Soudemont-Villers les Cagnicourt-Noreuil-Mory.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It came into line on the 26th north of Courcelles, attacking Ayette
on the 27th. It lost heavily, including numerous prisoners on April 2.
The division was relieved on April 6 and rested a week at Aubigny au
Bac. It entrained on the 11th and moved to Libercourt.


HANDES.

3. The division was engaged from April 15 to 23 east of Robecq. Elements
took part in the attack of the 18th, in which the losses were very
heavy.


LORRAINE.

4. After its relief on the 23d the division was railed to Lorraine by
Mons-Namur-Sedan-Montmedy-Metz. It rested and was reconstituted near
Dieuze from the end of April to May 13. At this time the division was
reenforced by a draft coming from the 233d Reserve Regiment of the
dissolved 195th Division.


AVRICOURT.

5. The division held the quiet Avricourt sector from May 13 to June 20.
It was relieved by the 7th Cavalry Division and railed to Champagne.


CHAMPAGNE.

6. It rested and trained in the vicinity of Rethel-Attigny. About the
10th of July it marched toward the front and on the 15th was engaged in
the Champagne offensive at Vaudesincourt. After the attack it held the
sector until the beginning of October.

7. The division was attacked at Mont sans Nom on September 26, and on
October 4 fell back on the line Betheniville-Hauvine, and later in the
direction of Rethel (Oct. 12). The division was in reserve during the
middle of October. Toward the end of the month the division was
reengaged near Rethel. Its line of retreat in the last weeks was through
Le Quesnoy, Jolimetz, Bermeries, south of Bavai, where it was identified
on November 8.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. In October the division was very
tired and its morale was low. Numerous infractions of discipline
occurred. Its battalions were reduced to three companies at the
beginning of August.




                            240th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │240.         │469.         │240.         │469.
              │             │470.         │             │470.
              │             │471.         │             │471.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │8 Sqn. 13 Drag. Rgt.       │3 Sqn. 13 Drag. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │240 Art. Command:
              │ 271 F. A. Rgt.            │ 271 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 3 Abt. 6 Res. Ft. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 1092 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1336 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1342 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(240) Pion Btn.:           │240 Pion Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 371 Pion Co.              │ 371 Pion. Co.
              │ 372 Pion Co.              │ 372 Pion Co.
              │ 440 T. M. Co.             │ 440 T. M. Co.
              │ 240 Tel. Detch.           │ 203 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │240 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 240 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 127 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │252 Ambulance Co.          │252 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │204 Field Hospital.        │204 Field Hospital.
              │205 Field Hospital.        │205 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │240 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │1092 M. T. Col.            │650 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (469th and 470th Infantry Regiments: 14th Corps District—Grand Duchy of
       Baden. 471st Infantry Regiment: 15th Corps District—Alsace.)


                                 1917.

The 240th Division was recruited in the depots of the 14th Corps
District (Baden). Like all the divisions of this series, the 240th
Division received a large contingent from the 1918 class at the time of
its formation.


ALSACE.

1. After a period of intensive training (Feb. 4 to Mar. 28) in the
training camps of Oberhofen and of Heuberg, the 240th Division was sent
to Mulhousen about the end of March and went into line between the
Rhone-Rhine Canal and Hirzbach (south of Altkirch) until August 20.


WOEVRE.

2. About August 25 it was sent to the Woevre in the sector of Calonne
trench, in September.


YPRES.

3. Entraining at Conflans (Oct. 5–6) it appeared in Flanders on the 9th.
It went into action between the Ypres-Staden railroad and Poelcappelle
and suffered heavy losses in the course of the British attacks of
October 9 and 12.


CAMBRAI.

4. Relieved during the night of October 13–14, it was sent to Artois. On
October 23 it took over the sector of Bullecourt (southeast of Arras).
On November 20, it lost heavily from the British attack launched north
of Bullecourt at the same time as on the Cambrai front (700 prisoners).

5. About the middle of December it was withdrawn from the front and sent
to rest in the vicinity of Douai.


                              RECRUITING.

The 240th Division was recruited principally from Baden, some elements
from the Rhine Districts.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The 240th Division appeared to be of mediocre combat value.


                                 1918.


LENS.

1. The division was in line in the sector Fresnoy-Oppy at the beginning
of the Somme offensive. It took no part in the attack on Vimy Ridge of
March 28, but remained in support. It was relieved in this sector on
April 8.


BATTLE OF THE LYS.

2. It moved northward and was engaged north of Bethune (Hinges-Robecq on
April 14.) In two weeks’ fighting in this sector the division lost very
heavily including many prisoners.


ARGONNE.

3. Withdrawn on April 27, the division rested at Lille a week. It
entrained about May 8 for the Argonne and detrained at St. Juvin.
Engaged at Boureuilles-Vauqunois on May 13 the division held that quiet
sector until July 10.


CHAMPAGNE.

4. The division was taken to Semide and held in reserve during the
offensive of the 15th to be used as an exploiting division. When the
attack failed the division was directed west of Reims via Machault,
Warmeriville, Brimont. It camped at Jonchery from July 21 to 23.


REIMS.

5. On the 23d the division was engaged in the Bois de Reims. After the
27th it retreated on the Montagnes de Bligny, and later toward Aubilly-
Bouleuse. On August 5 it passed into second line, and was relieved 10
days later. It rested 5 days west of Chateau Porcien and returned to
line in the Prunay sector on August 13. There it held firm until October
10.

6. After its relief it waited near Rethel until the 14th, when it was
railed to Stenay via Sedan. On October 17 it was engaged north of St.
Juvin, Champigneulle, east of the Argonne forest. It continued in line
until the end, retreating toward Mouzon.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. Its effectives were greatly
reduced and its morale low in October.




                            241st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │246.         │472.         │246.         │472.
              │             │473.         │             │473.
              │             │474.         │             │474.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │(?) 5 Sqn. 18 Hus. Rgt.    │2 Sqn. 18 Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │48 F. A. Rgt.              │241 Art. Command:
              │                           │ 48 F. A. Rgt.
              │                           │ 102 Ft. A. Btn. (Staff, 1,
              │                           │  2, and 3 Btries.).
              │                           │ 1055, 1061, and 1062 Light
              │                           │  Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(241) Pion. Btn.:          │241 Pion. Btn.
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 373 Pion Co.              │ 373 Pion. Co.
              │ 374 Pion. Co.             │ 374 Pion. Co.
              │ (441) T. M. Co.           │ 441 T. M. Co.
              │ 241 Tel. Detch.           │ 5 Searchlight Section.
              │                           │241 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 241 Tel. Detch.
              │                           │ 27 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │253 Ambulance Co.          │253 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │206 Field Hospital.        │206 Field Hospital.
              │207 Field Hospital.        │207 Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │274 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                 │651 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                (12th and 19th Corps Districts—Saxony.)


                                 1917.

The 241st Division was formed at the beginning of 1917 and composed of
new regiments (type of divisions 231 and following).

The 473d and 574th Infantry Regiments were formed in the camp at
Zeithain in January, 1917, by drafts from the 1918 class and the depots
and regiments of the 19th Corps District (Saxony). The 472d Infantry
Regiment was originally in the 12th Corps District (Dresden) formed in
the same way.


RUSSIA.

1. On March 1, 1917, the 241st Division went to Brest-Litowsk. In April
it took over the sector of Postavy in the vicinity of Lake Narotch,
where it remained until the middle of June.


GALICIA.

2. Relieved by the 21st Division, it entrained on June 17 at Sventsiany,
northwest of Lake Narotch, and went to Galicia, southwest of Brzezany,
detraining on June 22. At the beginning of July, it went into line in
this region and took part in the German counteroffensive at the end of
July advancing south of Skala at the beginning of August. It took up a
position on the Zbrucz.

3. After this time the 241st Division occupied various sectors of the
Galician front (Koroskow, Husiatin).


                              RECRUITING.

The 241st Division was entirely Saxon.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

It was on the Eastern Front from the time of its formation until
February, 1918. “Our new regiment is a gang of headstrong kids.” (Letter
from a man of the 473d Infantry Regiment, Apr. 2, 1917.)


                                 1918.

1. The division rested in the vicinity of Signy l’Abbaye until March 15.
It then proceeded by steps toward the St. Gobain forest (Fressancourt,
Mar. 24).


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was engaged south of the Oise (Amigny-Septvaux) from March 25–26
to April 5. Between the 6th and 9th it advanced from Septvaux and
Fresnes toward Coucy, encountering heavy losses. The division received
the thanks of the King of Saxony for its conduct in this fighting.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

3. The division held the sector of Coucy le Chateau until May 29. On the
29th it attacked and advanced as far as Crecy au Mont. It halted on the
line Nouvron-Vingre and held there until relieved at the end of June. In
the attack of June 5–6 toward Vic sur Aisne the division lost heavily.
On the 23d of June it received a draft of 1,500 men.


SECOND BATTLE OF THE MARNE.

4. It rested near Coucy le Chateau for about a week, and on July 10 was
engaged south of the Aisne between Ambleny and Pernaut. Then it was
struck by the Allied attack on the 18th and thrown back on Mercin. The
division lost 42 officers and 2,074 men as prisoners alone. It was
relieved at a date between July 22 and 26.


SECOND BATTLE OF PICARDY.

5. The division rested and was reconstituted at Vouplaix, Sains
Richaumont near Vervins until August 20. It was moved to La Fere (22d)
and on the 25th engaged east of Noyon (Baboeuf-Appilly) and September 4.
After that date it fell back gradually by Chauny, Fravecy, on Vendeuil,
where it was relieved about September 20.


CAMBRAI-ST. QUENTIN.

6. After 10 days’ rest the division was reengaged north of St. Quentin
(Romicourt-Montbrehain) from October 1 to 10. It lost about 1,900
prisoners in this engagement.


MEUSE-ARGONNE.

7. The division rested nearly a month at Audun la Roman after October
22. The 7th Saxon Jaeger Regiment from the dissolved 197th Division had
replaced the dissolved 472d Regiment when it appeared in line on
November 5 east of the Meuse. The last identification was at Murvaux on
November 7.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. Its heavy losses of prisoners
indicate its poor quality.




                             242d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │242.         │127.         │242.         │127.
              │             │475.         │             │475.
              │             │476.         │             │476.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │2 Sqn. Wurtt. Res. Drag.   │2 Sqn. Wurtt. Res. Drag.
              │  Rgt.                     │  Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │242 Art. Command:
              │ 281 F. A. Regt.           │ 281 F. A. Regt.
              │                           │ 3 Abt. 13 Ft. A. Rgt. (9
              │                           │  and 10 Btries.).
              │                           │ 751 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1091 Light Am. Col.
              │                           │ 1105 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│39 Pion. Btn.:             │242 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │ 375 Pion. Co.             │ 375 Pion. Co.
              │ 376 Pion. Co.             │ 376 Pion. Co.
              │ 442 T. M. Co.             │ 442 T. M. Co.
              │ 242 Tel. Detch.           │242 Signal Command:
              │                           │ 76 Wireless Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │32 Ambulance Co.           │32 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │208 Field Hospital.        │208 Field Hospital.
              │503 Field Hospital.        │503 Field Hospital.
              │275 Vet. Hospital.         │275 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport    │M. T. Col.                 │652 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Attached     │                           │78 M. G. S. S. Detch.
              │                           │14 Art. Observation
              │                           │  Section.
              │                           │221 Reconnaissance Flight.
              │                           │17 Balloon Sqn.
              │                           │243 Carrier Pigeon Loft.
              │                           │Elements attached, June 7,
              │                           │  1918. (German document.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

                   (13th Corps District—Wurttemberg.)


                                 1917.

The 242d Division was formed at the end of 1916. Like all of the
divisions of the same series, the 1918 class entered largely into the
composition of the regiments (475th and 476th). These two were recruited
from the 13th Corps District (Wurttemberg). Initial effectiveness, 235
to 240 men per company.

The 127th Infantry Regiment is an active peace-time regiment taken from
the 27th Division.

1. On March 11, 1917, the 475th and 476th Infantry Regiments left the
camp of Muensingen, where they had received training since January, and
went to Lorraine. They were joined there by the 127th Infantry Regiment.


LORRAINE.

2. From March 29 to April 30 the 242d Division was in line between
Abaucourt and Bezange wood.

3. From May 4 to 15 it was employed upon defensive works north of the
Suippe.


CHAMPAGNE-CORNILLET.

4. During the night of May 15–16 it went into line south of Nauroy
(Grille-Cornillet wood), where the French attack of May 20 caused it
heavy losses (3 officers and 194 men prisoners). Several companies of
the 476th Infantry Regiment remained in the Cornillet tunnel.

5. The 242d Division was relieved during the night of May 31-June 1, and
after a few days’ rest northeast of Lavannes went into line in a calm
sector near Betheny from June 3–4 until August 6.

6. The 242d Division was at rest in the Charleville area from August 7
to 20.


MEUSE.

7. On August 20 it was transferred to the right bank of the Meuse
(Beaumont sector). It received the French attack of August 26 (7
officers and 390 men prisoners, mostly from the 475th Infantry
Regiment). It counterattacked to relieve Beaumont and remained in line
until September 10.


AISNE.

8. From the beginning of October until December 16 it held the sector of
Berry au Bac, where its only activity consisted in one raid on November
12.


                              RECRUITING.

The 242d Division was recruited entirely from Wurttemberg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

In Champagne the 242d Division showed itself energetic and tenacious
(May, 1917).

It was a good division, with a high morale, and the prisoners talked
very little (December, 1917).

The 242d Division was listed as an assault division and received the
training for divisions of that category (February-March, 1918).

The 475th and 476th Infantry Regiments, however, were considered only
mediocre.


                                 1918.

1. The division marched to its entraining point at Bergnicourt (west of
Junville) on March 22–24 and entrained for Guise. From there it marched
by night toward the Montdidier-Noyan front via Ly Fontaine, Guiscard,
Margny aux Cerises.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It was engaged near Conchy les Pots, Orvillers, Sorel from March 29
to April 8, then near Boulogne la Grasse, Mortemer, from April 10 to 26.
The division’s losses were heavy.


BATTLE OF THE AISNE.

3. After its relief it was transported to Champagne, detraining near Le
Chatelet sur Retourne. There it rested three weeks. It entered in line
between Brimont and Vitry les Reims after May 20. It attacked on the
27th and advanced by Merfy (29th), Tinquex (31st), as far as the line
Betheny, Courcelles, St. Brice (June 2). It held that sector until the
1st of August, when it retreated on La Neuvillette and held the front
Betheny-Vitry road. It was relieved about September 26.

4. The division was engaged northeast of St. Pierre a Arnes from October
5 to 11. It then fell back on Rethel. On the 20th it was moved to the
area east of Vouziers and put in reserve. On October 23 it was engaged
near Chestres, and later near Ballay, Quatre-Champs until November 4.
Beginning on the 4th it retired in the direction of Sedan by Rancourt
(Nov. 8).


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was a fair division, although
the discipline was relaxed after September.




             243d Division (formerly 8th Ersatz Division).


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │           1914–15           │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 _Infantry.   │29 Mixed Ers. │29, 30, and 31│29 Mixed Ers. │363.
              │              │  Brig. Ers.  │              │
              │              │  Btns.       │              │
              │              │32, 80, and 86│              │364.
              │              │  Brig. Ers.  │              │
              │              │  Btns.       │              │
              │41 Mixed Ers. │41, 42, 49,   │51 Mixed Ers. │365.
              │              │  and (50),   │              │
              │              │  Brig. Ers.  │              │
              │              │  Btns.       │              │
              │51 Mixed Ers. │51 and 52     │              │51 Ers.
              │              │  Brig. Ers.  │              │
              │              │  Btns.       │              │
              │              │53 and 54     │              │52 Ers.
              │              │  Brig. Ers.  │              │
              │              │  Btns.       │              │
              │              │              │  (Composition in October.)
              │              │              │              │51  Ers.
              │              │              │              │52 Ers.
              │              │              │              │365.
              │              │              │              │400.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │Cav. Detchs. of the 29, 41,  │8 Cav. Sqn.
              │  and 51 Ers. Brigs.         │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Ers. Abtls. of the 23, 27,   │8 Ers. Brig.:
              │  44, 29, and 65 F. A. Rgts. │
              │                             │ 92 F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │ 65 Ers. F. A. Rgt.
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│1 Ers. Co. 16 Pions.         │1 Ers. Co. 3 Pion. Btn. No.
   Liaisons.  │                             │  16.
              │1 Ers. Co. 21 Pions.         │1 Ers. Co. 21 Pions.
              │                             │253 Pion. Co.
              │                             │306 Pion. Co.
              │                             │162 T. M. Co.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport    │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached     │                             │117 Labor Btn.
              │                             │44 Ldw. Brig. (93 Ldw. and
              │                             │  382 Ldw. Rgts.).
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 _Infantry.   │247.          │122 Fus.      │247.          │122.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │478.          │              │478.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │479.          │              │479.
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │3 Sqn. 19 Uhlan Rgt. 13 C.   │3 Sqn. 19 Uhlan Rgt.
              │  Dist. Ers. Cav. Detch.     │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │238 F. A. Rgt. (formerly 65  │238 F. A. Rgt.
              │  Ers. F. A. Rgt.).          │
              │                             │36 Ft. A. Btn.
              │                             │1151 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1152 Light Am. Col.
              │                             │1163 Light Am. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(243) Pion. Btn.:            │243 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 253 Pion. Co.               │ 1 Res. Co. 13 Pions.
              │ 306 Pion. Co.               │ 2 Res. Co. 13 Pions.
              │ 100 T. M. Co.               │ 16 Searchlight Section.
              │ 162 T. M. Co.               │243 Signal Command:
              │ 443 T. M. Co.               │ 243 Tel. Detch.
              │ 248 Searchlight Section.    │ 8 Wireless Detch.
              │ Tel. Detch.                 │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │420 Ambulance Co.            │420 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │137 Field Hospital.          │93 Res. Field Hospital.
              │138 Field Hospital.          │94 Res. Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.               │277 Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport    │M. T. Col.                   │653 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Attached     │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (243d Division (former 8th Ersatz Division): 18th Corps District-
                             Wurttemberg.)


                                1914–15.

The 243d Division is the former 8th Ersatz Division. The latter was
formed in August, 1914, with the help of the surplus trained men in the
depots (Reserve and Landwehr 1st Ban.) in the proportion of 1 battalion
per active brigade. In this way it comprised 13 brigade Ersatz
battalions grouped into 3 mixed brigades (29th, 41st, and 51st).


LORRAINE.

1. Detraining on August 17, 1914, at Sarrebruecken, in the rear of the
6th Army, elements of the 8th Ersatz Division went into action on the
20th. It fought at Hoéville and Serres, north of Luneville, on the 25th
and took part in the attacks upon Nancy the first part of September.
Sent to the rear of the front in the vicinity of Morhange, it was
transferred to Haye at the end of September to relieve the 14th Corps.
It stayed there for two years between Limey on the west and Le Pretre
wood on the east.

2. In August, 1915, the brigade Ersatz battalions were grouped into
regiments. The 8th Ersatz Division was then composed of the 363d, 364th,
and 365th Infantry Regiments (Prussian) and of the 51st and 52d Ersatz
Regiments (Wurttemberg). It continued to hold the lines in Haye, south
of Thiaucourt.


                                 1916.


LE PRETRE WOOD.

1. Until the beginning of October, 1916, the 8th Ersatz Division
occupied the sector of the Pretre wood, north of Fey en Haye. In August
it lost the 364th Infantry Regiment, assigned to the 33d Reserve
Division, and on September 20 the 363d, which entered into the
composition of the 214th Division. It received a new regiment, the 400th
Infantry Regiment, formed in September by drafts upon its infantry
units.


SOMME.

2. Leaving the 400th Infantry Regiment in Haye, and composed of three
regiments (365th Infantry Regiment, 51st and 52d Ersatz Regiments), the
8th Ersatz Division went to the Somme on October 3. After a rest in the
vicinity of Le Catelet until the 10th it went into the sector east of
south of Bouchavesnes, where it did not take part in any important
action.


LORRAINE.

3. Relieved on November 18, it returned to Lorraine at Fey en Haye. It
went into line southeast of Thiaucourt November 25, where the 400th
Infantry Regiment was again assigned to the division.


                                 1917.

1. The 8th Ersatz Division remained on the Lorraine front, southeast of
Thiaucourt, until about May 10, 1917. In February the 400th Infantry
Regiment was sent to Russia.

At the beginning of May the division underwent several changes—it gave
the 365th Infantry Regiment to the 5th Landwehr Division and received
the 122d Fusileer Regiment (Wurttemberg) from the 105th Division. The
51st and 52d Ersatz Regiments received the 478th and 479th. The 8th
Ersatz Division, already called Wurttemberg, then became the 243d
Division.


AISNE.

2. The reserve, first (behind the Rheims front), behind Brimont and
Neufchâtel, the 243d Division then occupied the front between Miette and
the Aisne (north of Berry au Bac) from May 29 to August 20.


MEUSE HILL 344.

3. Transferred to Verdun, the division went into action at Hill 344 on
September 9. The 479th Infantry Regiment lost heavily during the attack
of the 9th. The 122d Infantry Regiment took part in the attack of
October 2 and also had losses.


MEUSE (LEFT BANK).

4. About October 6 the 243d Division was relieved and sent to rest near
Stenay. On October 17 it took up its position on the left bank of the
Meuse (Bethincourt sector), where it still remained in December.


                              RECRUITING.

The division had become purely Wurttemberg.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The elements of the 243d Division appeared good. They were never engaged
in very active sectors, except at Hill 344 in September, 1917. At Verdun
they showed only mediocre combat value.


                                 1918.

1. The division was relieved in the sector northwest of Verdun at the
end of January and traveled by rail to the Stenay area north of
Montfaucon, where it rested and trained until March 20. On that day it
entrained at Stenay and traveled via Sedan-Charleville-Hirson-Ors to
Bazeul. On the 22d the division marched by night via Le Cateau and
Montbrehain to Raisel, crossed the Somme at St. Christ-Briost and came
into line reenforcing the front on the night of March 25–26.


BATTLE OF PICARDY.

2. It advanced in the first line of the attack through Guillancourt,
Villers aux Erables, and attacked Moreuil on the 30th. It suffered very
heavy losses, amounting to 50 per cent between March 26–30 at Estrees
and Ignancourt, and in the attack on Moreuil. Two companies of the 122d
Fusileer Regiment lost more than 207 of their fighting strength. The
division was withdrawn about April 4. On April 2 the division received a
draft of 350 to 400 men.


PICARDY.

3. The division was reengaged north and east of Villers Bretonneux,
relieving the 228th Division. On the 24th it made an unsuccessful attack
on Villers Bretonneux. On the 27th it was withdrawn to close reserve and
rested until May 13.


THIRD BATTLE OF THE SOMME.

4. Between May 13 and July 7 the division was in line near Albert. It
rested until August 10, when it was engaged east of Morlancourt, north
of the Somme. It was forced back by Chuignolles, Proyart, Fouconcourt,
Fay, Dompierre until its relief on August 29. Four hundred prisoners
were lost in that engagement. It was again in line between September 2
and 9 east of Bouchavesnes.

5. The division rested in upper Alsace during September. It returned to
Coutrai on October 6 and was engaged south and east of Le Cateau (St.
Benin, Bazeul, Catillon and later east of Landrecies), mid-October to
1st of November. On November 6 it was again engaged south of Aulnoye and
retreated east of Maubeuge, where it was last identified on November 9.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class. It was largely used on active
fronts and did creditably.




                            255th Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1915             │            1916
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │31 Ldw.       │30 Ldw.       │31 Ldw.       │30 Ldw.
              │              │68 Ldw.       │              │68 Ldw.
              │              │1 Ers. Ldw.   │     (?)      │2 Ers. Ldw.
              │              │2 Ers. Ldw.   │              │3 Ers. Ldw.
              │              │3 Ers. Ldw.   │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
              │              │              │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │Hus. Detch.                  │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                             │2 Ldw. Co. 11 C. Dist. Pions.
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │                             │1 Ldw. Co. 16 C. Dist. Pions.
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                             │
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │                             │
              │                             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                             │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────

 ─────────────┬─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────
              │            1917             │            1918
 ─────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────┼──────────────┬──────────────
              │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.   │   Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────
 Infantry.    │31 Ldw.       │30 Ldw.       │82 Ldw.       │68 Ldw.
              │              │86 Ldw.       │              │94 Ldw.
              │32 Ldw.       │68 Ldw.       │              │153 Ldw.
              │              │94 Ldw.       │              │
              │              │153 Ldw.      │              │
              │ (Composition after August,  │              │
              │           1917.)            │              │
              │31 Ldw.       │68 Ldw.       │              │
              │              │94 Ldw.       │              │
              │              │153 Ldw.      │              │
 ─────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────┼──────────────┴──────────────
 Cavalry.     │4 Sqn. 7 Hus. Rgt.           │4 Sqn. 7 Hus. Rgt.
              │1 Sqn. 15 C. Dist. Landst.   │
              │  Cav. Detch.                │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:                │301 F. A. Rgt.
              │ 301 F. A. Rgt.              │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Engineers and│(255) Pion. Btn.:            │255 Pion. Btn.:
   Liaisons.  │                             │
              │ 1 Ldw. Co. 8 C. Dist. Pions.│ 1 Ldw. Co. 8 C. Dist. Pions.
              │ Metz Landst. Pion. Co.      │ Landst. Ers. Co. 11 C. Dist.
              │                             │  Pions.
              │ 455 T. M. Co.               │ 209 Searchlight Section.
              │ 15 Searchlight Section.     │255 Signal Command:
              │ 255 Tel. Detch.             │ 255 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Medical and  │623 (?) Ambulance Co.        │627 Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                             │
              │Field Hospital.              │192 Field Hospital.
              │566 Vet. Hospital.           │
 ─────────────┼─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────
 Transport.   │M. T. Col.                   │
 ─────────────┴─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

 (Former Metz Detachment. 68th Landwehr: 16th Corps District—Lorraine and
   the Rhine Province. 94th Landwehr: 11th Corps District—Electorate of
 Hesse and Thuringia. 153d Landwehr: 4th Corps District—Prussian Saxony.)


                                1915–16.


LORRAINE.

1. The 255th Division is the former Metz Detachment, the composition of
which was remodeled and which was changed into a division in May, 1917.

2. The Metz Detachment, composed of the 31st Landwehr Brigade (30th and
68th Landwehr Regiments) and of the 1st, 2d, and 3d Ersatz Landwehr
Regiments, occupied the same sector of Lorraine between the Moselle and
Abaucourt (north of Pont à Mousson) from the end of October, 1914, to
1917.


                                 1917.

1. About May, 1917, the Metz Detachment became the 255th Division. It
then comprised the 31st Landwehr Brigade (30th and 68th Landwehr
Regiments) and three regiments of recent organization, the 86th, 94th,
and 153d Landwehr, formed by grouping the battalions of the old
dissolved Ersatz regiments.

2. With this composition, the 255th Division continued to hold the front
along the Moselle (right bank) until the month of October.

3. In July and August the 30th and 86th Landwehr Regiments left the
255th Division to form the new 31st Independent Landwehr Brigade. The
latter remained in line on the right bank of the Moselle. The 255th
Division, reduced to three regiments (68th, 94th, and 153d Landwehr),
went to the left bank (Le Prêtre wood) about October 13.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

Mediocre.


                                 1918.

1. The division continued to hold its sector in the Bois le Pretre until
the American attack on September 12. At that time the company strength
was 180 to 200, with an effective rifle strength of 100. The men were
mostly between 37 and 45 years of age.

2. The attack of the 12th of September threw the division back on
Vandieres and Preny, where it was still in line at the time of the
armistice.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class.




                            301st Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │             │             │             │48 Landst.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Cavalry.     │                           │1 Sqn. 9 Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │                           │3 Sqn. 9 Res. Hus. Rgt.
              │                           │4 Sqn. 9 Res. Hus. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Artillery.   │                           │217 F. A. Rgt.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│                           │342 Pion. Co.
   Liaisons.  │                           │
              │                           │410 T. M. Co.
              │                           │310 Tel. Detch.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │                           │Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │                           │Field Hospital.
              │                           │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │                           │M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Attached.    │84 Brig.:                  │1 Rastatt Landst. Inf. Btn.
              │                           │  (XIV/5).
              │ 70 Res. Inf. Rgt.         │10 Ldw. Rgt.
              │ 9 Res. Hus. Rgt.          │56 Ldw. Rgt.
              │ 252 F. A. Rgt.            │3 Btn. 2 Bav. Ers. Rgt.
              │                           │  Landst. Inf. Btns.
              │ 342 Pion. Co.             │2 Koeln (8 C. Dist. Btn.
              │                           │  No. 14).
              │ 410 T. M. Co. Landst. Inf.│8 C. D. No. 7 (Bonn).
              │  Btns.                    │
              │ 3 Bav. C. Dist. No. 13 (2 │14 C. D. No. 1 (Mosbach).
              │  Nurnberg).               │
              │ 16 C. D. No. 7 (2 Sarre-  │18 C. D. No. 10
              │  Louis).                  │  (Friedberg).
              │ 14 C. D. No. 5 (Rastatt). │1 Bav. C. D. No. 15
              │                           │  (Dillingen).
              │                           │1 Bav. C. D. No. 9
              │                           │  (Augsburg).
              │                           │7 C. D. No. 49 (Elberfeld).
              │                           │  (According to order of
              │                           │  battle, Aug. 12, 1918.)
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.

   (10th Landwehr Regiment: 6th Corps District—Silesia. 56th Landwehr
               Regiment: 7th Corps District—Westphalia.)


                                 1917.


VOSGES.

1. The 301st Division, apparently formed about the middle of 1917, was
simply a military unit without permanent elements.

2. To this division were attached the 70th Reserve (84th Landwehr
Brigade) from April, 1917, until the beginning of June, 1918 (Vosges
front west of Senones and in the vicinity of Ban de Sapt), the 2d
Bavarian Ersatz Regiment (an organic part of the 39th Bavarian Reserve
Division) from June, 1917, and several Landsturm Battalions.

3. The sector of the 301st Division extends on the Vosges front from La
Plaine as far as Provenchères. The headquarters of the division was at
Saulxures.


                          VALUE—1917 ESTIMATE.

The division was mostly made up of elderly men. The troops assigned to
the 301st Division were supposed to occupy calm sectors.

The 10th Landwehr Regiment was made up for the most part (three-
quarters) of Silesians and Prussians from the Province of Posen. There
were some Alsatians (4 in the 6th Company).


                                 1918.

1. The division remained in its sector in Army Detachment A without
event throughout 1918. Its losses were negligible. The companies had an
average ration strength of 170 men; an average trench strength of 105.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as fourth class. It was one of the lowest of that
class in value. The morale was low and desertions frequent.




                             302d Division.


                              COMPOSITION.

 ─────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────
              │           1917            │           1918
 ─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────┼─────────────┬─────────────
              │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.  │  Brigade.   │  Regiment.
 ─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────────
 Infantry.    │     (?)     │42.          │22.          │11 Gren.
              │             │45.          │             │9 Jag.
              │             │10 Jag.      │             │10 Jag.
              │    (After June 1917.)     │             │
              │22.          │45.          │             │
              │             │21 Res.      │             │
              │             │10 Jag.      │             │
 ─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────┼─────────────┴─────────────
 Artillery.   │Art. Command:              │
              │ 10 F. A. Rgt. (elements). │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Engineers and│Pion. Btn.:                │Pion. Btn. No. 19
   Liaisons.  │                           │  (elements).
              │ 19 Pion. Btn. (elements). │205 Pion. Co.
              │ 205 Pion. Co.             │172 Mountain T. M. Co.
              │ 172 Mountain T. M. Co.    │302 Tel. Detch.
              │ Tel. Detch.               │
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Medical and  │202 Ambulance Co.          │Ambulance Co.
   Veterinary.│                           │
              │Field Hospital.            │Field Hospital.
              │Vet. Hospital.             │Vet. Hospital.
 ─────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────
 Transport.   │672 (?) M. T. Col.         │(?) 672 M. T. Col.
 ─────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────


                                HISTORY.


                                 1917.


MACEDONIA.

1. The 302d Division (former Hippel Division) was organized on the
Macedonian front toward the end of 1916. At the beginning it included
elements of various nationalities. It appears to have become entirely
German during the first part of 1917. At this time its composition was
as follows: The staff of the 22d Infantry Brigade (coming from the 11th
Division); the 42d Infantry Regiment from the 3d Division; the 45th
Infantry Regiment from the 101st Division and the 10th Jäger Regiment
(the latter formed by grouping the Jäger and Fusileer Battalions of the
Guard and the 9th and 12th Jäger Battalions). In January, 1917, the 45th
Infantry Regiment had replaced the 11th Grenadier Regiment, transferred
to the 101st Division and which had come to the Hippel Division in
November.

2. The elements of the 302d Division occupied the Macedonian front
(Monastir-Boucle de la Cerna) in 1917 and until the end of February,
1918.

3. In June, 1917, the 42d Infantry Regiment, the same as the 59th
Regiment of the 101st Division, left the Macedonian front for Roumania
(vicinity of Rimnicu-Sarat). It was definitely detached from the 302d
Division and replaced by the 21st Reserve Infantry Regiment from the
216th Division.


                                 1918.

1. The divisional staff operated in Macedonia until it surrendered as a
complete unit, divisional commander, staff, and troops, numbering 7,000,
about the 1st of October.


                          VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.

The division was rated as third class at the time of its retirement from
the Western Front.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed “(?) Dion. Detchs.” to “(?) Pion. Detchs.” on p. 47.
 2. Changed “Cuichy-Canal” to “Cuinchy-Canal” on p. 56.
 3. Changed “2 Vac. Pion. Detch.” to “2 Cav. Pion. Detch.” on p. 69.
 4. Added “VALUE—1918 ESTIMATE.” heading on p. 77.
 5. Changed “Mauberge” to “Maubeuge” on pp. 95 and 276.
 6. Changed “abrustungs” to “abrüstungs” on p. 192.
 7. Changed “Tanganrog” to “Taganrog” on p. 272.
 8. Changed “Buskeque” to “Bousbecque” on p. 274.
 9. Changed “Duenamuemde” to “Duenamuende” on p. 301.
10. Changed “Ghissegnies” to “Gussignies” on p. 326.
11. Changed “Kalwariia-Mariampol” to “Kalwaria-Mariampol” on pp. 397 and
      538.
12. Changed “Rambluzim” to “Rambluzin” on p. 403.
13. Changed “Dhinzel” to “Dhuizel” on p. 404.
14. Changed “Grandelain” to “Crandelain” on p. 411.
15. Changed “Rozoy sur Sene” to “Rozoy sur Serre” on p. 420.
16. Added “1918.” sub-heading on p. 427.
17. Changed “October 19.” to “August 19.” on p. 437.
18. Changeed “Brandeberg” to “Brandenburg” on pp. 577 anf 593.
19. Changed “Yores” to “Ypres” on p. 615.
20. Changed “Schuz” to “Schutz” on p. 616.
21. Added footnote anchor after “COMPOSITION.” heading on p. 639.
22. Changed “405th Infantry Regiment” to “445th Infantry Regiment” on p.
      719.
23. Silently corrected typographical errors.
24. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
25. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORIES OF TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-ONE DIVISIONS OF THE GERMAN ARMY WHICH PARTICIPATED IN THE WAR (1914-1918) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


