The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ritual of the Order of the Eastern Star
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ritual of the Order of the Eastern Star


Creator: Order of the Eastern Star. General Grand Chapter

Release date: January 8, 2020 [eBook #61130]

Language: English

Credits: MFR, amsibert, David King, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RITUAL OF THE ORDER OF THE EASTERN STAR ***



Produced by MFR, amsibert, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive.)






[Illustration: Frontispiece.]

                Ritual of the Order of the Eastern Star




                Ritual of The Order of the Eastern Star.

          Published by Authority of The General Grand Chapter.




Chicago, Illinois:
FIRST REVISED EDITION.
January, 1890.

COPYRIGHT, 1890.




                                PREFACE.


In pursuance of a call, issued and endorsed by several Grand Chapters, a
convention of representatives was held at Indianapolis, Indiana,
November 16th, 1876, and the General Grand Chapter, Order of the Eastern
Star, was organized. A Ritual Committee was appointed, and in 1878 the
General Grand Chapter adopted the work, and it was published by its
authority. At the session in 1883, a committee on Ritual was appointed,
with instructions to receive all proper amendments, and report the same
at the next meeting. In 1886, the Committee was continued. At the
session in 1889, the Ritual Committee, consisting of Jerome Spaulding,
Mary A. Hepler and Lorraine J. Pitkin, presented the following Ritual as
the result of their labors, which was adopted.

We hereby certify the following to be the Ritual as revised at the
session of the General Grand Chapter, September, 1889.

_Nettie Ransford,
M. W. Grand Matron._

_Benjamin Lynds,
M. W. Grand Patron._

_Lorraine J. Pitkin,
R. W. Grand Secretary._




                               CONTENTS.


              Preface                                    v

              General Regulations                        1

              Opening                                   15

              Closing                                   31

              Initiation                                35

              Installation, Subordinate Chapter         69

              Installation, Grand Chapter               97

              Funeral Ceremonies                       117




                          GENERAL REGULATIONS.


                                 TITLE.


This organization shall be known as "THE ORDER OF THE EASTERN STAR."


                              MEMBERSHIP.


Master Masons in good standing in a Masonic Lodge, and their wives,
daughters, mothers, widows, and sisters, who have attained the age of
eighteen years, are eligible to membership in this Order.


                              GOVERNMENT.


The government of the Order is vested in three bodies, named
respectively, in the order of their rank, General Grand Chapter, Grand
Chapter, and Subordinate Chapter.


                         GENERAL GRAND CHAPTER.


The authority of the General Grand Chapter is supreme when exercised
within the limits defined and prescribed by its Constitution. It has no
jurisdiction over matters not specifically given to its control by that
instrument.


                             GRAND CHAPTER.


The authority of a Grand Chapter is supreme within its jurisdiction,
excepting upon matters which are within the control of the General Grand
Chapter. Its jurisdiction shall not include more than one State or
Territory.


                          SUBORDINATE CHAPTER.


The authority of a Subordinate Chapter is prescribed and limited by the
Grand Chapter within whose jurisdiction it exists. Five Subordinate
Chapters within any State or Territory where no Grand Chapter exists,
may organize a Grand Chapter, possessing all the lawful powers of such a
Chapter within said State or Territory.


                               LANDMARKS.


1. A belief in the existence of a Supreme Being.

2. In the Order of the Eastern Star there are only five degrees, known
as Adah, the daughter; Ruth, the widow; Esther, the wife; Martha, the
sister; and Electa, the mother.

3. The name of the Order, the names of its degrees, and modes of
recognition are unchangeable.

4. Its lessons are Scriptural, its teachings moral, and its purposes
beneficent.

5. Its obligations are based upon the honor of those who obtain its
secrets, and are framed upon the principle that whatever benefits are
due by Masons to the wives, daughters, mothers, widows and sisters of
Masons, reciprocal duties are due from them to the Brotherhood.

6. That the obligation of our Order, voluntarily assumed, is perpetual,
from the force of which there is no release.

7. The ballot, for candidates for the degrees, or membership, must be
unanimous, without debate, and kept inviolably secret.

8. The degrees cannot be conferred unless a brother in good standing
shall preside. He can call upon the Worthy Matron to assist in
conferring the degrees.

9. Every member is amenable to the laws of the Order, and may be tried
for offenses, either by the Chapter to which the member belongs, or by
the Chapter within whose jurisdiction the member resides.

10. The right of every member to appeal from the decision of a
Subordinate Chapter, to the Grand Chapter or its executive head.

11. The right of every Chapter to decide, from among eligible
candidates, who shall be admitted to membership.

12. The right of every member to visit any regular Chapter unless lawful
objection is made to such visitor.


                         SUBORDINATE CHAPTERS.


Every Subordinate Chapter must have a Charter or Dispensation legally
issued, and always present at its meetings, without which it cannot
legally act.


                               OFFICERS.


The officers of a Subordinate Chapter shall be:

    WORTHY MATRON,
    WORTHY PATRON,
    ASSOCIATE MATRON,
    SECRETARY,
    TREASURER,
    CONDUCTRESS,
    ASSO. CONDUCTRESS,
    ADAH,
    RUTH,
    ESTHER,
    MARTHA,
    ELECTA,
    WARDER,
    SENTINEL.
    If desired:
    CHAPLAIN.
    MARSHAL.
    ORGANIST.

The Stations of the several Officers are indicated on the Plan of
Chapter Room on page 12.

The first seven shall be elected by separate and majority ballot, and
the others shall be appointed by the Worthy Matron.


                               MEETINGS.


The meetings of a Chapter are either regular or special. Regular
meetings are those held at stated intervals as prescribed by its
By-laws. Special meetings are those held by appointment of the Worthy
Matron or other lawful authority.


                                QUORUM.


Seven members, including one of the first three officers, shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, unless the By-laws
of the Chapter shall prescribe a larger number.


                               PETITIONS.


A petition for the degrees or membership must be signed by the
petitioner and two members of the Chapter, who recommend the petitioner.
The petition must be received at a regular meeting of the Chapter,
unless the Grand Chapter of its jurisdiction shall otherwise provide;
and when received, must be referred to a committee of three members, one
of whom shall be a brother, appointed by the presiding officer. The
committee can only report at a regular meeting.


                              THE BALLOT.


The ballot upon petitions for the degrees or membership, can only be
taken at a regular meeting. The Associate Conductress shall have charge
of the ballot-box, under the direction of the Worthy Matron. After it
has been examined by the Worthy Matron and Associate Matron, she shall
present it to the Worthy Matron and Worthy Patron for their ballot, and
may carry it to every member present--or _may_ place it upon the Altar.
If placed upon the Altar, every member entitled to a vote shall approach
the Altar from the West, between Ruth and Esther, make the sign of
salutation, deposit their ballot, leaving between Esther and Martha.

The member balloting must be at least three paces in advance of the one
who directly follows.

When all have voted, the Worthy Matron shall declare the ballot closed,
and direct the Associate Conductress to bear the ballot box West and
East.

After it has been examined by the Associate Matron, the Matron will ask:

_W. M._ Sister Associate Matron.

_A. M._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ How is the ballot in the West?

    The Associate Matron will say:

_A. M._ The ballot is clear, (or not clear,) Worthy Matron.

    After the W. M. has inspected it, and no black balls appear, she
    will say:

_W. M._ The ballot being clear in the East, I have the pleasure to
inform you that you have elected ---- to receive the degrees, (or become
a member,) in this Chapter.

    If the ballot is not clear, but so nearly so that the result may
    have been from mistake, a second and final ballot may be ordered. If
    the final ballot is dark, the W. M. will say:

_W. M._ The ballot not being clear, I have to announce that the petition
of ---- is rejected.


                              MEMBERSHIP.


Membership can only be forfeited by dimission, suspension, or expulsion
from a Chapter, excepting that the suspension or expulsion of a brother
from a Masonic Lodge, for any other cause than non-payment of dues,
deprives him of all the rights of membership in this Order until
reinstated by the Masonic body.


                      BADGES, JEWELS, AND REGALIA.


The officers shall wear during Chapter sessions the badge of office
belonging to their respective offices. The badge shall consist of the
appropriate Jewel, made of gold or gilded metal and suspended by a
ribbon having the five colors of the Order.

Collars, Robes, and other regalia in addition to what is here prescribed
may be worn by Chapters that desire them; the General Grand Chapter only
prescribing the minimum.

The Jewels appropriate to the several Officers are as follows:

    WORTHY MATRON, _Five-pointed Star with Gavel in the center_.

    WORTHY PATRON, _Five-pointed Star with Square and Compasses in the
    center_.

    ASSOCIATE MATRON, _Five-pointed Star with Sun in the center_.

    SECRETARY, _Five-pointed Star with Cross-pens in the center_.

    TREASURER, _Five-pointed Star with Cross-keys in the center_.

    CONDUCTRESS, _Five-pointed Star with Scroll and Baton in the
    center_.

    ASSOCIATE CONDUCTRESS, _Five-pointed Star with Baton in the center_.

    CHAPLAIN, _Five-pointed Star with Bible in the center_.

    MARSHAL, _Five-pointed Star with Cross-batons in the center_.

    ADAH, _Triangle, with Sword and Veil in the center_.

    RUTH, _Triangle, with Sheaf in the center_;

    ESTHER, _Triangle, with Crown and Sceptre in the center_.

    MARTHA, _Triangle, with Broken Column in the center_.

    ELECTA, _Triangle, with Cup in the center_;

    WARDER, _Five-pointed Star with Dove in the center_.

    SENTINEL, _Five-pointed Star with Cross-swords in the center_.

    ORGANIST, _Five-pointed Star with Lyre in the center_.

The Jewel for Associate Grand Patron shall be a Five-pointed Star with a
Star in the center within a Pentagon.

The Jewels for Grand Chapters shall be the same as Subordinate Chapters
within a Pentagon.

The Jewels for the General Grand Chapter shall be the Grand Chapter
Jewels within a circle.

Special Regalia for Grand Chapters shall be left to the discretion of
each Grand Chapter.

In addition to the Jewel worn by the Worthy Matron, she is entitled to
wear a Scarf made of royal purple velvet, three inches wide, edged with
gold lace on the inner edge, and gold fringe on the outer edge, a
five-pointed Star in colors worked in silk, upon the shoulder and at the
crossing, a golden rosette with two gold tassels suspended therefrom. It
must be worn from left shoulder to the right side.


                            MEMBERS' BADGES.


During Chapter sessions members shall wear upon the left breast a badge
embracing a five-pointed Star and the five colors of the Order.

[Illustration: Matron.]

[Illustration: Patron.]

[Illustration: Asso. Matron.]

[Illustration: Secretary.]

[Illustration: Treasurer.]

[Illustration: Conductress.]

[Illustration: Assoc. Conductress.]

[Illustration: Chaplain.]

[Illustration: Warder.]

[Illustration: Sentinel.]

[Illustration: Marshal.]

[Illustration: Organist.]

[Illustration: Adah.]

[Illustration: ruth.]

[Illustration: Esther.]

[Illustration: Martha.]

[Illustration: Electa.]

[Illustration: Chapter Room.]


                            FURNITURE, ETC.


In the center of the Chapter room there should be an Altar, standing
upon the center of a Five-pointed Star, having the five colors of the
Order, with the white point towards the west. Upon the Altar should be
an open Bible.

In the East, there should be a pedestal with a Gavel thereon for the use
of the presiding officer.

Each Chapter should have a Seal, Signet, and one or more small Bibles, a
Sword and Veil for Adah, Culms of Barley for Ruth, a Crown and Scepter
for Esther, a Broken Column for Martha, and a Cup for Electa; they may
also have banners with appropriate emblems thereon.


                        POSITION OF THE CHAIRS.


The chairs for the Star Officers may either face the East, or incline
toward the Altar.


                           USE OF THE GAVEL.


One blow of the gavel calls the Chapter to order, seats it when
standing, and completes its closing; two blows call up the Officers; and
three blows call up the Chapter.


                                 RAPS.


When giving an alarm at the door, five raps shall be given, which shall
be answered by five from the other side, these will be followed by one
from each side. Raps are given in this manner, ** ** * *. The door will
be opened by the Warder.


                             GRAND HONORS.


The Grand Honors are given by crossing the arms over the breast, the
left being over the right, and slightly bowing.




                        Opening of the Chapter.


    When ready for the opening exercises, the Officers with the
    exception of the Worthy Patron, and Associate Conductress, retire to
    the anteroom. The Associate Conductress assumes her chair, and the
    Worthy Patron, ascending the dais, gives one blow with the gavel.
    After requesting all present who are not members of the Order to
    retire, he says:

_W. P._ Sister Associate Conductress.

_A. C._ Worthy Patron.

    Officers rise and respond, whenever addressed, and remain standing
    until seated by an order from the East.

_W. P._ You will invite the worthy Matron and other Officers to enter
the Chapter room.

    The Associate Conductress retires and returns with the officers
    through the door of the preparation room. As they enter, the Chapter
    is called up, and music furnished. The officers enter in two files,
    led by the Conductress and Associate Conductress, and take positions
    as follows:

                        W. M.           A. M.


                        War.            Esther.

                        Ruth.   Altar.  Martha.

                        Adah.           Electa.

                        Sec'y.          Treas.

                        Cond.           Asso.
                                        Cond.


                                East.

    The Worthy Patron will say:

_W. P._ Sister Conductress, you will escort the Worthy Matron to the
East.

    She does so, and the Worthy Matron ascending the dais, receives the
    gavel and proceeds.

    The use of the above ceremony is optional.

_W. M._ The Officers will take their respective stations and prepare for
the active duties of the Chapter.

    Seats the Chapter.

_W. M._ Sister Warder.

_War._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ You will see that the doors to our Chapter are secure.

_War._ The doors are secure, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ It is well. Sisters, Brothers and Visitors of ---- Chapter, No.
--, the hour has arrived for us to resume our labors. To open our
Chapter in a manner becoming the solemnity of the work, and to secure
the best results, I require your attention and assistance. Sister
Associate Matron.

_A. M._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ You will ascertain if all present are members of the Order and
entitled to its privileges.

    If the Associate Matron is able of her own knowledge to vouch for
    all present, she responds at once to the Worthy Matron. If she is
    unable to do so, she says:

_A. M._ Sisters Conductress and Associate Conductress, ascertain and
report if all present are members of the Order.

    The Conductress and Associate Conductress will use the customary
    means of examination, beginning at the East, on the South and North,
    meeting at the West, back of Esther. The Associate Conductress
    reporting to the Conductress.

    Having done so, the Conductress says:

_Cond._ Sister Associate Matron. I find all present members of the Order
of the Eastern Star.

    The Associate Matron will then respond:

_A. M._ Worthy Matron, all present are members of the Order and entitled
to its privileges.

_W. M._ It is well. Sister Warder.

_War._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ You will instruct the Sentinel that we are about to engage in
the ceremony of opening our Chapter, and direct him to allow no
interruption, while we are thus engaged.

    The Warder, in due order, ** ** * * after responses from the
    Sentinel, opens the doors and repeats the order to the Sentinel,
    after which she closes the door and says:

_War._ Worthy Matron, there will be no interruption.

    The Worthy Matron will call up the Officers and they will remain
    standing during the ceremony of opening.

_W. M._ Sister Associate Matron.

_A. M._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What number of Officers constitute a Chapter, and what titles do
they bear?

_A. M._ A complete Chapter requires fourteen, and their titles are:
Worthy Matron, Worthy Patron, Associate Matron, Secretary, Treasurer,
Conductress, Associate Conductress, Adah, Ruth, Esther, Martha, Electa,
Warder, Sentinel, and may have Chaplain, Marshal and Organist.

_W. M._ Where is the Sentinel's station?

_A. M._ Outside the closed door.

_W. M._ What is his duty and explain his badge of office.

_A. M._ To protect the Chapter against the intrusion of improper
persons. His badge is the Cross-swords within the Star, an emblem of
protection, admonishing him that upon his watchful care depends our
security against interruption.

_W. M._ Where is the Warder's station?

_A. M._ At the southwest entrance to the Chapter, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Warder.

_War._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty and explain your badge of office.

_War._ To act in conjunction with the Sentinel, and allow none to enter
or leave the Chapter, without permission of the presiding officer. My
badge is the Dove within the Star, an emblem of peace, admonishing me
that I should labor for the peace and harmony of the Chapter.

_W. M._ Where is the Associate Conductress' station?

_War._ In the North, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Associate Conductress.

_A. C._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_A. C._ To receive and prepare candidates for the ceremony of
initiation, and assist the Conductress in the active duties of the
Chapter. My badge is the Baton within the Star, an emblem of direction
admonishing me that good discipline is essential to the success of our
Order.

_W. M._ Where is the Conductress' station?

_A. C._ In the South, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Conductress.

_Cond._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty and explain your badge of office.

_Cond._ To assist the Associate Matron, conduct candidates through the
ceremony of initiation, and obey your instructions. My badge is the
Scroll and Baton within the Star, an emblem of prepared plans and their
fulfillment, admonishing me that it depends greatly upon the manner of
conducting candidates through the ceremony of initiation, to make the
first impressions permanent, and as we desire they should be.

_W. M._ Where is the Treasurer's station?

_Cond._ In the North-east, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Treasurer.

_Treas._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_Treas._ To receive all moneys from the Secretary, giving my receipt
therefor, and pay them out only upon proper authority. My badge is the
Cross-keys within the Star, an emblem of security, admonishing me to the
strictest fidelity in the discharge of my important trust, that the
Chapter may not be embarrassed in its efforts to relieve the distressed
and meet its necessary expenses.

_W. M._ Where is the Secretary's station?

_Treas._ In the South-east, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Secretary.

_Secy._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_Secy._ To make proper record of the proceedings of the Chapter, and
conduct its correspondence. To receive all moneys belonging to the
Chapter, and pay them to the Treasurer, taking her receipt therefor. My
badge is the Cross-pens within the Star, an emblem of intelligence,
admonishing me to be faithful to my trust, that the good deeds of my
companions may not go unrecorded.

_W. M._ Where is Adah's station?

_Secy._ At the first point of the Star, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Adah.

_Adah._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_Adah._ To make known to all proper inquirers the light, knowledge and
beauty of the Blue ray, which represents the sky when all clouds have
vanished, and symbolizes Fidelity. My badge is the Sword and Veil within
the Triangle, an emblem of the heroic conduct of Jephthah's daughter.

_W. M._ Have you a sign?

_Adah._ I have; it is given by--

    While giving the sign explain from secret work. (3.)

_W. M._ Sisters and Brothers, on seeing this sign given, how would you
respond?

    _Response._ Members will respond with the Pass of Adah.

_W. M._ Where is Ruth's station?

_Adah._ At the second point of the Star, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Ruth.

_Ruth._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_Ruth._ To make known to all proper inquirers the light, knowledge and
beauty of the Yellow ray, whose golden hue symbolizes Constancy. My
badge is the Sheaf within the Triangle, an emblem of plenty, and
represents the reward of patient industry gained by the humble gleaner
Ruth.

_W. M._ Have you a sign?

_Ruth._ I have; it is given by--

    While giving the sign explain from secret work. (6.)

_W. M._ Sisters and Brothers, on seeing this sign given how would you
respond?

    _Response._ Members will respond with the Pass of Ruth.

_W. M._ Where is Esther's station?

_Ruth._ At the third point of the Star, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Esther.

_Esther._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_Esther._ To make known to all proper inquirers the light, knowledge,
and beauty of the White ray, which symbolizes Light, Purity, and Joy. My
badge is the Crown and Scepter within the Triangle, an emblem of royalty
and power. In the exercise of authority, we should be governed by
justice and unselfish loyalty to the welfare of others. It was by the
practice of these virtues that Esther was able to save her people from
extermination.

_W. M._ Have you a sign?

_Esther._ I have; it is given by--

    While giving the sign explain from secret work. (9.)

_W. M._ Sisters and Brothers, on seeing this sign given how would you
respond?

    _Response._ Members will respond with the Pass of Esther.

_W. M._ Where is Martha's station?

_Esther._ At the fourth point of the Star, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Martha.

_Martha._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_Martha._ To make known to all proper inquirers the light, knowledge and
beauty of the Green ray, an emblem of nature's life and beauty,
symbolizing Hope and Immortality. My badge is the Broken Column within
the Triangle, an emblem of the death of a person, cut off in the vigor
of life, and should remind us of the sisterly grief of Martha.

_W. M._ Have you a sign?

_Martha._ I have; it is given by--

    While giving the sign, explain from secret work. (12.)

_W. M._ Sisters and Brothers, on seeing this sign given how would you
respond?

    _Response._ Members will respond with the Pass of Martha.

_W. M._ Where is Electa's station?

_Martha._ At the fifth point of the Star, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Electa.

_Electa._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_Electa._ To make known to all proper inquirers the light, knowledge,
and beauty of the Red ray, a symbol of that Fervency which should
actuate all who are engaged in the service of truth, as exemplified in
the life of Electa. My badge is the Cup within the Triangle, an emblem
of charity and hospitality, and should remind us that however bitter may
be the cup which our Heavenly Father gives us, it will in the end
overflow with blessings, rich, abounding, and eternal.

_W. M._ Have you a sign?

_Electa._ I have; it is given by--

    While giving the sign, explain from secret work. (15.)

_W. M._ Sisters and Brothers, on seeing this sign given how would you
respond?

    _Response._ Members will respond with the Pass of Electa.

_W. M._ It is well; and when a member of the Order hails us with any one
of these signs we will recall the merits of the heroine whose sign is
given, and respond with proper attention.

_W. M._ Where is the Associate Matron's station?

_Electa._ In the West, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Sister Associate Matron.

_A. M._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is your duty, and explain your badge of office.

_A. M._ To assist the Worthy Matron, and preside over the Chapter during
her absence. My badge is the effulgent Sun within the Star, an emblem of
light, admonishing me that the principles of our Order should shine with
undiminished lustre through our lives.

_W. M._ Where is the Worthy Patron's station?

_A. M._ At your left, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is his duty, and explain his badge of office.

_A. M._ To preside during the conferring of the degrees, and at other
times when requested to do so by the Worthy Matron; to act as her
adviser, see that the officers are proficient in their work, and
exercise a general supervision over the affairs of the Chapter. His
badge is the Square and Compasses within the Star, an emblem of the
relationship existing between the Masonic Fraternity and the Order of
the Eastern Star.

_W. M._ Where is the Worthy Matron's station?

_A. M._ In the East, Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ What is her duty, and explain her badge of office.

_A. M._ To preside at the meetings of the Chapter, see that its business
is properly conducted, and secure obedience to the laws and regulations
of the Order. Her badge is the Gavel within the Star, an emblem of
authority, admonishing her that the government of this Chapter, and its
prosperity, depend greatly upon her judgment and discretion. Her
responsibilities to God for the faithful discharge of her duties should
ever prompt her to do her work in the spirit of faith and prayer.

_W. M._ It is in this spirit that I desire to open this Chapter, and
perform whatever duties may devolve upon me. That we may have the needed
grace to do our work well, let us unite in prayer.

    The Chapter is called up, and the following Prayer is offered by the
    Worthy Patron or Chaplain at the Altar, approaching between Martha
    and Esther.


                                PRAYER.


    Bless, O Lord, we beseech Thee, our humble labors in the promotion
    of truth and love, unity and peace. Dispel whatever spirit of
    discord may here arise. Enrich our hearts with that most excellent
    gift of charity, so that our acts may be full of the spirit of
    kindness and forbearance one towards another. Give us strength to
    continue in every good work, and faith to believe that we shall reap
    if we faint not; and at last may we enjoy the blessedness which Thou
    hast prepared for those that love Thee. AMEN.

    Response by all the members.

So may it ever be.

    The Worthy Patron or Chaplain steps back into the circle of Star
    officers, between Esther and Martha facing East, remaining in that
    position until the Worthy Matron seats the Chapter when he returns
    to his station.

_W. M._ Let us unite in singing our Opening Ode.


                                SINGING.


_W. M._ Sister Conductress, you will attend at the Altar.

    Conductress approaches the Altar between Ruth and Esther, makes a
    slight bow, opens the Bible, gives the sign of salutation, and steps
    back into the circle of Star officers between Ruth and Esther,
    remaining there, until seated by the Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ I now declare ---- Chapter, No. -- Order of the Eastern Star,
duly opened for the transaction of business. Sister Warder, you will so
instruct the Sentinel.

    The Warder in due order ** ** * * opens the door, informs the
    Sentinel, and after closing the door, says:

_War._ Worthy Matron, your order has been obeyed.

    The W. M. seats the Chapter.




                        Closing of the Chapter.


_W. M._ Sister Associate Matron.

_A. M._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ Do you know of any further business to come before the Chapter
at this time?

_A. M._ Worthy Matron, there is none within my knowledge.

_W. M._ Sister Warder.

_War._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ You will inform the Sentinel that we are about to close the
Chapter, and direct him to permit no interruption while we are thus
engaged.

    The Warder in due order ** ** * * opens the door and informs the
    Sentinel.

_War._ Worthy Matron, your order has been obeyed.

_W. M._ It is well; let us unite in singing our Closing Ode.

    Calls up the Chapter.


                                SINGING.


    The prayer will be offered at the Altar as in opening.

_W. M._ Let us unite in prayer.


                                PRAYER.


    Holy and merciful God! who answereth prayer and doth not scorn the
    petition of the humblest of Thy children! Bestow upon us in our
    parting that spirit of affection which can resist the selfishness of
    the world, and cause us to remember our obligations to each other
    and to Thee. Grant that we may all be permitted with loving hearts
    to assemble here again, for our instruction, for Thine honor, and
    for the good of our fellow men. All of which we ask for Thy name's
    sake. AMEN.

    Response by all the members.

So may it ever be.

    The Worthy Patron or Chaplain steps back into the circle of Star
    officers between Esther and Martha facing East, remaining in that
    position until the Worthy Matron closes the Chapter.

_W. M._ Sister Conductress, you will attend at the Altar.

    Conductress approaches the Altar as before, with the Sign of
    Salutation, closes the Bible, makes a slight bow, steps back into
    the circle of Star officers between Ruth and Esther, remaining until
    Chapter is closed.

_W. M._ Sisters and Brothers, we go forth into the world not knowing
what trials may await us in the journey of life. Let us not be dismayed,
for our Heavenly Father has promised to strengthen and uphold us by the
right hand of his power. Farewell.

    Response by all the members.


                               Farewell.


_W. M._ I now declare ---- Chapter, No. --, closed. Sister Warder, you
will so instruct the Sentinel.

    The Worthy Matron gives one blow with the gavel. The Warder informs
    the Sentinel that the Chapter is closed.




                         Initiation Ceremonies.


    The Initiation Ceremony is the same for gentlemen as for ladies, and
    both may receive the degrees at the same time. The necessary changes
    in language must be made as circumstances require. The time having
    arrived for initiation, and it being probable that candidates are in
    waiting, if robes are used, the officers retire, and prepare for the
    ceremony of initiation.

_W. M._ Sister Associate Conductress.

_A. C._ Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ You will retire and ascertain if there are candidates in waiting
to receive the degrees.

    The Associate Conductress advances to the west of the Altar, gives
    the Sign of Salutation, and (the Warder having given the usual raps
    and opened the door,) retires. Ascertaining the name of the
    candidate, she returns, and standing west of the Altar, gives the
    Sign of Salutation and says:

_A. C._ Worthy Matron, I find in waiting -- -- who is desirous of being
initiated into our Order.

    The Worthy Matron invites the Worthy Patron to preside for the
    purpose of conferring the degrees. The Worthy Patron, taking the
    chair, says:

_W. P._ Sister Secretary.

_Sec'y._ Worthy Patron.

_W. P._ Has this candidate been elected to receive the degrees of the
Order?

_Sec'y._ She has, Worthy Patron.

_W. P._ Sister Associate Conductress, you will retire and prepare the
candidate for the ceremonies of initiation.

    She gives the sign, and retires as before. Taking the candidate into
    the preparation room, she says:

_A. C._ Do you believe in the existence of a Supreme Being? _Ans._ I do.

My friend, human life is a labyrinth through which we all wander
blindly, and too often, in ignorance. It is good to consider the
experience of others, and profit by their knowledge and example. Having
received the degrees of our Order, and therefore being able to assist
you, permit me to direct your preparation for the ceremonies of
initiation.

    She then removes the candidate's hat, gloves and shawl or cloak,
    prepares and leads her to the

    door of the Chapter-room. The Associate Conductress gives five raps
    upon the door, ** ** *

_Cond._ Worthy Patron, there is an alarm at the door of the preparation
room.

_W. P._ Sister Conductress, you will ascertain the cause of the alarm.

    The Conductress goes to the door, answers the alarm, ** ** * * and
    opening the door, says:

_Cond._ Who knocks at the door of our Chapter?

_A. C._ The Associate Conductress with a candidate, who desires to be
initiated into our Order.

_Cond._ Is she properly prepared?

_A. C._ She is.

_Cond._ My friend, you will wait until further orders are received from
the Worthy Patron.

    The Conductress closes the door, and, advancing to a position in
    front of the Associate Matron, facing the East, says:

_Cond._ Worthy Patron, the alarm was caused by the Associate Conductress
with a candidate, who desires to receive the degrees of our Order.

_W. P._ Is the candidate properly prepared?

_Cond._ She is.

_W. P._ You will admit her.

    The Conductress returning to the door, opens it wide, and says:

_Cond._ It is the order of the Worthy Patron that you be admitted to our
Chapter.

    Before the door is opened to receive the candidate the lights may be
    turned down, and soft music played during this lecture by the
    Conductress. The candidate is led inside the door and stopped. The
    Conductress then says to her:

_Cond._ You have doubtless well considered the step you have taken in
seeking admission to this Order, dedicated to Charity, Truth, and
Loving-kindness. You came here of your own free choice. Complain not,
therefore, at any trial. A seal is here set upon your lips. Let it warn
you to be ever silent and secret, as to all that may be made known to
you here. Be not weary in well-doing. Woe unto those who seek to take
upon themselves burdens which they cannot bear. Woe unto the faithless
and insincere, who assume obligations lightly and forthwith forget them.
"Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own
understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He will direct thy
paths."

    Conductress offers her right arm to the candidate. If there are two
    the Associate Conductress offers her left arm to the candidate and
    in like manner follows with the second. The Associate Conductress
    assists only when necessary to form couples. The candidate is
    conducted once around the room to the Associate Matron. Officers and
    members always observe square corners.

    During the march, vocal or instrumental music is furnished, or the
    Worthy Patron may recite the following:

_W. P._ "Though I speak with the tongues of men, and of angels, and have
not charity, I am become as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal."

"Charity suffereth long, and is kind: charity envieth not."

"Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth."

"And now abideth Faith, Hope and Charity, but the greatest of these is
Charity."

    Having arrived at the West, the candidate is introduced to the
    Associate Matron.

_Cond._ Sister Associate Matron.

_A. M._ Sister Conductress.

_Cond._ I have the honor of introducing -- -- who is to be presented by
you to the Worthy Matron.

_A. M._ My friend, you are heartily welcome. Sister Conductress, you
will cause the candidate to face the East.

    Conductress and candidate face the East.

_A. M._ Worthy Matron, I have the honor to present -- --whose petition
has been approved by this Chapter, and who is now ready to assume our
Obligation.

    The Worthy Matron rises and addresses the candidate.

_W. M._ It is with pleasure that I welcome you into this Chapter. Your
relation to the Masonic fraternity, and the recommendations presented in
your behalf, assure us that you merit the honor we confer, and are
worthy of the important trust with which we are about to invest you. The
Order of the Eastern Star exists for the purpose of giving practical
effect to one of the beneficent purposes of Freemasonry, which is to
provide for the welfare of the wives, daughters, mothers, widows, and
sisters of Master Masons.

Here they may share with the Masonic brother in promulgating the
principles of Brotherly Love, Relief, and Truth.

Here we may aid, comfort, and protect each other in our journey through
the labyrinth of human life, and by cheerful companionship and social
enjoyments, lighten the burdens of active duty.

By means of secret signs, and other work of the Order, we are able to
make ourselves known to each other wherever we may meet.

We are governed by the laws and regulations of the Grand Chapter, and by
a code of By-Laws framed by ourselves. These we are bound to obey so
long as we remain members of the Order, and in this obedience, we shall
expect you to share.

    Addressing the Worthy Patron, the Worthy Matron says:

Worthy Patron, it is with pleasure that I introduce to you this
candidate, who is prepared to assume the Obligation of the Order.

_W. P._ The obligation you are about to take is a solemn pledge which
you must give to this Chapter, before you can participate in the
privileges of our Order. By it you bind yourself to the most solemn
secrecy respecting the work of the Order, and to the performance of
those acts of kindness and forbearance, which are essential to our
welfare and prosperity.

With this knowledge of its requirements are you willing to proceed?

_Cand._ I am.

_W. P._ Sister Conductress, you will cause the candidate to be in proper
position at the Altar to receive the Obligation. (1.)

    During the march there should be vocal or instrumental music.

_Cond._ Worthy Patron, the candidate is in proper position.

    The Chapter is called up, and the Worthy Patron takes his position
    on the east side of the Altar, and causes the candidate to repeat
    after him the following. Soft music may be played during obligation.


                              OBLIGATION.


* * * (2.) * * *

_W. P._ Arise, my sister, we accept the pledge you have given, and share
with you in this solemn Obligation.

    The Conductress takes the Bible from the candidate, when the Worthy
    Patron says: "Arise, my sister," he extends his right hand and
    assists the candidate in rising, the lights are suddenly turned up
    at the same time.

_W. P._ You will now be received into our Order and be conducted to the
several points of the Star, where you will receive instruction in those
sublime virtues exemplified in the lives of Adah, Ruth, Esther, Martha,
and Electa.

    The Worthy Patron returns to the East, and seats the Chapter.

    The Conductress and candidate will leave the Altar on the right,
    passing out between Electa and Adah, leaving Adah on the right, all
    around the outside of the Star to Adah for instruction.

    During the march there should be vocal or instrumental music, or the
    Worthy Patron may recite the following:

_W. P._ "Happy is the man that findeth wisdom and the man that getteth
understanding."

"She is more precious than rubies, and all the things thou canst desire
are not to be compared unto her."

"Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace."

_Cond._ Sister Adah.

    Adah rises and takes her position at the right of her chair; after
    each lecture the Star Officer will remain in her position, standing
    until the Conductress and candidate have passed her, then be seated.

_Adah._ Sister Conductress.

_Cond._ I present this Sister, who, having assumed our Obligation, will
receive from you such lessons respecting fidelity to convictions of
right and duty, as may properly be drawn from the history of Jephthah's
Daughter.

_Adah._ Jephthah was the ninth judge and one of the mightiest men in
Israel. Being called upon, in the extremity of his country's trials, to
go at the head of its armies, he prepared his household for a campaign
that would perhaps cost him his life; and then "Jephthah vowed a vow
unto the Lord, and said, 'If thou shalt deliver the children of Ammon
into mine hands then it shall be that whatsoever cometh forth of the
doors of my house to meet me when I return in peace shall surely be the
Lord's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.'" Jephthah went
forth to battle, the victory was gained, and the victorious warrior
returned to Mizpeh. The door of his house opened, and, "behold! his
daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances," and she
was his only child. Jephthah, when he saw her, rent his clothes, and in
the anguish of his heart, cried aloud, "Alas, my daughter! thou hast
brought me very low, for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I
cannot go back." Adah replied, "My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth
unto the Lord, do to me according to that which has proceeded out of thy
mouth." She asked that she might go among the mountains for two months,
and there prepare her mind for the solemn surrender of her life to
preserve her father's honor.

When the two months had expired, she was seen, followed by her friends,
winding her way down the mountain's side to the altar, where her father
with an almost broken heart was prepared to fulfil his vow.

She approached her father with a kiss of affection and bade him
farewell. Taking hold of the veil she wore, he threw it over her face,
and drew his sword. But she unveiled herself, and said she need not have
her face covered for she was not afraid to die. Her father replied that
he could not strike the blow while she looked upon him, and again cast
it over her. She threw it off the second time, and said she would look
upward, that his arm might not be unnerved by her gaze. A third time,
however, he insisted, and a third time she as resolutely cast it off,
this time holding the ends of it firmly in her hands and casting her
eyes upward, invited the fatal blow. And a deed was consummated which
has rendered the name of Jephthah's Daughter famous in the annals of
Scripture.

The sign of this degree is given by--

    Repeat from secret work. (3.)

The pass. (4.)

The color appropriate to this degree is blue, which symbolizes fidelity,
and teaches us to be faithful to all moral obligations.

The emblems are the Sword and Veil. By the sword Adah was slain. The
veil alludes to her determination to die in the light, suffering no
stain to rest upon her memory.

Sister Conductress, you will present this sister at the second point of
the Star for further instruction.

    The Conductress will lead the candidate around Adah's chair, leaving
    the chair to the right, then across the Star, leaving the Altar to
    the left, around Martha's chair, passing to Ruth for instruction.
    After each lecture the labyrinth is followed in a similar manner,
    always leaving the chairs to the right and the Altar to the left.
    From Ruth around Electa to Esther; from Esther around Adah to
    Martha; from Martha around Ruth to Electa; from Electa around Esther
    to the Worthy Patron.

    During the march there should be vocal or instrumental music, or the
    Worthy Patron may recite the following:

_W. P._ "And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and behold, his
daughter came out to meet him, with timbrels and with dances: and she
was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter."

"And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and
said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one
of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I
cannot go back."

_Cond._ Sister Ruth.

    Ruth rises and takes her position at the right of her chair.

_Ruth._ Sister Conductress.

_Cond._ I present this sister to be instructed in the duty of obedience
to the demands of honor and justice in all conditions of life, as
illustrated in the history of Ruth.

_Ruth._ About eleven hundred years before the Christian era, Elimeleck
and his wife Naomi, with their two sons, were driven by famine from
Bethlehem to the land of Moab. The sons married women of Moab named Ruth
and Orphah. After a few years, Elimeleck and his sons died, leaving
Naomi, Ruth and Orphah in mourning. Naomi, aged and dependent, resolved
to return to the land of her nativity. She urged Ruth and Orphah to
remain with their kindred and friends, rather than follow her in poverty
to a land of strangers. But Ruth believed it to be her duty to remain
with Naomi and assist in her maintenance, saying, "Entreat me not to
leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou
goest, I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge, thy people shall
be my people, and thy God my God."

They arrived in Bethlehem, destitute, weary and worn, and Ruth was
compelled to seek through menial labor the means of support for herself
and the aged Naomi. Faithful to the duties which adverse fortune had
thrown upon her, she became a gleaner in the fields of Boaz, who said to
his servant that was set over his reapers, "Whose damsel is this?" Upon
being informed of her history, her devotion to Naomi, and present
circumstances, advanced to where she was resting and addressed to her
kindly words of encouragement. Ruth raised her hands to show him how
small were her gleanings, and that she had not taken from the sheaves;
placed them meekly upon her breast as proof of her willingness to submit
to whatever lot she might be called upon to endure, casting her eyes
upward, as appealing to God.

He ordered his reapers to drop handfuls of barley that she might gather
a supply, and invited her to eat and drink of the provisions he had
supplied. Ruth was encouraged; and at evening, returned laden with the
fruits of her toil to gladden the heart of Naomi. My sister, be faithful
to the duties of your station; ever teaching that honor and justice
which Ruth portrayed in the touching and beautiful incidents of her
life.

The sign of this degree is given by--

    Repeat from secret work. (6.)

The pass. (7.)

The color appropriate to this degree is yellow, whose golden hue
symbolizes constancy, teaching faithful obedience to the demands of
honor and justice.

The Sheaf is an emblem of plenty, and from its collection of minute
parts, teaches that by patient industry, gathering here a little and
there a little, we may provide for the infirmities of age.

Sister Conductress, you will present this sister at the third point of
the Star for further instruction.

    The candidate is conducted around Ruth's chair, leaving the chair to
    the right, then across the Star, leaving the Altar to the left,
    around Electa's chair to Esther for instruction.

    During the march there should be vocal or instrumental music, or the
    Worthy Patron may recite the following:

    "And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers,
    The Lord be with you: and they answered him, The Lord bless thee."

    "Then said Boaz unto his servant, that was set over the reapers,
    Whose damsel is this?"

    "And the servant, that was set over the reapers, answered and said:
    It is the damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of
    Moab."

_Cond._ Sister Esther.

    Esther rises and takes her position at the right of her chair.

_Esther._ Sister Conductress.

_Cond._ I present this sister to be instructed in the commendable virtue
of fidelity to kindred and friends as exemplified in the history of
Esther.

_Esther._ Esther was a Jewish damsel, living about five hundred years
before the Christian era. The Jews were then held in captivity within
the Persian empire. After the divorce of Queen Vashti, the king caused
search to be made throughout the empire for the most beautiful woman, to
be her successor. The choice fell upon Esther, who, amid national
rejoicing and royal magnificence, became the queen of Persia.

The knowledge of her descent from the captive race was carefully
concealed from the king and his court. In due time the enemies of the
Jews, being powerful and numerous, persuaded the king to issue a royal
edict commanding that upon a given day the entire Hebrew race should be
destroyed.

Queen Esther, when informed of the cruel edict, resolved to risk the
loss of royal favor and life itself, to save her people from death.

It was a law of the palace that no one, not even the queen, should enter
the king's presence unsummoned, under penalty of death, unless the king
should extend the golden sceptre as a signal of pardon.

Esther, attired in her queenly apparel, with heroic purpose, sought the
presence of the king. It was the day of the grand council of governors,
princes and officers of Persia. The royal guards held all avenues of
approach to the council chamber. The king sat upon his throne of gold
and ivory, surrounded by the highest officials of his empire. The queen
approached. The guards and palace officials were stricken with terror at
the unbidden advance of the queen. The king's countenance flushed with
anger when he beheld her intrusion. Queen Esther, fixing her eyes, now
eloquent with her soul's heroic purpose upon the king, firmly advanced
to the foot of the throne, at once reminding him of his former pledges
by touching her crown and robe in which he had desired her to appear
when claiming his promise. She secured pardon by laying her hand upon
the golden sceptre which he extended to her. Graciously, said the king,
"What wilt thou, Queen Esther? and what is thy request? it shall be even
given thee to the half of the kingdom." Esther's perilous adventure was
successful.

The king relented from his cruel purpose, and spared the chosen people.

The sign of this degree is given by--

    Repeat from secret work. (9.)

The pass. (10.)

The color appropriate to this degree is white; a symbol of light,
purity, and joy, and should teach us that a pure and upright life is
above the tongue of reproach.

The Crown and Sceptre united is an emblem of royalty and power.

Sister Conductress, you will present this sister at the fourth point of
the Star for further instruction.

    The candidate is conducted around Esther's chair, leaving the chair
    to the right across the Star, leaving the Altar to the left, around
    Adah's chair to Martha for instruction.

    During the march there should be vocal or instrumental music, or the
    Worthy Patron may recite the following:

_W. P._ "And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in
the court, that she obtained favor in his sight; and the king held out
to Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near,
and touched the top of the sceptre."

"Then said the king unto her, 'What wilt thou, Queen Esther? and what is
thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the kingdom.'"

_Cond._ Sister Martha.

    Martha rises and takes her position at the _left_ of her chair.

_Martha._ Sister Conductress.

_Cond._ I present this sister to be instructed in the sublime virtue of
a trustful faith, in the hour of trial, and hope of immortal life, as
illustrated in the history of Martha.

_Martha._ The history of Martha is that of a young woman oppressed with
grief at the loss of an only brother.

The family, consisting of Martha, and Mary, and their brother Lazarus,
were residents of Bethany. They were known among the people of the
country as followers of Christ. During the absence of Jesus, Lazarus was
taken ill, and in a short time died. At the close of the fourth day,
intelligence reached them that Jesus was returning to Bethany. Martha
hastened to meet him, raising her hands imploringly towards his face,
looking upward with suppressed emotion, cried aloud, "Lord if thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died. But I know that even now, whatsoever
thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee."

"Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again."

"Martha saith unto him, 'I know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day.'"

"Jesus saith unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever
liveth and believeth in me, shall never die. Believest thou this?" Here
is the record of her unfaltering trust; here the record of her hope,
inspired by the teachings of Jesus, that beyond the grave, the loved
ones gone before are waiting to welcome us to our eternal home.

In the measureless realm of time, how brief is our earthly life; yet how
momentous and eternal its issues! Life's experiences, coming thick and
fast, are the soul's appointed means of growth. To-day, we build our
castles, to-morrow, fickle fortune snatches from hope the promised joy.
To-day, prosperity or the presence of loved ones fills our cup with joy;
to-morrow, adversity, or sore bereavement casts us into the valley of
sorrow.

My sister, may you have the trustful faith of Martha; it will lighten
the burden of sorrow, and incline you to the voice of duty.

The sign of this degree is given by--

    Repeat from secret work. (12.)

The pass. (13.)

The color appropriate to this degree is green; an emblem of nature's
life and beauty, and a symbol of Martha's trustful faith and hope of
immortality.

The Broken Column is an expressive emblem of the uncertainty of human
life.

Sister Conductress, you will present this sister at the fifth point of
the Star for further instruction.

    The candidate is conducted around Martha's chair, leaving the chair
    to the right, then across the Star leaving the Altar to the left,
    around Ruth's chair to Electa for instruction.

    During the march there should be vocal or instrumental music, or the
    Worthy Patron may recite the following:

    _W. P._ "Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here
    my brother had not died."

    "But I know that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will
    give it thee."

    "Jesus saith unto her, thy brother shall rise again."

    "Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the
    resurrection at the last day."

    "Jesus saith unto her, I am the resurrection and the life, he that
    believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall ye live."

    "And whosoever liveth, and believeth in me, shall never die."

_Cond._ Sister Electa.

    Electa arises and takes her position at the _left_ of her chair.

_Electa._ Sister Conductress.

_Cond._ I present this sister to be instructed in the commendable virtue
of heroic endurance of the wrongs of persecution, when demanded in
defense of Truth, as illustrated in the lesson of Electa.

_Electa._ The second epistle of John is addressed to "the _elect_ lady
and her children." Tradition delineates her as a lady who lived in the
days of St. John the Evangelist. Her charity, benevolence, and generous
hospitality to the poor entitled her to great distinction.

Having been reared a Pagan and afterwards becoming a convert to the
Christian religion, she was subjected to severe trials and the most
bitter persecution. An edict was issued by the Roman emperor that all
followers of the Christ should renounce their faith under penalty of
death. She was visited by a band of soldiers, one of whom handed her the
cross, with a command to trample it under foot. Electa, looking him
steadily in the face, received the cross--precious emblem of her
Saviour's blood--pressed it with ardor to her bosom, and cast her eyes
upward as a testimony of her love and loyalty to her Christian faith. As
Electa I represent this historical heroine, and commend to you the
sublime virtue she exemplified through her life, "that we love one
another." You may not be called upon to suffer in the same degree from
the hand of persecution--but there is always need of loyalty to Truth,
and, alas, there is too often persecution.

My sister, be loyal to your convictions of truth, and murmur not at
another's loyalty. Let truth be spoken, and let it shine through your
life. If persecution comes, bear it with heroic endurance, and despair
not of the final triumph of Truth.

The sign of this degree is given by--

    Repeat from secret work. (15.)

The pass. (16.)

The color appropriate to this degree is red: a symbol of that fervency
which should actuate all who are engaged in the service of Truth.

The cup is an emblem of charity and hospitality, and teaches us to
extend generous aid to the victims of poverty and distress.

Sister Conductress, you will present this sister to the Worthy Patron
for further instruction.

    The candidate is conducted around Electa's chair, leaving the chair
    to the right, then across the Star, leaving the Altar to the left,
    around Esther's chair, leaving the labyrinth between Adah and
    Electa, then to the right once around the Altar, outside the Star to
    the Worthy Patron.

    During the march there should be vocal or instrumental music, or the
    Worthy Patron may recite the following:

    _W. P._ "Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from God the Father."

    "And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new
    commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning,
    that we love one another."

    "And this is love, that we walk after His commandments."

    "By this we know that we walk in the truth. Behold what manner of
    love the Father hath bestowed upon us."

    "That we should be called the children of God. That our joy may be
    full."

    "Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God, and every one
    that loveth and knoweth God, is born of God."

    "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he first loved us.
    If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another."

_Cond._ Worthy Patron, I present to you this sister, who has passed
through the labyrinth of our Star, and been instructed in those sublime
virtues exemplified by the heroines of our Order.

_W. P._ We hail with pleasure your coming among us. The work of our
Order is worthy of our earnest labor; and we shall rejoice to find you
excelling in zeal our most devoted members. You will now give attention
to the address of the Worthy Matron.

_W. M._ My sister, the Eastern Star is closely related to the Masonic
fraternity; and although related to it by the dearest ties, yet it is no
part of that ancient institution.

Here the wives, daughters, mothers, widows, and sisters of Masons, may
become co-laborers with the great Brotherhood in the service of
humanity.

By the laws of that ancient Order, women are not eligible to its
degrees. But woman's heart beats responsive to the same inspiration that
prompts man to noble deeds.

She hears the cry of the orphan, the call of want, and the piteous wail
of sorrow. She honors the Brotherhood for its noble work, and seeks
through the Eastern Star, to be a co-worker with the Masonic brother; to
pay the tribute of her love and labor at the same shrine, and be able to
make herself known, throughout the domain of Masonry, as being entitled
to its protection.

Into this field of labor, you have now entered. You have taken the
solemn Obligation of the Order, and been instructed in those sublime
virtues which should adorn our lives, and make this institution worthy
of the protection and support of all good Masons.

We extend to you a fraternal love, and shall rejoice to learn that your
devotion to the great moral and social purposes of our Order, is earnest
and persistent.

That the blessing of our Heavenly Father may rest upon our labor, let us
unite in prayer.

    The Chapter is called up and a circle is formed around the Altar in
    the following manner by the officers joining hands: Secretary
    between Adah and Ruth--Associate Matron between Ruth and
    Esther--Associate Conductress between Esther and Martha--Treasurer
    between Martha and Electa--the Worthy Matron at the left of Electa.
    If desired the members may join in forming the circle.

    The Worthy Patron or Chaplain will take position at the west side of
    the Altar. The Conductress with the candidate at her right, will
    advance to the open space at the left of the Worthy Matron; and when
    the words "golden chain thus lengthened" in the prayer are being
    pronounced, the Worthy Matron will extend her left hand and take the
    right hand of candidate and the Conductress will join the circle at
    her left, thus making it complete. At the words "each link shall
    fall away in death," the hands will be unclasped. If a Chaplain
    officiates, the Worthy Patron will remain in his station.


                                PRAYER.


    Source of all wisdom, truth, and love, Grant we beseech Thee, that
    in the reception of this person into our Order we may add strength
    to our strength, and grace to our grace. O, may the golden chain
    thus lengthened become the brighter for this link, and be
    strengthened for the great work we strive to do. Enlarge our powers
    to benefit mankind, and to honor Thee our God.

    And when, one by one, each link shall fall away in death, may the
    parting be temporary, and the meeting eternal. In the world where
    death comes not, may we realize the full happiness of loving and
    serving Thee forever. AMEN.

    Response by the Chapter.

So may it ever be.

    At the conclusion of the prayer an Ode may be sung while the members
    are standing around the Altar. After singing the Worthy Patron seats
    the Chapter. The Conductress leads the candidate to the East, and
    the Worthy Matron may, at the request of the Worthy Patron, conclude
    the initiation ceremonies.

_W. P._ In taking upon yourself the solemn Obligation of our Order, you
enter upon a new phase of life; henceforth you will be numbered among
the members of this Order, who have for their inspiration the Star of
Bethlehem, which will guide all the faithful to the New Jerusalem, that
city not made with hands. I must remind you, that with privileges come
responsibilities. You have been informed that we are in possession of
certain secrets, by means of which, we are able to make ourselves known
to each other wherever we may meet. You have been conducted to the
several points of the Star, and been instructed in the secret work of
the Order, which, if properly understood, will enable you to make
yourself known as a member. That the signs and passes may be more firmly
impressed upon your mind, with the assistance of our Conductress, I will
repeat them with explanations.

    The Conductress will give the signs as the Worthy Patron explains
    them.

The first is the Daughter's sign, or the sign of Adah. It is given by
(3.) It alludes to the heroic conduct of Jephthah's Daughter.

The Pass is (4.) (5.)

The second is the Widow's sign, or the sign of Ruth. It is given by (6.)
It alludes to the humble gleaner Ruth with her handfuls of barley
gathered from the fields of Boaz.

The Pass is (7.) (8.)

The third is the Wife's sign, or the sign of Esther. It is given (9.) It
alludes to the manner in which Queen Esther saluted the king, reminding
him of his promise, by giving a sign which was understood between them.

The Pass is (10.) (11.)

The fourth is the Sister's sign, or the sign of Martha. It is given by
(12.) It alludes to Martha's meeting with Jesus.

The Pass is (13.) (14.)

The fifth is the Mother's sign, or the sign of Electa. It is given by
(15.) It alludes to heroic submission, under the wrongs of persecution.

The Pass is (16.) being the impressive lesson taught by Electa.

Any member of the Order is at liberty to give any one of these signs
when among strangers and desirous of becoming known to a sister or
brother. Any member seeing one of these signs given should respond by
giving the Pass belonging to the sign given, and asking, (17.)

This is all the examination that is required under such circumstances.
It can be followed by such questions as may be necessary. In passing an
examination to visit a Chapter, in addition to this, you will be
required to give the signs and passes of each degree.

There is one other sign, called the salutation sign, which is given by
members on entering or retiring from a Chapter while in session. They
shall advance in front of the Associate Matron, and (19.)

The Grip of the Order is given by (20.)

    The Conductress will communicate the Grip to the candidate.

The Signet is prepared to assist the memory of those who have received
the degrees.

On the outer edge of the central division will be found the (21.)

I will explain the significance of the colors, the emblematic flowers,
and the meaning of the several emblems alluding to the distinguished
characters portrayed in the degrees.

Blue symbolizes Fidelity. It is represented by the violet.

The open Bible is appropriate to Jephthah's Daughter, as a symbol of
obedience to the word of God.

Yellow symbolizes Constancy. It is represented by the yellow jessamine.

The Lily of the Valley is appropriate to Ruth, as a symbol of loveliness
among the lowly.

White symbolizes Light, Purity and Joy. It is represented by the white
lily.

The Sun is appropriate to Esther, as a symbol of the light and joy she
gave to a down-trodden race.

Green symbolizes Hope and Immortality. It is represented by the fern.

The Lamb is appropriate to Martha, as a symbol of innocence and
humility.

Red symbolizes Fervency. It is represented by the red rose.

The Lion is appropriate to Electa, as a symbol of the courage and power,
that sustained the martyr defenders of Truth.

And, finally, my sister, Jephthah's Daughter, because she freely
sacrificed her life to preserve her father's honor; Ruth, poor and
lowly, was faithful to the demands of honor and justice; Esther, noble
queen, was prepared to sacrifice her crown and life, to save her people
from destruction; Martha, from her trustful faith and hope of immortal
life; and Electa, pre-eminent in charity, and heroic in endurance of the
wrongs of persecution; were (18.)

So may it be with you. As you illustrate in your life the virtues of
these tried servants of God, so shall be your reward.

You will now be conducted to the Secretary's desk, where you will sign
the By-Laws of this Chapter, and become entitled to all the privileges
of membership; after which you will be re-conducted to your present
position.

    While the candidate is signing the By-Laws, there may be vocal or
    instrumental music. After signing the By-Laws the candidate is
    conducted to the preparation room, disrobes if robes are used, a
    badge of the Order put on, and conducted to the East, facing West.
    When the door opens for the Conductress and candidate to return, the
    Chapter is called up, and all join in singing a welcome song, after
    which the Worthy Patron says:

_W. P._ Sisters and Brothers, our sister has passed through the several
degrees of our Order, we hope with some pleasure to her, and we know
with great satisfaction to us. You will give her a hearty welcome and
resume order at the sound of the gavel.

    The Chapter takes a recess.




                        Installation Ceremonies.


    These ceremonies may be performed in public. If at a special
    meeting, the Chapter will be declared open with one blow of the
    Gavel. If regular, it may be opened in an adjacent room and business
    postponed, adjourning to the Hall for installation, after which the
    Worthy Matron will declare the Chapter closed.

    The Installing Officer must be a Present or Past Matron or Patron.
    The first board of officers of a new Chapter must be installed by a
    Grand Matron or Patron, or a Deputy; who also may install the
    officers of any Chapter when requested to do so by the Chapter.

    The Installing Officer, after assuming the chair, will appoint a
    Marshal, who will collect the several badges of office, and place
    them where they will be convenient for use. The Secretary will
    furnish the Marshal with a list of the officers to be installed. If
    the installation is a public one, an address may be delivered
    touching the history and purposes of the Order.

    If a Grand officer presides, the Marshal will be Grand Marshal. The
    officers will be addressed by their titles and such changes made in
    the language of the following ceremonies as the circumstances
    require.

    Music, vocal or instrumental, may be introduced as may seem best.

    After the appointment of the Marshal and the collection of the
    badges of office, the installing officer will proceed as follows:

_I. O._ Sisters and Brothers, the selection of a new board of officers
is an important event in the history of a Chapter. The welfare of this
Chapter, and the prosperity of our Order in this place, may be
permanently effected by the action of those whom you have chosen to
serve as the officers of this Chapter for the ensuing year. Before
investing them with official authority we will invoke the blessing of
Him from whom cometh all wisdom and strength. Let us unite in prayer.

    The Chapter is called up, and the Installing Officer or Chaplain
    offers at the altar the following


                                PRAYER.


    Our Father, who art in Heaven, whose wisdom and goodness manifest
    themselves in all the works of creation; with filial love and
    reverence we invoke Thy blessing upon Thy children here assembled,
    and grace to consecrate the labors we have met to perform. We
    commend to Thy especial care and guidance the officers elect, into
    whose hands we are about to repose the government of this Chapter.
    Endue them with a just appreciation of the responsibilities they are
    about to assume, and may they be ever mindful that a Father's care
    is always over them, and that Thy all-seeing eye is ever upon them.

    Bless and prosper our beloved Order; may it be known and honored
    among the institutions of the land as one whose foundation is laid
    upon the enduring principle of Truth. Direct our footsteps in ways
    of pleasantness and paths of peace, and may all our doings reflect
    honor upon Thy Holy Name. AMEN.

    Response by the Chapter:

So may it ever be.

    Seats the Chapter.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal.

_M._ Worthy ----

_I. O._ You will call the roll of officers elect, who, as their names
are called, will form a semi-circle on the west side of the altar,
facing the East, to receive the Obligation.

    The W. M. on the extreme South, then followed by the W. P., A. M.,
    etc. If the Warder and Sentinel are both called from their stations,
    a brother will be appointed to attend at the door until the absent
    officers return. Old officers not re-elected or appointed, may
    occupy their stations until their successors are installed. When all
    are in their places, the Marshal will say:

_M._ Worthy ----, the officers-elect are in order, and await your
pleasure.

_I. O._ Sisters and brothers, you behold those who have been selected as
officers to serve you for the ensuing year. Do you still desire that
they shall fill the positions to which they have been elected or
appointed?

_Ans._ We do.

    Calls up the Chapter.

_I. O._ You will repeat after me the following


                              OBLIGATION:


    I solemnly and sincerely promise, in the presence of the members of
    this Chapter, that I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully and
    impartially perform all the duties belonging to the office for which
    I have been selected. That I will conform to the By-Laws of this
    Chapter, and the Constitution, Rules and Regulations of the Grand
    Chapter, and do all in my power to promote the welfare and
    prosperity of our Order.

    The Chapter and officers will be seated. The Marshal will present
    the officers at the altar for installation, approaching the altar
    between Adah and Ruth and leaving between Martha and Electa.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Worthy Matron elect for
installation.

_M._ Worthy ----, it is with pleasure that I present for installation
Sister ----, who has been elected Worthy Matron of this Chapter for the
ensuing year. Our sister is fully aware of the important responsibility
that rests upon her in the acceptance of this trust, yet she is willing
to assume it, in the hope that by the aid of her sisters and brothers,
and the favor of God, she will not prove altogether unworthy of the high
honor that has been conferred upon her.

_I. O._ My sister, before proceeding with your investiture, it is
necessary that you signify your assent to those Regulations of the
Order, upon the strict observance of which its stability and success
depend.

You admit that the name, character, and modes of recognition of the
Order of the Eastern Star are unchangeable.

_Ans._ I do.

You admit that a belief in the existence of a Supreme Being is one of
the requirements of the Order.

_Ans._ I do.

You admit that the utmost care should be taken to admit to membership
only such persons as possess a good moral character.

_Ans._ I do.

You admit that no new Chapter can be legally formed without a Charter or
Dispensation from the Grand Chapter within whose jurisdiction it is
formed; that no countenance should be given to any illegally formed
Chapter, its members, or persons initiated therein.

_Ans._ I do.

You promise to obey the Laws and Regulations of the Grand Chapter;
together with the By-Laws of this Chapter, and to permit no violation of
them by its members.

_Ans._ I do.

You promise that no visitor will be admitted to your Chapter, to witness
the secret work of the Order, unless found legally entitled to do so;
and that none will be admitted who would injuriously effect the peace
and harmony of the Chapter.

_Ans._ I do.

You agree to do all in your power to promote the welfare of this
Chapter, and to enforce, to the best of your ability, all the rules and
regulations of the Order.

_Ans._ I do.

Members of ---- Chapter, you have heard your Worthy Matron elect in the
pledges she has made; do you promise to support her in the performance
of her duties?

_Ans._ We do.

My sister, the office of Worthy Matron is one of great responsibility,
and it will require your utmost attention, wisdom and forbearance. The
members will look to you, not only for counsel in all matters that come
before the Chapter, but for advice and sympathy in their troubles and
sorrows. It should be your constant study, therefore, how best to
cultivate the social virtues, and avoid unpleasant misunderstandings
among the members of your Chapter. You should be cautious in the
execution of your trust, courteous to the members, and ever ready to
render a helping hand to sisters or brothers in affliction or adversity.
You should set an example of good order and punctuality, for only by so
doing can you expect similar attention from others. Whatever you would
deem praiseworthy in another in your position, you should carefully
imitate, and with equal care avoid what would be blameworthy. Within the
Chapter it will be your duty to see that its regular meetings are held,
and special meetings called, whenever the good of the Chapter demands
them; that your subordinates fill their stations with honor and
usefulness; that the By-Laws be implicitly obeyed; that the funds,
records, rituals, and other property of the Chapter be properly
preserved by the officers in whose charge they are placed; that the cry
of the widow and orphan shall never be heard in vain; and that this
Chapter fails in nothing for which it was established. All this you
should strive to accomplish by the zealous exercise of your prerogatives
as Worthy Matron, to which exalted position your associates have been
pleased to elect you.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sister with the badge of her office.

    The Marshal will invest the officers with their badges as she is
    requested to do so by the Installing Officer.

_I. O._ Your badge is the Gavel within the Star, an emblem of authority;
admonishing you that upon your judgment and discretion rests the
government of this Chapter, and, in a great measure, the prosperity of
our beautiful Order.

[Illustration: Matron.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sister to her station.

    The Worthy Matron will ascend the dais, and, turning towards the
    Chapter, stand in her station. The Installing Officer will call up
    the Chapter and say:

_I. O._ Worthy Matron, behold your sisters and brothers. Sisters and
brothers, behold your Worthy Matron, and salute her with the Grand
Honors.

    The Chapter responds by giving the Grand Honors, after which the
    Chapter is seated. The Worthy Matron takes the chair on the left of
    the Installing Officer.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Worthy Patron elect for
installation.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting, for installation,
Brother ----, who has been elected Worthy Patron of this Chapter for the
ensuing year. His zeal in our cause, and qualifications for the
position, assure us that he will discharge the duties to the
satisfaction of the Chapter, and the honor and welfare of our Order.

_I. O._ My brother, you have heard the pledges made by the Worthy Matron
previous to her installation. Do you also promise a faithful obedience
to all those regulations?

_Ans._ I do.

_I. O._ My Brother, the station to which you have been elected is one of
the most important within the gift of the members of this Chapter, and
your election thereto the highest honor they can confer upon a Brother.
From the nature of the Order you are not its chief officer, yet you are
expected to have a watchful care over the interests of the Chapter and
see that the Laws of the Order are promptly obeyed.

It is your duty to preside during the ceremony of Initiation and at
other times when requested to do so by the Worthy Matron; to see that
the officers are thoroughly instructed in their duties, and that the
ritual work of the Order is properly rendered. It is also your duty to
have a general supervision over the affairs of the Chapter, and act as
the constitutional adviser of the Worthy Matron. To do this acceptably,
you must make yourself thoroughly familiar with the jurisprudence of the
Order, as promulgated in its established rules and regulations.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our brother with the badge of his
office.

_I. O._ Your badge is the Square and Compasses within the Star, an
emblem of the relationship existing between the Masonic Fraternity and
the Order of the Eastern Star, and admonishes you to be ever mindful of
your obligations to the Order.

[Illustration: Patron.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our brother to his station, at the left
of the Worthy Matron.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Associate Matron elect for
installation.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting Sister ----, who has
been elected Associate Matron of this Chapter for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My Sister, the duties of your position are embodied in the name
of your office. You are the assistant to the Worthy Matron in all
branches of her responsible charge, and, in her absence, will succeed to
all her privileges and prerogatives. It is necessary therefore, that you
should make yourself familiar with the duties of that office, so that
you may fill it with credit to yourself and honor to your Chapter.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sister with the badge of her office.

_I. O._ Your badge is the Sun within the Star, an emblem of light,
admonishing you that the principles of our Order should shine with
undiminished lustre through our lives.

[Illustration: Asso. Matron.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sister to her station in the West.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Secretary elect.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting Sister ----, who has
been elected Secretary of this Chapter for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My sister, yours is a difficult and responsible charge. Failure
or neglect on your part will complicate and embarrass all our
proceedings, and give us a disgraceful record on the books of the Grand
Chapter. It is your duty to note in proper order, the business of our
meetings, to collect all moneys due the Chapter, and forward to the
Grand Secretary the necessary returns, as required by the Constitution,
and perform such other duties as properly belong to your office.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sister with the badge of her office.

Your badge is the Cross-pens within the Star, an emblem of intelligence,
admonishing you to be faithful to your trust, that the good deeds of
your companions may not go unrecorded.

[Illustration: Secretary.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sister to her station in the
South-East.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Treasurer elect.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting Sister ----, who has
been elected Treasurer of this Chapter for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My sister, the proper preservation of our funds demands honesty
and carefulness on the part of the Treasurer. The money placed in your
hands may be required for charitable purposes at the most unexpected
moment, or to meet the necessary expenses of the Chapter.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sister with the badge of her office.

Your badge is the Cross-keys within the Star, an emblem of security,
admonishing you to the strictest fidelity in the discharge of your
important trust, that the Chapter may not be embarrassed in its efforts
to relieve the distressed and meet its necessary expenses.

[Illustration: Treasurer.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sister to her station in the
North-East.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Conductress and Associate
Conductress elect.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting Sister ----, elected
to be Conductress, and Sister ----, elected to be Associate Conductress
of this Chapter for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My sisters, upon you devolves the duty of preparing and
conducting through our ceremonies of initiation those who seek the
privileges of our Order. It is important, therefore, that you should
fully understand and intelligently perform the duties of your office.
The candidates enter our Chapter prepared to receive a favorable
impression of our mysteries and aims; if you present these matters
aright, throwing sisterly courtesy and dignity around your official
proceedings, they will acquire a fond regard for our beautiful Order.
Remember, therefore, that it depends greatly upon the manner in which
you perform your duties whether the candidates receive favorable
impressions from their initiation.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sisters with their badges of office.

Sister Conductress, your badge is the Scroll and Baton within the Star,
an emblem of prepared plans and their fulfillment, admonishing you that
the first impressions made upon candidates are permanent, and should be
for good.

[Illustration: Conductress.]

Sister Associate Conductress, your badge is the Baton within the Star,
an emblem of direction, admonishing you that good discipline is
essential to the success of our Order.

[Illustration: Assoc. Conductress.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sisters to their stations in the
South and North.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Chaplain elect.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting ---- ----, who has
been appointed Chaplain for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My ----, we recognize our dependence upon the Source of all
Wisdom and Strength, and often invoke the blessing of our Heavenly
Father upon our work. It will be your duty to lead the Chapter in its
devotions at the altar, and perform such other duties as are appropriate
to your office.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our ---- with the badge of his office.

Your badge is the Bible within the Star, a symbol of the word of God,
admonishing you to walk circumspectly, that your life may be void of
offense toward God and man.

[Illustration: Chaplain.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our ---- to ---- station in the East,
at the right of the Worthy Matron.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Marshal elect.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting Sister ----, who has
been appointed Marshal for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My sister, the position assigned you is one of honor and
responsibility. It is your duty to superintend and marshal all
processions, assist in all its public and private ceremonies, conduct
and proclaim the officers at the time of their installation, and perform
such other duties as pertain to your office.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sister with the badge of her office.

Your badge is the Cross Batons within the Star, an emblem of direction,
admonishing you that courtesy and promptness are essential to the
discharge of your duties.

[Illustration: Marshal.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sister to her station in the
South-East.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present for installation the sisters
appointed to represent the five rays of our central Star.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting those who have been
appointed to represent the five rays of our central Star. Sister ----,
to represent the blue ray of Adah; Sister ----, the yellow ray of Ruth;
Sister ----, the white ray of Esther; Sister ----, the green ray of
Martha; and Sister ----, the red ray of Electa.

    In the installation of the Star officers, bouquets of flowers,
    having the appropriate colors for the several points, may be
    introduced with pleasing effect.

_I. O._ My sisters, you are the floral center of this Chapter. In our
ceremonies, the colors and flowers appropriate to the five points of our
Star are endowed with beauty and instruction. To you is assigned the
duty of teaching the impressive lessons which those colors and floral
emblems symbolize, and the sublime virtues illustrated in the lives of
the heroines of our Order. How important, then, that in the discharge of
your official duties, you should strive to throw an air of beauty and
solemnity around all that you have to say and do, so that from you, as
the central Star of this Chapter, may emanate a light that will give
instruction and joy to all who attend our meetings.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sisters with their badges of office.

_I. O._ Sister Adah, your badge is the Sword and Veil within the
Triangle, an emblem of the heroic conduct of Jephthah's Daughter,
admonishing you to be ever faithful to your convictions of right and
duty.

[Illustration: Adah.]

Sister Ruth, your badge is the Sheaf within the Triangle, an emblem of
plenty, admonishing you that patient industry shall not go unrewarded.

[Illustration: ruth.]

Sister Esther, your badge is the Crown and Scepter within the Triangle,
an emblem of royalty and power, admonishing you to emulate the virtues
of the heroic queen Esther.

[Illustration: Esther.]

Sister Martha, your badge is the Broken Column within the Triangle, an
emblem of the uncertainty of human life, admonishing you that the
deepest sorrow is often relieved by trustful faith in God.

[Illustration: Martha.]

Sister Electa, your badge is the Cup within the Triangle, an emblem of
charity and hospitality, virtues inculcated by the teachings of our
Order.

[Illustration: Electa.]

Such, my sisters, are some of the lessons taught by your several badges
of office.

The sublime virtues exemplified in the lives of the distinguished
heroines whom you represent, are worthy of imitation, and I trust that
while you teach those virtues to others, they will be illustrated in
your lives. Thus you may honor the positions to which you have been
appointed, and lay up for yourselves those Heavenly treasures which
shall never fade and which will render you "Fairest among thousands,
altogether lovely."

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sisters to their several stations.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Warder and Sentinel for
installation.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting Sister ----, who has
been appointed Warder, and Bro. ----, appointed Sentinel of this Chapter
for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My sister and brother, you are respectively the inner and outer
guards of the Chapter. Upon you, therefore, we rely to preserve that
secrecy which is essential to our proceedings, and to see that the
solemnity of our ceremonies is not interrupted by untimely alarms. Be
ever watchful in your positions, and allow none to enter or leave the
Chapter without permission of the presiding officer.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sister and brother with their badges
of office.

Sister Warder, your badge is the Dove within the Star, an emblem of
peace, admonishing you that peace and harmony are necessary to the
success of our Order.

[Illustration: Warder.]

Brother Sentinel, your badge is the Cross-swords within the Star, an
emblem of protection, admonishing you that upon your watchful care
depends our security from interruption.

[Illustration: Sentinel.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sister and brother to their
stations within and without the door.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will present the Organist elect.

_M._ Worthy ----, I have the pleasure of presenting Sister ----, who has
been appointed Organist for the ensuing year.

_I. O._ My sister, your duties are embodied in the name of your office.
To make the initiation ceremonies as impressive and effective as we
desire, it is important that you should be faithful to your trust.

Sister Marshal, you will invest our sister with the badge of her office.

Your badge is the Lyre within the Star, an emblem of music and poetry,
admonishing you that by uniting harmony with our mystic rites, the
impressions will be more lasting.

[Illustration: Organist.]

Sister Marshal, you will conduct our sister to her station.

_I. O._ Sisters and Brothers, such is the nature of all associations,
that some must rule and govern, and others submit and obey.

The officers whom you have selected to preside over your deliberations
during the ensuing year, are, I trust, sufficiently conversant with the
rules of our Order to avoid exceeding the powers with which you have
intrusted them.

All things are now ready for you to enter upon the proceedings of a new
year. But we know not what is before us. No one can affirm that another
year, or even a single day, will be committed to our trust. Therefore,
if we have been faithful heretofore, let us increase our exertions for
the future.

As among the objects for which we are associated together is our purpose
to protect the widow and orphan, comfort the afflicted, sympathize with
the sorrowing, and relieve the destitute and distressed, I trust that no
discord will ever rise among us to imperil the success of our efforts to
accomplish these charitable purposes, and increase the happiness of
ourselves and others.

Let us be kind, forbearing and forgiving, one towards another. Let us
return kindness for hostility. Let us sacredly preserve our lips from
slander and evil speaking; and whatever may be our failings, let us
throw around each other the broad mantle of charity. And, finally, let
us be governed in words and deeds by the golden rule, "Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the
law and the prophets."

Thus may we confidently hope that in the good providence of God, each of
us will be brought, through a useful and happy life, to a blissful
close, and triumphant entrance upon the joys of celestial life.

    The Installing Officer then addresses the Worthy Matron, who, as he
    does so, rises.

Worthy Matron, the officers of your Chapter have been installed into
their respective stations, and are prepared to enter upon their duties.
You will now receive in charge the Charter, by the authority of which
this Chapter is held, and which must be present at all its meetings. You
will also receive the Constitution governing the Order in this State,
and the By-laws of this Chapter, both of which you are expected to make
yourself thoroughly acquainted with, and see promptly obeyed. I now
present to you the Gavel, an emblem of your authority; and as none
should disobey it, I confidently hope that you will never use it in an
arbitrary or dictatorial manner, remembering that we should charitably
temper justice with mercy. You will now assume your station as the
Worthy Matron of this Chapter.

    The Worthy Matron steps to the center of the dais, and the
    Installing Officer to the right. The Worthy Matron calls up the
    Chapter.

_I. O._ Sister Marshal, you will now proclaim the officers of ----
Chapter No. --, regularly installed.

_M._ In the name of the Grand Chapter and by order of the Worthy ----, I
proclaim the officers of ---- Chapter No. --, of the Order of the
Eastern Star, for the ensuing year, regularly installed.




                        CEREMONY OF INSTALLATION
                      Officers of Grand Chapters.


    The Grand Chapter being properly opened, as for work, a Past Grand
    Patron or Grand Matron presiding; if none such be present, then the
    oldest member being a Past Patron shall take the chair, and, with
    such assistance as he may appoint, the ceremony shall proceed, as
    follows:

    The Grand Secretary shall call the list of officers, elected and
    appointed; and, as their names are called, they will form a
    semi-circle on the west side of the Altar, facing the East, to
    receive the Obligation; the emblems of office and jewels having been
    collected at the East; the Worthy Grand Matron on the extreme South,
    followed by the Worthy Grand Patron, &c.

    [This ceremony may be used to install the officers of the General
    Grand Chapter, by prefixing the words, "Most Worthy" to Grand Matron
    and Grand Patron, "Right Worthy" to the Associate Grand Matron,
    Associate Grand Patron, Grand Secretary and Grand Treasurer, and
    "Very Worthy" to Grand Chaplain, and "Worthy" before the rest of the
    Grand Officers. Whenever "Grand Chapter" occurs, prefix the word
    "General."]

    The Grand Marshal will then present the officers to the Grand Matron
    or Grand Patron.

_G. M._ Grand ----, I have the pleasure to present to you, for
installation, these sisters and brothers, who have been duly elected and
chosen to preside over us and assist in conducting the business of this
Grand Chapter, and to discharge all other duties appertaining to their
several stations until their successors are lawfully chosen and
installed.

    Installing Officer rises and calls up the Grand Chapter, which is
    addressed as follows:

_Grand ----._ Sisters and brothers of the Grand Chapter, these persons,
selected by you, are now ready and willing to take upon themselves the
obligations, duties and responsibilities of office. In our beautiful
Order, preferment to office should not be sought after, but should come
to the individual chosen, as an honor justly merited and freely
bestowed. Those only should be chosen, who, by their reputation, their
work, and high moral character, command the esteem and confidence of our
members, and can give us standing and credit before the world. Do you
believe they possess these qualifications, and now desire that they
shall be installed into the offices to which they have been chosen?

    The Grand Chapter responds:

We do.

    Installing Officer continues:

_Grand ----._ Sisters and brothers-elect, there being no objection
against either of you, gives us full assurance of your competency to
discharge the responsible duties to be assigned you. You have been
chosen to take charge of the affairs of this Grand Chapter for the
ensuing year.

It is no small mark of esteem to be thus selected; let it be your aim to
make the ensuing year the most prosperous in the history of this Grand
Chapter; then you will find in the record of its prosperity the reward
of your faithful service.

You will please give your assent to the obligation of office.

Do you each sacredly promise to support, maintain and enforce the
Constitution, By-Laws, and Regulations of this Grand Chapter, be
obedient to its orders and directions, and, to the best of your
knowledge and ability, impartially and faithfully discharge the duties
of your office, and use your utmost endeavors to make yourself useful,
and your station honorable, in the office with which I am now about to
invest you?

    They severally assent, and the Installing Officer will then seat the
    Grand Chapter, the officers elect being seated together, and the
    ceremonies will proceed, as follows:

_G. M._ Grand ----, I have the honor to present, for installation,
Sister ----, duly elected Grand Matron for the ensuing year. Our sister
is fully aware of the great responsibility she is assuming, in the
acceptance of this important position, yet she is willing to undertake
it, in the belief that, with the aid and assistance of the sisters and
brothers, and by the help of God, she will not fail in the performance
of her duty, and thus prove that the confidence reposed in her has not
been misapplied.

_Grand ----._ Sister ----, you have been elected by the free ballot of
the members of this Grand Chapter, to occupy the most exalted position
in their power to bestow upon a sister; a just and deserving tribute to
your zeal and worth, and I congratulate you upon your preferment.

The high honors attached to the office of Grand Matron are accompanied
by weighty and delicate responsibilities. It is expected that you will
have a watchful care over the interests of this Grand Chapter, see that
its Constitutions, By-Laws and Regulations, orders and edicts are
promptly enforced throughout this jurisdiction, that subordinate
officers discharge their duties, and that, by your own respect for law
and good government, you will cause all others to find the strongest
incentive of obedience to all lawful commands.

Your duties are more specifically set forth in the Constitution, to
which I refer you, with the admonition: Be cautious in your words,
courteous in your actions, sincere in your rulings, governing with
moderation and decorum, trusting that your well-known zeal in the cause
of the Order will lead you to discharge these important trusts with
lasting benefit to this Grand Chapter and great credit to yourself.

[Illustration: Grand Matron.]

You will now be invested with the proper badge of office, and be
conducted to your station in the East.

    After she is in her station, the Installing officer will call up the
    Grand Chapter, and say:

_Grand ----._ Grand Matron, behold your sisters and brothers! Sisters
and brothers, behold your Grand Matron, and salute her with the Grand
Honors.

    Seats the Grand Chapter.

_G. M._ Grand ----, it is with pleasure I introduce to you Brother ----,
who has been duly elected Grand Patron for the ensuing year. I doubt not
but you will find him as willing to discharge the duties as to enjoy the
high honors conferred upon him.

_Grand ----._ Brother ----, you have been elected by the free choice of
the members of this Grand Chapter to occupy the most exalted position in
their power to bestow upon a brother; a just compliment to your zeal and
worth, and for which I offer you my sincere congratulations. Your
intimate acquaintance with the rules and affairs of our Order justify me
in saying that the members have exercised a sound discretion in this
selection. You are elevated to a position from which the power and
prerogative may depart with the expiration of your term of service, but
the honor and dignity, except by your own act, _never_!

Your duties are to issue dispensations, organize and supervise new
Chapters, and assist the Grand Matron in the discharge of her duties.
Other duties appropriate to your high office might be named, which will
readily suggest themselves to a sensitive mind, imbued with a proper
zeal to promote the interests of our Order. The field is broad, and
whitening for the harvest; may you be the instrument of gathering many
sheaves to our garner, that it may be said of you, "Well done, thou good
and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will
make thee ruler over many things."

[Illustration: Grand Patron.]

You will now be invested with the insignia of office, and be conducted
to your station on the left of the Grand Matron in the East.

    After he is in his station, the Installing Officer will call up the
    Grand Chapter, and say:

_Grand ----._ Grand Patron, behold your sisters and brothers! Sisters
and brothers, behold your Grand Patron, and salute him with the Grand
Honors.

    Seats the Grand Chapter.

_G. M._ Grand ----, with pleasure I present Sister ----, elected
Associate Grand Matron, for installation. I am persuaded she fully
appreciates the honor conferred, and will discharge the duties imposed
with credit to herself and satisfaction to the Order.

_Grand ----._ Sister ----, the duties of your honorable station are
embodied in the name of your office. You are to assist the Grand Matron,
and in case of her death, absence, or disability, you shall act for her
and discharge her duties. To you is especially intrusted the supervision
of your sister officers, that the paraphernalia of the Grand Chapter be
properly preserved, and its Ritual ceremonies performed intelligently.
Be ever ready to discharge these duties.

[Illustration: Asso. Grand Matron.]

You will now be invested with your badge of office, and conducted to
your station in the West.

_G. M._ Grand ----, I now have the pleasure of presenting to you, for
installation, Brother ----, who has been duly elected Associate Grand
Patron.

_Grand ----._ Brother ----, I congratulate you on being chosen to fill
so high a station. Your duties are to assist the Grand Patron, and in
case of his death, absence or disability, to assume his powers and
duties. Those who have reposed so much confidence in you have reason to
expect you to faithfully look after their interests, and zealously work
for the welfare of the Order. Let the laws, tenets and professions of
the Eastern Star be your constant study, that you may be ready to
enforce them by precept and example, and the better enabled to exercise
the higher and more exalted position to which you may be called at any
moment.

[Illustration: Associate Grand Patron.]

You will now be invested with the proper emblem of office, and conducted
to your station on the left of the Associate Grand Matron, in the West.

_G. M._ Grand ----, it is my pleasant duty to introduce ---- ----, duly
elected to serve us as Grand Secretary for the ensuing year.

_Grand ----._ ---- ----, the office to which you have been elected is by
far the most important, if not the most honorable, within the gift of
this Grand Chapter. Yours is an onerous and most responsible charge. But
few are competent to perform it in the thorough manner it demands.
Failure or neglect upon your part will complicate and embarrass all our
proceedings, and give us a disgraceful record before the world. To you,
also, is intrusted the collection of all funds due the Grand Chapter,
the custody of the seal, records, books, and papers. You are the
correspondent and financial agent of the Grand Chapter, the medium of
intercourse between the officers and members thereof, as well as between
them and Subordinate Chapters. The faithful discharge of all your
various duties requires constant and systematic work, a careful keeping
of records and accounts, prompt and discreet action, and the highest
integrity of character.

[Illustration: Grand Secretary.]

You will now receive your emblem of office, and be conducted to your
station in the South-East.

_G. M._ Grand ----, it is with confidence and pleasure I present to you,
for installation, Sister ----, duly elected to serve as Grand Treasurer
for the ensuing year.

_Grand ----._ Sister ----, to you is intrusted the proper care,
preservation and disbursement of the funds of this Grand Chapter. This
is a trust of the utmost importance, for without money little good can
be accomplished. You will, therefore, attend carefully to the financial
interests of the Order, receiving the funds, through the Grand
Secretary, from the different sources of revenue, keep them safely
invested, render a just account thereof, and pay the same out only on
proper vouchers, with the consent of this Grand Chapter. Let it be your
constant care to be faithful to your trust, and not forfeit the
confidence reposed in you by this Grand Chapter.

[Illustration: Grand Treasurer.]

You will now receive your badge of office, and be conducted to your
station, in the North-East.

_G. M._ Grand ----, I have the honor to present ---- ----, chosen to
officiate as Grand Chaplain for the ensuing year.

_Grand ----._ My ----, our beautiful Order founded upon the moral
teachings of the Holy Scripture, everywhere, and on all occasions,
acknowledges the existence and providence of God. Except the Lord build
the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the
city, the watchman waketh in vain. You have been chosen Grand Chaplain,
and as such it will be your duty to conduct the devotional exercises of
this Grand Chapter, and superintend and promote its charitable and
benevolent objects. These will afford a wide field of usefulness, and
may you be so successful in pointing to the "Star in the East" that all
will be induced to follow it, until they meet in the Grand Chapter
above.

[Illustration: Grand Chaplain.]

You will now be invested with your badge of office, and take your
station on the right of the Grand Matron.

_G. M._ Grand ----, it is with pleasure I present ---- ----, appointed
Grand Lecturer.

_Grand ----._ ---- ----, to you is intrusted the work of the Order, its
rites, traditions, and ceremonies, and it will be your duty to exemplify
the same, whenever called upon by this Grand Chapter, and see that they
are intelligently performed by the subordinate Chapters of this
jurisdiction. To discharge these duties well, will require much time,
study and observation upon your part; but we trust that your attachment
to the principles of our Order, and zeal in promoting its interests,
will lead you to the faithful discharge of your duties.

Receive the jewel and emblem of your office, and take your station in
the South.

_G. M._ Grand ----, I now have the pleasure of presenting ---- ----, for
installation, as Grand Marshal.

_Grand ----._ ---- ----, the post assigned to you is one of honor and
responsibility. It is your duty to superintend and marshal all
processions of the Grand Chapter, assist in all its public and private
ceremonies, conduct and proclaim the officers at the time of
installation, and perform such other duties as pertain to your office.

[Illustration: Grand Marshal.]

You will now be invested with the badge of your office, and be conducted
to your station in the South-East.

_G. M._ Grand ----, I have the pleasure to introduce, for installation,
Sister ----, appointed Grand Conductress, and Sister ----, appointed
Associate Grand Conductress for the ensuing year.

_Grand ----._ My sisters, your duties are to attend upon your superior
officers, assist in the active duties of this Grand Chapter, introduce
and welcome visitors, and aid in exemplifying the rites and ceremonies
of our Order upon all proper occasions.

If you attend to these duties aright, throwing sisterly courtesy and
dignity around your official conduct, you will acquire the confidence
and respect of all and merit promotion to still higher honors and more
weighty responsibilities.

[Illustration: Grand Conductress.]

You will now receive your respective badges of office, and be conducted
to your proper stations in the South and North.

[Illustration: Assoc. Grand Conductress.]

_G. M._ Grand ----, it is with pleasure that I present to you, for
installation, these sisters who have been appointed to represent the
five distinguished heroines of our Order, Sister ----, as Grand Adah;
Sister ----, as Grand Ruth; Sister ----, as Grand Esther; Sister ----,
as Grand Martha; Sister ----, as Grand Electa.

_Grand ----._ My sisters, the most important lessons of our Order are
given from the five points of our emblematic Star. It should be your
study to most impressively render these lessons during the opening
ceremonies of this Grand Chapter, and whenever your services may be
needed.

You will now each be invested with the badge of your office, and
conducted to your stations.

[Illustration: Grand Officers.]

_G. M._ It is with pleasure that I present, for installation, Sister
----, appointed to be Grand Warder, and Brother ----, appointed to be
Grand Sentinel.

_Grand ----._ My sister and brother, you are, respectively, the inner
and outer guards of the Grand Chapter. Upon you, therefore, we rely to
preserve that secrecy which is essential to our proceedings, and to see
that our ceremonies are not interrupted by untimely alarms, and to
discharge such other duties as appertain to your office. A prompt and
faithful discharge of these responsibilities will afford the best
evidence of your attachment for the tenets and professions of our Order.

You will be invested with your respective badges of office, and
conducted to your stations within and without the door of the Grand
Chapter.

_G. M._ It is my pleasant duty to present for installation, Sister ----,
appointed to serve as Grand Organist for the ensuing year.

_Grand ----._ My sister, your duties are embodied in the name of your
office, admonishing you that by uniting music and harmony with our
mystic lessons the ceremonials of our Order will prove more lasting.

[Illustration: Grand Organist.]

You will be invested with your badge of office, and conducted to your
station.

_G. M._ Grand ----, my duties are ended. The several officers of this
Grand Chapter have been duly elected, installed, invested with their
badges of office, and conducted to their respective stations.

_Grand ----._ It is well. Officers and members of the Grand Chapter, all
things are now ready for you to enter upon the proceedings of a new
year. Harmony and good-will prevail, and we start under the most
auspicious circumstances. But no one can affirm that another year, or
even a single day, will be committed to our trust. Therefore, if we have
been faithful heretofore, let us redouble our exertions for the future.
Let us continue kindly affectionate, one toward another. Let us walk
circumspectly, sacredly preserving our lips from slander and evil
speaking, ever remembering our sacred obligations. And may we, each of
us, through the good providence of God, be brought, through a useful and
happy life, to a blissful close and a triumphant entrance upon the joys
of the Heavenly life.

Let us now look to God for his benediction.

    Installing Officer calls up the Grand Chapter.


                                Prayer.


_Grand ----._ Grand Marshal, you will proclaim the Grand Officers,
regularly installed.

_G. M._ In the name of the Grand Chapter and by order of the Worthy
Grand ----, I proclaim the officers of the Grand Chapter of ----, Order
of the Eastern Star, duly installed.

    Seats the Grand Chapter.




          Funeral Ceremonies of the Order of the Eastern Star

    At the burial of a sister, the badges of the members and officers
    should be draped with crape. A floral five-pointed Star should be
    provided, having flowers of the appropriate colors for the several
    points. The Star officers should each have a small bouquet, or a few
    loose flowers of the appropriate color. A few flowers should also be
    provided for the Worthy Matron and Worthy Patron.

    The floral Star may be deposited with the casket, or be retained by
    the family of the deceased.

    This service, although primarily designed for use at the Grave, can,
    if it is thought best to do so, be performed within the Chapter
    room, the Church, or other appropriate place. The members may meet
    at the Chapter room, or at the place of service.

    A member will be appointed to act as Marshal, who will see that the
    badges are properly draped, and that the officers and members are in
    their proper positions.

    If a procession is formed, it will march in the following order:
    Marshal and Sentinel, Members, Warder and Electa, Martha and Esther,
    Ruth and Adah, Conductress and Associate Conductress, Secretary and
    Treasurer, Matron and Associate Matron, Patron and Chaplain.

    During the services, the officers and members will occupy the
    following positions around the grave or casket:

[Illustration: Funeral Positions.]

    When all is ready, the services should commence with a short strain
    of solemn music, "The Lord is my Shepherd," etc. After which the
    Worthy Patron will say:

_W. P._ Sisters and Brothers, we have gathered at this solemn hour to
perform those final rites which affection has prescribed for our
departed sister. She, who was with us but yesterday, has been summoned
hence by a messenger who cometh sooner or later for us all.

How appropriately may we gather around her remains, and together pay
love's tribute to her memory.

She has indeed passed beyond the reach of praise, or the touch of
censure. It is not, therefore, to her that we tender this our heart's
saddest offering.

We are here in acknowledgment of sacred ties now severed, of memories
tenderly cherished, and hearts touched with sympathy for loved ones
bereaved.

Our sister has finished her allotted task in the conflict of life. The
chapter of her earthly sojourn is closed, but her many virtues shall not
go unrecorded.

For a time we have walked with her in the pilgrimage of life, and around
the same altar we have learned the lessons of our Order.

As she was faithful to her convictions of right, as she was obedient to
the demands of honor and justice in her station; as she loved kindred
and friends, and in affliction evinced a trustful faith; and as she
lived in the spirit of charity and the love of truth, so shall be her
reward.

Remembering her many virtues, we are indeed mourners at her grave, and
in the house of sorrow we would drop the tear of affectionate sympathy.

Sisters, brothers, and friends, as we stand in this solemn presence we
may hear the voice of this Providence speaking to us.

Not long shall we wait ere we obey the inexorable decree of Death, and
follow our sister.

How brief and full of mystery is human life! Who can fathom its purpose,
or disclose its issues. We entered life as it were but yesterday; to-day
we perform our allotted task, and to-morrow we go--who knows whither? We
strain our eyes in vain endeavor to scan with mortal vision the infinite
shore. But, thanks to our Heavenly Father, who gives fruition to His
children's hopes, He bids us look yet again.

Standing beside the Broken Column, we may, with Martha's trustful faith,
look beyond the shore of time, and know that our sister, though lost to
mortal vision, is only waiting beyond the river to welcome us to our
eternal home.

"In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am there ye may
be also." O, let the comforting assurance come to us, "That if our
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens."

Instructed by this Providence, may we go from this place of mourning,
and this hour of reflection, with the inspiration of a new hope, and
earnest purpose.

    "So live, that when thy summons comes to join
    The innumerable caravan that moves
    To the pale realms of shade, where each shall take
    His chamber in the silent halls of death,
    Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night,
    Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed
    By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave
    Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
    About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams."


                                SINGING.


The following or some other appropriate hymn may be used:

      Friend after friend departs;
      Who hath not lost a friend?
    There is no union here of hearts,
      That finds not here an end.
    Were this frail world our only rest,
    Living or dying, none were blest.

      There is a world above,
      Where parting is unknown--
    A whole eternity of love
      And blessedness alone;
    And faith beholds the dying here,
    Translated to that happier sphere.

_W. P._ The examples and symbols of our Order are full of useful and
impressive lessons. They speak to us in this solemn hour with unwonted
significance.

These floral tributes, the offering of sisterly affection, echo voices
often heard from the several points of our Star; they symbolize, in the
ritual of our Order, virtues which should adorn our lives. How
appropriately, then, may they bear an important part in this solemn
ceremonial.

Sisters of our Star, you who represent the five distinguished heroines
of our Order, have you anything to offer ere we leave the grave of our
departed sister?

Sister Adah, what is the voice and tribute from the Blue point of our
emblematic Star?

_Adah._ Blue symbolizes fidelity, and is appropriate to Jephthah's
Daughter, who, in the morning of life, surrendered to the grave the
brightest of earthly hopes, that she might be faithful to her
convictions of right, and preserve her father's honor. As a token of
faithfulness to the memory of our sister, I deposit in her grave this
tribute of faithful love.

    At the proper time each officer will drop into the grave, or place
    upon the casket, the flowers provided for that purpose.

    Adah deposits her tribute, and then, addressing Ruth, says:

Sister Ruth, what is the voice and tribute from the Yellow point of our
Star?

_Ruth._ Yellow symbolizes constancy, teaching faithful obedience to the
demands of honor and justice. Ruth exemplified these virtues in humble
station, and sought the society of the good and true. In token of
appreciation of these virtues, I deposit in the grave of our sister this
floral tribute.

    Deposits her tribute, and then, addressing Esther, says:

Sister Esther, what is the voice and tribute from the White point of our
Star?

_Esther._ White symbolizes light and purity. The heroic Queen Esther
evinced the purity of her motive and love of kindred and friends, by her
willingness to risk the loss of crown and life, to save her people from
death. In token of sincere affection for our sister, I deposit in her
grave this emblem of light and purity.

    Deposits her tribute, and then, addressing Martha, says:

Sister Martha, what is the voice and tribute from the Green point of our
Star?

_Martha._ Green is an emblem of Nature's life and beauty. The evergreen
is a symbol of immortal life, and teaches us, that in the economy of God
there is no death; forms change, but the spirit survives. Martha, beside
the grave of her beloved brother, avowed her trustful faith and hope of
immortal life. In the full assurance of our sister's entrance upon a
glorious immortality, I deposit in her grave this evergreen.

    Deposits her tribute, and then, addressing Electa, says:

Sister Electa, what is the voice and tribute from the Red point of our
Star?

_Electa._ Red symbolizes fervency and zeal. Electa represents those who
have been pre-eminent in charity, and heroic in endurance of the wrongs
of persecution. In token of the fervency of our affection for our
sister, I deposit in her grave this tribute of love.

    Deposits her tribute, and then, addressing the Worthy Matron, says:

Worthy Matron, we have spoken from the five points of our emblematic
Star, but our departed sister hears us not. Is it in vain that we speak
to the living?

_W. M._ You have spoken well, my sisters. It is not in vain that we hear
the oft repeated lessons of our Star. It is true that our sister hears
not with mortal ear the lessons she was wont to learn from you; but is
it true that she listens not to our words of love, and sees not the
beautiful tributes strewn within her grave? May not her quickened
spirit, freed from its earthly tenement, yet hover around the loved ones
here assembled, listen to our words, and perceive with clearer vision
our every movement?

She needs not to be ministered unto; but may she not now minister to us?
"Are they not all ministering spirits?" saith the apostle.

Love is an attribute of the soul, and imperishable. Our sister's
affection ceases not; therefore may she not now be whispering to
grief-stricken hearts, "Peace be still," "Lo, I am with you always."
Think not that the spirit world is distant. Our loved ones, though lost
to mortal sight, may yet be with us in spiritual existence. Let their
loving presence be to us a perpetual inspiration, calling us to a higher
moral and spiritual life.

These beautiful flowers are the highest expression of Nature's
loveliness. We never tire of looking at their perfect and delicately
variegated tints. From time immemorial they have been endowed with
expressive language. They speak to us, "To whisper hope whene'er our
faith grows dim." But these floral emblems, with all their exquisite
loveliness, are but dim reflections of the glories that may be unfolded
to our spiritual vision. In token of our hope that such an unfolding of
spiritual life may come to us all, I scatter these flowers within the
grave of our departed sister. May we cherish her memory and emulate her
virtues.

    Deposits her tribute, and then, addressing the Worthy Patron, says:

Worthy Patron, within the grave, hallowed by the tenderest ties of human
affection, we scatter these floral emblems of Nature's loveliness, and
spiritual life. May we not trust all else to the Father's loving care?

_W. P._ The Infinite Father's ever watchful care is nowhere more
impressively taught, than by His voice speaking to us through the floral
kingdom. Over the whole earth where life exists, flowers bloom in
endless variety and profusion, there is no place so obscure but that
they blossom there and give to the world their beauty and fragrance.
Some open with the rising sun, and close with his setting rays. Others
open to the full moon and starry firmament, and shrink before the
piercing gaze of the king of day.

So the Father's love goes forth by day and night, to the weakest, most
humble, and obscure of His children.

We are told to consider the lilies of the field, and learn the paternal
love of Him, beyond whose watchful care none can stray. Not a sparrow
falls without His notice. "Ye are of more value than many sparrows."

In token of our trust in the all-embracing love of the Infinite Father,
I deposit these emblems of His watchful care in the grave of our
departed sister.

    Drops the flowers, and continues as follows:

Sisters and brothers, within the city of the dead, we consign to the
bosom of mother earth all that was mortal of our departed sister. The
body we leave in the grave is but the casket which held the precious
jewel of life. We bear it tenderly to its resting-place, because it is
the form by which we knew her in our Chapter. Peacefully let it rest in
the hallowed ground where we place it. Upon her grave flowerets will
bloom amid all the countless activities of Nature's life.

    "The murmuring brook, the bird on airy wing,
    And whispering pines, will here her requiem sing."

Over her the fleeting shadows will pass. The rising sun will scatter
over the chambers of the dead his gladsome rays, and tint the western
sky with the glories of departing day. In the hush of night the feeble
rays of countless stars, traveling centuries on their journey here, will
finally rest upon her grave.

We leave in this lowly bed the earthly form of our departed sister, and
may the hallowing influence of this providence go with us in the
remaining journey of our life, and when our earthly mission is over, and
we are "beyond the smiling and the weeping" of earth, may we gather with
the loved ones gone before.

Let us unite in prayer.


                                PRAYER.


    Our Father who art in Heaven, in whom we live, and in whom are all
    the issues of life and death. We come to Thee, in this hour of
    sorrow, and ask that we may so learn the lessons of this hour, that
    when it shall be our turn to lay aside our mortality, that we may do
    it with trustful faith in Thee and hope of a glorious immortality.
    We pray Thee to look with tender compassion upon these Thy children,
    whose household has been broken by this providence. May they lie
    passive in the arms of Thy chastening love, and realize that there
    is wisdom and goodness in all Thy appointments. Sanctify this
    bereavement to the good of us all. May it be the means of drawing us
    closer to Thee, and of our loving and serving Thee forever. And as
    it has pleased Thee to call from the toils of earth the soul of our
    beloved sister, we commit her remains to the silent tomb. Earth to
    earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, hopefully looking to a joyful
    reunion with her, in that land where separation and death are known
    no more, forever. AMEN.

_Response._ So may it ever be.


                                SINGING.


    Nearer, my God, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!
    Ev'n though it be a cross
      That raiseth me!
    Still all my song shall be,
    Nearer, my God, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!

    Though like a wanderer,
      The sun gone down,
    Darkness be over me,
      My rest a stone,
    Yet in my dreams I'd be
    Nearer, My God, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee!

    Or, if on joyful wing
      Cleaving the sky,
    Sun, moon, and stars forgot,
      Upward I fly,
    Still all my song shall be,
    Nearer, My God, to Thee,
      Nearer to Thee.




                                 Forms.


                         PETITION FOR DEGREES.


    _To the Worthy Matron, Officers, and Members of ...... Chapter, No.
    ......, Order of the Eastern Star_:

_The undersigned respectfully petitions to receive the Degrees of the
Order of the Eastern Star, and become a member of your Chapter._

_If accepted, ... he pledges .... self to a cheerful obedience to the
laws of the Order._

    _Residence_ ...........
    _Signed_ .................

    _Recommended by_ ..............
    _of_ ..............

    ................ _of_ ...... _Lodge_,

    _F. & A. M. of_ ............


                       PETITION FOR AFFILIATION.


    _To the Worthy Matron, Officers, and Members of ...... Chapter, No.
    ......, Order of the Eastern Star_:

_The undersigned, late a member of ........ Chapter, No. ......, of
............., solicits Affiliation with your Chapter._

_If this Petition shall be granted, .. he pledges .... self to a
cheerful obedience to the laws of the Order._

    _Residence_ ............
    _Signed_ ................

    _Recommended by_ ................

                          ....... ........

[_The Petition must be accompanied by a Dimit from the Chapter of which
the Petitioner was last a Member, or its absence satisfactorily
explained._]


                                 DIMIT.


_To all Members of the Order of the Eastern Star_:

_This Dimit witnesseth,_

_That ..............., whose name appears in the margin of this
instrument, was received into .......... Chapter, No. ......, of
......... ........ 18... And that having paid all Dues, and being free
from all charges, .. he is at .... own request lawfully dismissed from
Membership therein._

_Given under my hand and the Seal of the Chapter, this ...... day of
........., ..._

.................... _Secret y._




Transcriber's Notes:

Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.

Typographical errors were silently corrected.

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only when a
predominant form was found in this book.

Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).





End of Project Gutenberg's Ritual of the Order of the Eastern Star, by Various


        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RITUAL OF THE ORDER OF THE EASTERN STAR ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


