The Project Gutenberg eBook of Synonyms and antonyms
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Synonyms and antonyms
        An alphabetical list of words in common use, grouped with others of similar and opposite meaning

Author: Edith B. Ordway

Release date: March 23, 2024 [eBook #73237]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: George Sully and co, 1913

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYNONYMS AND ANTONYMS ***





                         SYNONYMS AND ANTONYMS
  _An Alphabetical List of Words in Common Use, Grouped with Others of
                     Similar and Opposite Meaning_


                                   BY

                            EDITH B. ORDWAY
 _Author of “The Etiquette of To-Day,” “Handbook of Quotations,” Etc._


                                NEW YORK

                        GEORGE SULLY AND COMPANY




                           _Copyright, 1913_

                        BY SULLY AND KLEINTEICH

                         _All rights reserved_


                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.




                                PREFACE


The aim in compiling this book has been to make the list of words in
common use concise yet full, and authoritative yet suggestive. Above
five thousand leading words are given, and the synonyms and antonyms
comprise several thousand more different words.

Actual references may be multiplied by looking up a synonym or antonym,
as well as by consulting cognate words, such as the corresponding noun,
verb, or adjective.

In some cases common words have been omitted, because they were composed
of a root word and a prefix, intensive or privative. Their synonyms and
antonyms may be found under the root word.

Occasionally within the lists words closely synonymous or antonymic have
been grouped within semicolons.

The part of speech of a word is designated by an abbreviation in such
cases as are necessary to save confusion.

Synonyms appear immediately after the leading word; antonyms, after the
abbreviation “Ant.” This order is invariable.

In the effort to make this list authoritative, the standard dictionaries
and the acknowledged authorities on the subject have been consulted.

                                                                E. B. O.




                             ABBREVIATIONS


 _a._       Adjective.

 _ad._      Adverb.

 _Ant._     Antonym or Antonyms.

 _conj._    Conjunction.

 _interj._  Interjection.

 _n._       Noun.

 _p.p._     Past Participle.

 _prep._    Preposition.

 _Syn._     Synonym or Synonyms.

 _v._       Verb.




                         SYNONYMS AND ANTONYMS




                                   A


=Abandon.= Desert, leave, forsake, depart from, quit, give up,
relinquish, discontinue, abdicate, renounce, repudiate, forswear,
withdraw from, vacate, surrender, retract, recant, retire from, cast
off, abjure, cede, cease, resign, forego, yield, waive, part with, let
go, lay down, evacuate, drop, deliver up.

ANT. _Claim, cherish, defend, keep, hold, maintain, protect, adopt,
uphold, advocate, vindicate, occupy, undertake, prosecute, pursue,
follow, seek, guard, favor, retain, support, assert, haunt._

=Abandoned.= Discarded, rejected _and the p.p. of the syn. of
“abandon”_; depraved, corrupt, profligate, wicked, unprincipled,
shameless, sinful, hardened, impenitent, lost, demoralized, vicious,
dissolute, reprobate, graceless, obdurate, licentious, incorrigible,
irreclaimable, bad.

ANT. The p.p. of the ant. of “abandon”; _visited, frequented, sociable;
virtuous, good, deserving, worthy, commendable, excellent, laudable;
reclaimable, penitent; conscientious, correct, upright, righteous,
self-controlled, high-principled, steady._

=Abandonment.= Desertion, renunciation, surrender, rejection,
abandoning, relinquishment, dereliction; cession, resignation,
abnegation, demission, abjuration, abdication, defection, abrogation.

ANT. _Solicitude, care, heed, watchfulness, vigilance; hospitality,
entertainment, conviviality, welcome, reception; retention, completion,
reclamation, support, help, correction, custody, tenacity._

=Abase.= Degrade, reduce, lower, discredit, disgrace, dishonor, humble,
sink, humiliate, bring low, cast down, stoop, debase, depress, drop,
take down, demean.

ANT. _Elevate, exalt, honor, promote, raise, dignify, uplift,
aggrandize._

=Abasement.= Degradation, humiliation, dishonor, degeneracy, shame,
depression, reduction, lowering, fall, deterioration, debasement,
degeneration, vitiation, perversion, depravation, abjection, disrepute,
discredit, subserviency.

ANT. _Promotion, exaltation, honor, elevation, aggrandizement, dignity,
repute, reputation, standing, supremacy._

=Abash.= Bewilder, confound, disconcert, discompose, confuse, daunt,
humble, dishearten, mortify, shame, humiliate, snub, discountenance.

ANT. _Embolden, cheer, encourage, animate, uphold, rally, countenance,
inspirit, abet, incite, buoy._

=Abate.= Lessen, lower, reduce, diminish, moderate, decrease, decline,
ebb, mitigate, subside, suppress, terminate, remove; temper, assuage,
alleviate, appease, pacify; remit, allow; relax, slacken; bate, deduct;
soothe, soften, qualify, allay, mollify, compose, tranquilize, quiet,
quell, calm, dull, blunt; batter down, beat down, demolish, raze.

ANT. _Increase, prolong, magnify, foment, enlarge, extend, aggravate,
continue, develop, revive, raise, enhance, amplify._

=Abatement.= Subsidence, decline, lowering, reduction, decrease;
allowance, discount, rebate, depreciation, drawback; moderation,
lessening, mitigation, assuagement, remission, sinking, settling,
waning, fading, ebb, evanishment, declension, deduction, diminution.

ANT. _Increase, augmentation, enlargement, increment, accretion,
development, growth, aggrandizement, dilation, accession._

=Abbreviate.= Shorten, contract, curtail, reduce, abridge, condense,
epitomize, compress.

ANT. _Lengthen, extend, elongate, dilate, expand, amplify, enlarge,
produce, stretch, prolong, expatiate._

=Abbreviation.= Abridgment, contraction, condensation, compend,
abstract, epitome, reduction, summary, curtailment, compression.

ANT. _Expansion, amplification, expatiation, extension, production,
enlargement, dilation._

=Abdicate.= Resign, relinquish _office_ (_especially of the throne_),
surrender, abandon, vacate, forego, renounce, give up, cede.

ANT. _Retain, claim, occupy, maintain, usurp, seize, grasp._

=Abdomen.= Belly, paunch, ventral region, visceral cavity.

=Abduct.= Take away (_surreptitiously or forcibly_), kidnap, run away
with, carry off, spirit away, drag away.

ANT. _Restore, reinstate, adduct._

=Abduction.= Withdrawal, drawing away, abstraction, kidnapping, seizure,
appropriation.

ANT. _Adduction, replacement, restitution, restoration, surrender,
reinstatement._

=Aberrant.= Wandering, rambling, divergent, deviating, devious, erratic;
irregular, abnormal, unusual, exceptional.

ANT. _Regular, true, consistent, uniform, consecutive, normal, natural,
continuous._

=Aberration.= Wandering, divergence, irregularity, rambling,
disconnectedness, hallucination, illusion, delusion, eccentricity,
singularity, peculiarity.

ANT. _Uniformity, consecutiveness, regularity, progression, continuity,
order, type, norm._

=Abet.= Aid, assist, promote, support, sanction, uphold, countenance,
encourage, advocate, incite, instigate, embolden, favor, foment, connive
at, coöperate with.

ANT. _Hinder, impede, obstruct, frustrate, baffle, confound, counteract,
deter, discourage, thwart, contradict, disconcert, disapprove, denounce,
dissuade, expose._

=Abettor.= Assistant, helper, aid, ally, coöperator, advocate,
confederate, accomplice, accessory, adviser, promoter, instigator,
associate, coadjutor.

ANT. _Opponent, foe, adversary, antagonist, rival, dissuader, detector,
baffler, disconcerter._

=Abeyance.= Suspense, suspension, expectancy, waiting, anticipation,
dormancy, intermission, quiescence, suppression, expectation.

ANT. _Renewal, revival, resuscitation, action, operation, exercise,
force, possession._

=Abhor.= Hate, detest, loathe, shrink from, recoil from, shudder at,
abominate, despise, dislike, eschew, nauseate, revolt at.

ANT. _Crave, desire, enjoy, covet, esteem, like, love, relish, admire,
approve, affect._

=Abhorrent.= Odious, offensive, shocking, repugnant, loathsome,
revolting, horrible, repellent, repulsive, nauseating.

ANT. _Admirable, enjoyable, lovely, estimable, desirable._

=Abide.= Wait for, await, attend; endure, tolerate, bear, suffer;
anticipate, watch for, expect; bide, continue, reside, dwell, sojourn,
tarry, lodge, rest, stay, inhabit, remain.

ANT. _Abandon, shun; resist, reject, avoid; deport, migrate, move,
journey, continue, proceed, progress._

=Abiding.= Lasting, continuing, permanent, durable, constant, stable,
immutable, changeless, unchanging.

ANT. _Ephemeral, fickle, changeable, unsubstantial, perishable._

=Ability.= Power, force, might, efficiency, vigor, skill, energy,
dexterity, adroitness, skilfulness, cleverness, ingenuity, talent,
aptitude, facility, knack, expertness, readiness, quickness, strength,
capacity, qualification, competency, genius, caliber, capability,
capableness, faculty, gift, parts.

ANT. _Incapacity, weakness, inability, unreadiness, maladroitness,
imbecility, impotence, disability, inaptitude, inefficiency,
incompetence, disqualification, helplessness, stupidity, folly._

=Abject.= Base, vile, mean, low, despicable, contemptible, worthless,
groveling, fawning, beggarly, servile, cringing, miserable, degraded,
menial, ignoble.

ANT. _Dignified, honorable, exalted, worthy, venerable, illustrious,
independent, princely, self-assertive, self-reliant, vain, arrogant,
insolent, haughty._

=Abjure.= Renounce, relinquish, reject, forswear, forego, repudiate,
disown, give up, retract, revoke, recant, disavow, disclaim, withdraw,
take back, deny, apostatize, discard.

ANT. _Claim, advocate, acknowledge, profess, vindicate, assert, demand,
retain, appropriate, avow._

=Able.= Accomplished, adroit, talented, clever, ingenious, apt, skilful,
efficient, capable, fitted, learned, gifted, masterly, telling,
vigorous, strong, proficient, competent, versed, practical, endowed,
powerful, mighty.

ANT. _Incapable, ineffective, unqualified, stupid, inept, weak,
inefficient, unskilful, silly, incompetent._

=Ablution.= Washing, bathing, cleansing, lavation, purification,
baptism.

ANT. _Pollution, defilement, dirt, soilure, contamination, taint, stain,
abomination, impurity._

=Abnegation.= Denial, abjuration, renunciation, rejection, surrender,
abandonment, disallowance, abstinence.

ANT. _Assertion, vindication, license, claim, indulgence, concession;
affirmation, allegation, statement, declaration, word, averment,
deposition; proposal, proffer._

=Abnormal.= Singular, unnatural, unusual, irregular, peculiar,
exceptional, aberrant, erratic, monstrous, preternatural.

ANT. _Normal, regular, usual, natural, typical, customary, ordinary,
common._

=Aboard.= On board, on the ship, afloat, inside, within.

ANT. _Ashore, aground._

=Abode.= Home, house, place, residence, domicile, habitation, dwelling,
lodging, quarters, seat.

ANT. _Halt, tent, bivouac, perch._

=Abolish.= Abrogate, annul, destroy, repeal, revoke, suppress,
terminate, rescind, cancel, nullify, suppress, overthrow, extirpate,
remove, prohibit, set aside, end, stamp out.

ANT. _Establish, support, sustain, cherish, confirm, continue, restore,
revive, reinstate, institute, promote, legalize._

=Abominable.= Hateful, horrible, loathsome, abhorrent, foul, odious,
offensive, detestable, impure, execrable.

ANT. _Desirable, admirable, enjoyable, pleasing, pure, delectable._

=Abomination.= Offense, horror, shame, wickedness, abhorrence, aversion,
disgust, curse, pollution, iniquity, defilement, corruption, nuisance,
annoyance.

ANT. _Acquisition, enjoyment, gratification, blessing, desire, longing,
delight, benefit, pleasure, satisfaction._

=Aboriginal.= Primitive, primeval, primary, pristine, native, original,
indigenous, autochthonous.

ANT. _Subsequent, imported, exotic, recent, modern, late, novel, fresh,
immigrant, adventitious_.

=Abortion.= Failure, miscarriage, disappointment, non-success, vain
effort, defect, frustration, blunder.

ANT. _Success, consummation, completion, realization, perfection,
achievement, development, exploit, feat._

=Abound.= Team, swarm, multiply, swell, increase, flow, luxuriate,
flourish, prevail, wanton, revel, exuberate.

ANT. _Waste, lack, wane, vanish, lessen, decrease, die, decay, fall._

=About.= Concerning, regarding, touching, relative to, with reference
to, in regard to; near, surrounding, around; almost, nearly, well-nigh;
ready, on the point of, on the eve of; around, hind part before.

ANT. _Afar, distant, remote; precisely, exactly._

=Above.= Overhead, aloft, on high; before, previously; higher, having
precedence; over, exceeding, beyond, superior, excessive.

ANT. _Below, beneath, within; later, subsequently; lower; less,
diminished._

=Aboveboard.= Openly, candidly, frankly, sincerely, fairly, ingenuously,
unreservedly, guilelessly.

ANT. _Secretly, elusively, underhand, deceitfully, wilily._

=Above-named.= Named before, aforesaid, above-mentioned, above-cited,
above-described, mentioned above.

ANT. _Named below, described below, hereinafter named._

=Abrasion.= Rubbing, friction, wearing away _or_ off, disintegration,
attrition.

ANT. _Accretion, augmentation, increment; supplement, reinforcement._

=Abreast.= Alongside, side by side, aligned; against, off, opposite to.

ANT. _Ahead, astern; behind._

=Abridge.= Abbreviate, shorten, condense, diminish, reduce, contract,
cut down, deprive of, divest of, epitomize, compress.

ANT. _Amplify, expand, spread out, extend, dilate._

=Abridgment.= Summary, synopsis, compend, analysis, abstract,
abbreviation, epitome, outline, compendium, digest.

ANT. _Amplification, expatiation, exposition, annotation, paraphrase,
expansion, comment._

=Abroad.= Far away, distant, apart, dispersed, aloof, adrift;
distracted, confused, dazed, confounded; forth, out of doors.

ANT. _Near, close, collected, fast, housed; composed, poised,
self-contained; within._

=Abrogate.= Abolish, cancel, set aside, annul, make void, overrule,
invalidate, nullify, repeal.

ANT. _Enact, confirm, enforce, establish, continue, revive._

=Abrogation.= Repeal, rescinding, annulment, abolition, revocation,
voidance, cancelation, setting aside; discontinuance, disestablishment.

ANT. _Enactment, institution, establishment; sanction, continuance,
confirmation._

=Abrupt.= Sudden, unexpected, hasty, ill-timed, precipitate; steep,
precipitous, craggy, rough, rugged, jagged; short, blunt, curt,
unceremonious; stiff, cramped, harsh, disconnected.

ANT. _Easy, gliding; polished, smooth, undulating; expected, courteous,
elegant, complaisant, suave._

=Abscond.= Depart, steal away, decamp, bolt, disappear, run off, hide,
withdraw, retreat, escape, elope, slink _or_ sneak off, absent one’s
self.

ANT. _Show, appear, emerge, issue, present one’s self._

=Absence.= Non-attendance, non-appearance, non-existence, absenteeism;
inattention, abstraction, preoccupation, musing; want, lack, privation,
defect, deficiency.

ANT. _Presence, existence, manifestation, evidence, supply; attention,
consideration; immanence, inherency._

=Absent.= Away, gone; abstracted, preoccupied, inattentive, dreaming.

ANT. _Present, here; attentive, alert._

=Absolute.= Perfect, complete, supreme, autocratic, authoritative,
commanding, independent, unrestricted, unqualified, unlimited,
unconditioned, self-existent, self-determined, ideal; despotic,
arbitrary, exacting, domineering, tyrannical, imperious, dictatorial,
irresponsible; positive, actual, real, veritable, genuine, certain,
categorical, unquestionable.

ANT. _Related, responsible, conditioned, limited, qualified, restricted,
accountable; ductile, humble, lenient, meek, mild, yielding, compliant,
complaisant; dubious, contingent, defective, deficient, wanting,
lacking, mutilated, incomplete._

=Absolution.= Acquittal, remission, release, deliverance, forgiveness,
pardon, shriving, shrift; indulgence, justification.

ANT. _Charge, accusation, condemnation, censure, conviction; penance,
purgation, fasting, flagellation._

=Absolve.= Acquit, clear, exonerate, forgive, free, liberate, release,
pardon, set free, discharge, exempt, exculpate.

ANT. _Accuse, condemn, convict, impeach, charge, compel; obligate,
oblige, bind._

=Absorb.= Take in, consume, imbibe, swallow, suck up, exhaust; engross,
engage, immerse, occupy, arrest, rivet (_of attention_).

ANT. _Give up, disgorge, send out, radiate, throw off, eject; dissipate,
distract, disperse._

=Absorption.= Absorbing, imbibing, assimilation, destruction,
consumption, exhaustion; engrossment, engagement, occupation, immersion.

ANT. _Ejection, rejection, expulsion, discharge; inadvertency,
inattention, oversight, disregard._

=Abstain.= Refrain, resist, forbear, desist, deny one’s self, avoid,
cease, stop, withhold, give up, relinquish.

ANT. _Indulge, wanton, revel, yield to, gratify._

=Abstemious.= Abstinent, sober, moderate, temperate, sparing, frugal,
self-denying, continent.

ANT. _Sensual, self-indulgent, intemperate, greedy._

=Absterge.= Wipe off, purge, cleanse, purify, scrub, sponge, scour.

ANT. _Soil, pollute, begrime, contaminate, bespatter, bedaub._

=Abstersive.= Cleansing, purging, purifying, scouring; detergent,
cathartic.

ANT. _Corruptive, contaminative, offensive._

=Abstinence.= Temperance, abstemiousness, self-control, self-restraint,
self-denial, sobriety, fasting, continence, moderation, frugality.

ANT. _Excess, intoxication, self-indulgence, sensuality, wantonness,
intemperance, greed, gluttony, revelry, dissipation._

=Abstinent.= Abstaining, fasting; abstemious, sober, temperate,
self-restraining, self-denying, continent, austere.

ANT. _Sensual, self-indulgent, intemperate, epicurean, dissipated,
incontinent, debauched._

=Abstract=, _n._ Epitome, summary, abridgment, compend, synopsis,
syllabus, outline, digest, brief, compendium, gist, drift, contents.

ANT. _Amplification, disquisition, exposition, expansion, expatiation._

=Abstract=, _v._ Appropriate, withdraw, remove, separate, take away,
detach, purloin, part, eliminate, distract, discriminate, abridge.

ANT. _Add, complete, increase, restore, unite, conjoin, fill up,
strengthen, combine._

=Abstracted.= Separated, withdrawn, removed; subtle, refined, abstruse;
inattentive, preoccupied, dreaming, absent-minded, oblivious,
thoughtless, negligent, indifferent, heedless, absorbed, absent.

ANT. _Intelligible, lucid, transparent; attentive, intent, observant,
alert, prompt, ready, thoughtful, wide-awake._

=Abstraction.= Disconnection, disjunction, removal, isolation,
separation; preoccupation, revery, inattention, absorption, absence;
taking, abduction, seizure, stealing, appropriation, purloining;
classification, generalization.

ANT. _Addition, conjunction, union, restitution, importation,
restoration; enumeration, analysis; attention, specification,
observation, individualization._

=Abstruse.= Hidden, difficult, recondite, profound, deep, curious,
occult, dark, obscure, mystical, hard, vague, indefinite, mysterious,
abstract, transcendental.

ANT. _Patent, simple, obvious, trite, intelligible, manifest, lucid,
clear, easy, plain, popular, superficial._

=Absurd.= Ludicrous, monstrous, nonsensical, preposterous, senseless,
ridiculous, foolish, irrational, wild, unreasonable.

ANT. _Sensible, rational, reasonable, logical, wise, sagacious, sound,
substantial, philosophical, reflective, consistent, true._

=Absurdity.= Unreasonableness, irrationality, foolishness, folly,
fatuity, idiocy, extravagance, drivel.

ANT. _Reason, possibility; truism, axiom, maxim, adage._

=Abundance.= Profusion, wealth, affluence; flow, flood, overflow;
copiousness, fertility, richness, largeness, store, plenty, exuberance,
plenteousness.

ANT. _Scarcity, deficiency, rarity, scantiness, dearth, failure,
poverty._

=Abundant.= Abounding, flowing, plentiful, liberal, bountiful,
sufficient, lavish, plenteous, much, copious, replete, full, teeming.

ANT. _Rare, scarce, scant, deficient, insufficient, short, niggardly,
sparing, impoverished, dry, drained._

=Abuse=, _n._ Misuse, dishonor, maltreatment, outrage, reviling,
obloquy, defamation, insult, disparagement, reproach, ill usage.

ANT. _Kindness, praise, deference, respect, honor, good treatment, good
usage._

=Abuse=, _v._ Harm, ill-treat, ill-use, injure, wrong, maltreat,
oppress, molest, malign, impose on, ruin, victimize, slander, violate,
ravish, defile, disparage, damage, defame, misuse.

ANT. _Cherish, protect, regard, shield, respect, care for, tend,
benefit; laud, favor, applaud, extol, eulogize, praise; uphold, sustain,
vindicate, conserve._

=Abusive.= Insulting, rude, denunciatory, reproachful, injurious,
offensive, reviling, insolent, scurrilous, opprobrious.

ANT. _Respectful, attentive, laudatory, kind, flattering, courteous,
complimentary, obsequious._

=Abut.= Be adjacent, extend, impinge, project, approximate, be
contiguous, adjoin; end, border.

ANT. _Diverge, recede, return, retreat, recurve._

=Abutment.= Terminal support, buttress.

=Abuttal.= Adjacency, contiguity, nearness, juxtaposition; boundary,
terminus, limit, termination.

ANT. _Interval, separation, gap, chasm, interspace, fissure, breach._

=Abyss.= Gulf, gorge, deep, chasm, profound, abysm; the pit.

ANT. _Surface, abutment, adhesion, contact, contiguity; heaven._

=Academical.= Scholastic, learned, literary, collegiate, classical.

ANT. _Illiterate, ignorant, unschooled._

=Academy.= School, seminary, institute, college, gymnasium, high school;
scientific body, association of artists.

=Accede.= Consent, assent, acquiesce, comply, agree, accept, concur,
approve, coincide.

ANT. _Decline, withdraw, refuse, demur, protest, dissent, reject._

=Accelerate.= Hasten, quicken, speed, precipitate, despatch, expedite,
hurry, urge, push forward, press on; forward, advance, further.

ANT. _Delay, impede, clog, hinder, retard, drag, obstruct._

=Accent=, _n._ Stress, beat, emphasis, rhythm, pulsation, intonation,
cadence, tone, modulation, ictus.

ANT. _Monotony, equableness, babble, flow, smoothness._

=Accentuate=, =Accent=, _v._ Lay stress upon, put the ictus on;
emphasize, mark, make prominent.

ANT. _Make light of, make insignificant, underestimate, ignore._

=Accept.= Take, receive; admit, agree to, approve, acknowledge, avow;
estimate, regard, value, construe.

ANT. _Refuse, decline, reject, ignore, disown, repudiate._

=Acceptable.= Welcome, pleasing, grateful, gratifying, pleasant,
agreeable, pleasurable, seasonable, desirable, expedient.

ANT. _Unpleasant, disagreeable, annoying, grievous, ungrateful,
unwelcome._

=Acceptance.= Reception, taking; acknowledgment, approbation, approval,
satisfaction, gratification.

ANT. _Rejection, refusal, repudiation, exclusion._

=Acceptation.= Meaning, significance, sense, import, interpretation,
construction, understanding; approval, adoption, acceptance.

=Access.= Entrance, approach, passage, avenue, entry; admission,
admittance, audience, interview; addition, increase, gain; accession;
attack, onset, fit, paroxysm.

ANT. _Exit, egress, departure; exclusion; repulse, recoil; retirement,
retreat; quiescence, inertia, languor, torpor._

=Accessary=, _see_ =Accessory=.

=Accessible.= Easy of access, approachable, affable, conversible.

ANT. _Distant, cold, unapproachable, difficult._

=Accession.= Addition, increase, enlargement, extension, augmentation;
arrival, influx; attainment (_of power_).

ANT. _Abandonment, decrease, ebb, drain, subsidence, departure,
resignation, diminution._

=Accessory=, _n._ Confederate, assistant, helper, associate, accomplice;
detail, accompaniment, subordinate element; companion, partner.

ANT. _Foe, rival, adversary, antagonist, opponent, enemy; principal,
instigator._

=Accessory=, _a._ Assisting, aiding, abetting, helping, acceding,
additional; supplemental, subservient, subsidiary, subordinate,
conducive; accompanying, contributory, auxiliary.

ANT. _Essential, inherent; superfluous, irrelevant._

=Accident.= Chance, disaster, happening, hazard, incident, misfortune,
calamity, adventure, casualty, mishap, possibility.

ANT. _Certainty, provision, plan, intention, appointment, calculation,
law, necessity, purpose, preparation._

=Accidental.= Casual, unintended, fortuitous, chance; incidental,
immaterial, non-essential; occasional, contingent, adventitious.

ANT. _Intended, purposed, prepared, appointed, certain._

=Acclamation.= Applause, cheer, outcry, homage, gratulation, salutation.

ANT. _Censure, execration, denunciation, obloquy, sibilation._

=Acclivity.= Rise, incline, ascent, steep, hill, height.

ANT. _Decline, declivity, hollow, descent, depth._

=Accommodate.= Oblige, serve, furnish, supply, contain, hold,
convenience; adapt, reconcile, adjust, harmonize, suit, conform,
arrange.

ANT. _Deprive, aggravate, inconvenience, disturb, disoblige; misfit,
incommode._

=Accommodating.= Kind, obliging, considerate, unselfish, polite,
yielding, conciliatory.

ANT. _Rude, churlish, disobliging, inconsiderate, exacting._

=Accompany.= Follow, attend, consort with, go with, escort, convoy.

ANT. _Abandon, leave, quit, avoid, discard, desert._

=Accomplice.= Confederate, accessory, abettor, associate, ally, aid,
assistant, promoter, coadjutor.

ANT. _Rival, enemy, foe, adversary._

=Accomplish.= Complete, finish, achieve, effect, perform, carry out,
attain, realize, consummate, execute, perfect, fulfil, do; equip,
furnish.

ANT. _Fail, mar, spoil, frustrate, defeat, disconcert, destroy._

=Accomplished.= Educated, experienced, practiced, finished, versed,
consummate, adroit, expert, apt, skilful, talented, fine, qualified,
proficient, polite, elegant; completed, effected, established.

ANT. _Unskilled, unfettered, ignorant, unpolished, uncouth, inefficient,
incapable, inexpert, incompetent._

=Accomplishment.= Execution, achievement, performance, completion;
acquirement, attainment, proficiency, ornament, grace.

ANT. _Failure, blunder, folly, stupidity, incompetency, mismanagement,
bungling._

=Accord.= Agree, correspond, harmonize; grant, concede, give, yield,
deign, vouchsafe, consent, answer.

ANT. _Differ, disagree; withhold, deny, refuse._

=Accordant.= Agreeable, suitable, consonant, harmonious, congruous,
agreeing, corresponding, conformable.

ANT. _Adverse, inconsistent, discordant._

=Accordingly.= Suitably, conformably, agreeably; consequently,
therefore, hence, wherefore.

ANT. _Conversely, inconsistently, impertinently._

=Accost.= Approach, address, salute, greet, confront, speak to.

ANT. _Depart, rebuff, check, repulse, shun, elude, pass, ignore._

=Account=, _n._ Record, register, inventory; bill, charge; count,
calculation, enumeration; statement, description, narration, relation,
narrative, recital, chronicle, history; explanation, exposition;
consideration, regard, motive, reason; importance, worth, dignity,
profit, advantage, benefit.

ANT. _Suppression, silence; attempt, project; misannouncement._

=Account=, _v._ Esteem, regard, deem, judge, think, hold, believe,
consider, view; estimate, reckon, rate; explain, solve.

ANT. _Underrate, undervalue; disesteem, misestimate; mystify, perplex,
darken._

=Accountable.= Responsible, punishable, answerable, liable, amenable;
accredited, delegated.

ANT. _Independent, absolute, supreme, despotic, autocratic._

=Accouter.= Equip, furnish, dress, fit out, arm, array.

ANT. _Despoil, impoverish, denude, strip, bare._

=Accredit.= Credit, authorize, trust, empower, commission, depute.

ANT. _Recall, supersede, dismiss, discard; disbelieve, distrust,
suspect._

=Accredited.= Authorized, commissioned, sanctioned; confidential,
trusted, believed.

ANT. _Unauthorized, distrusted, discredited._

=Accretion.= Growth, accumulation, adhesion, coherence, increase.

ANT. _Abrasion, disintegration, diminution._

=Accrue.= Result, arise, issue, ensue, follow, proceed, come, increase,
augment.

ANT. _Cause, occasion; reduce, weaken, abate._

=Accumulate.= Pile, collect, gather up, bring together; store, amass,
garner, treasure, husband, lay by, hoard; aggregate.

ANT. _Separate, dissipate, disperse, scatter, waste, expend._

=Accumulation.= Collection, heap, mass, accretion, hoard, store.

ANT. _Separation, segregation; unit, individual; prodigality, leakage,
expenditure._

=Accuracy.= Exactness, precision, nicety, truth, carefulness,
correctness, exactitude, fidelity.

ANT. _Looseness, slovenliness, incorrectness, error, fallacy,
misconception, misstatement._

=Accurate.= Careful, exact, faithful, precise, truthful, correct,
rigorous, close, severe, just, unerring.

ANT. _Inexact, faulty, inaccurate, defective, loose, careless._

=Accusation.= Charge, indictment, arraignment, impeachment, imputation,
crimination, censure.

ANT. _Discharge, acquittal, vindication, absolution, approval._

=Accuse.= Charge, indict, arraign, incriminate, impeach, cite, summon,
tax, censure, taunt, blame, reproach.

ANT. _Discharge, acquit, defend, vindicate, exonerate, pardon, absolve,
condone, release._

=Accustom.= Habituate, use, be wonted, harden, familiarize, train,
addict, drill, break in, discipline.

ANT. _Estrange, wean, alienate, dishabituate._

=Acerbity.= Sourness, acidity, tartness, bitterness, roughness,
harshness, acrimony.

ANT. _Sweetness, mildness, softness, gentleness, smoothness._

=Ache=, _n._ Pain, dull or continued pain, anguish, suffering, agony.

ANT. _Pleasure, relief, ease, refreshment, delight._

=Achieve.= Accomplish, perform, complete, finish, realize, bring to
pass, work out, conclude; obtain, acquire, gain, win, get.

ANT. _Neglect, undo, mar, omit; fail of, lose._

=Achievement.= Accomplishment, performance, attainment, completion,
consummation; exploit, deed, feat.

ANT. _Forfeit, failure, negligence, frustration, blunder._

=Acknowledge.= Recognize, be aware of; admit, concede, allow, accept;
confess, avow; express thanks for; own _or_ profess.

ANT. _Disclaim, disown, deny, repudiate, ignore, disavow._

=Acme.= Summit, zenith, climax, top, apex, vertex, pinnacle,
culmination.

ANT. _Base, nadir, depth, ground, foundation, foot, root._

=Acquaintance.= Association, familiarity; friend; intimacy,
companionship, experience, knowledge, friendship, fellowship.

ANT. _Ignorance, inexperience, unfamiliarity, ignoring._

=Acquiesce.= Assent, concur, yield, comply, submit, agree, consent.

ANT. _Object, demur, dissent._

=Acquire.= Gain, earn, win, reap, obtain, attain, achieve, get, secure;
master, learn thoroughly.

ANT. _Lose, surrender, miss, forego, forfeit._

=Acquit.= Discharge, exonerate, release, absolve, excuse, pardon,
exculpate.

ANT. _Charge, condemn, sentence, compel, indict, imprison._

=Acquittal.= Discharge, release, deliverance, liberation, absolution.

ANT. _Judgment, punishment, penalty, trial, retribution, correction,
castigation._

=Acrimony.= Bitterness, sharpness, sourness, tartness, severity,
asperity, hardness, rancor, ill-temper, spite, unkindness.

ANT. _Gentleness, good nature, kindness, sweetness, courtesy._

=Act=, _n._ Deed, performance, exploit, accomplishment, achievement,
effect, movement, transaction, work.

ANT. _Cessation, inertia, quiescence, inaction, rest, repose, quiet,
deliberation._

=Act=, _v._ Work, do, perform, execute; behave; play, feign, pretend,
dissemble; operate, have effect; be, realize, actualize.

ANT. _Rest, cease, stop, stay; neglect, omit, mar, undo; expose, reveal,
vaunt; be quiescent or latent; fancy; endure, suffer._

=Action.= Exercise, motion, movement, deed, performance; agency, force,
operation; battle, conflict; gesture; representation, play; subject,
plot; lawsuit, case.

ANT. _Inertia, torpor, languor; quiescence, rest, passiveness; harmony,
truce, peace._

=Active.= Agile, brisk, alert, lively, quick, prompt, ready, spry;
industrious, energetic, busy, diligent.

ANT. _Dull, idle, indolent, lazy, quiet, slow, stupid._

=Actual.= Real, true, genuine, certain, absolute, positive, veritable,
substantial; present, sensible, perceptible.

ANT. _Possible, fictitious, supposititious, virtual, theoretical,
hypothetical, conjectural._

=Acumen.= Discernment, penetration, keenness, shrewdness, insight,
sharpness, sagacity, acuteness.

ANT. _Dulness, obtuseness, stupidity, bluntness._

=Acute.= Sharp, pointed, keen, shrewd; violent, intense; high, sudden,
severe, distressing; subtile, ingenious, sagacious, discerning.

ANT. _Dull, blunt, obtuse, stupid, heavy; chronic; stolid._

=Adaptation.= Adjustment, fitness, conformity, suitableness, aptness,
harmony.

ANT. _Incompatibility, incongruity, misfit, discord._

=Add.= Sum up, increase, adjoin, append, attach, augment, enlarge,
amplify, annex, affix.

ANT. _Deduct, subtract, lessen, reduce, remove, diminish._

=Addicted.= Habituated, disposed to, inclined, prone, attached to,
devoted, given over to, wedded to.

ANT. _Averse, disinclined, unaccustomed, indisposed, divorced from._

=Addition.= Accession, enlargement, increase, extension, accretion,
augmentation, adjunct.

ANT. _Subtraction, decrease, diminution._

=Address=, _n._ Courtesy, manners, politeness, tact, ingenuity,
dexterity, discretion, adroitness; discourse, harangue, oration,
lecture, speech, appeal, request, suit, solicitation.

ANT. _Clumsiness, rudeness, stupidity, unmannerliness, folly; refusal._

=Address=, _v._ Accost, approach, court, greet, hail, salute, speak to.

ANT. _Avoid, elude, ignore, shun, cut, pass, overlook._

=Adduce.= Offer, present, advance; cite, quote, introduce, name,
mention; allege.

ANT. _Withdraw, except, deduct, suppress, retract._

=Adept.= Expert, master, proficient, genius, veteran, professor.

ANT. _Novice, tyro, blunderer, inexpert._

=Adequate.= Equal, competent, fitted, qualified, suitable, sufficient,
capable, adapted, satisfactory; proportionate, commensurate.

ANT. _Inferior, poor, useless, worthless, unfit, incompetent._

=Adhere.= Stick, cling, cohere, hold, cleave; belong, pertain; be
attached, fixed, or devoted.

ANT. _Part, separate, sunder, sever, give way._

=Adherence.= Tenacity, attachment, constancy, fidelity, devotion,
partisanship; adhesion.

ANT. _Desertion, separation, disunion, unfaithfulness._

=Adjacent.= Near, close, bordering, adjoining, contiguous, beside.

ANT. _Separate, distant, remote, detached, disconnected._

=Adjourn.= Postpone, delay, defer; suspend, interrupt, close, end,
dissolve.

=Ant.= _Despatch, hasten, conclude, complete, terminate, consummate._

=Adjunct.= Addition, appendage, accessory, aid, advantage, help;
colleague, associate.

ANT. Detriment, impediment, hindrance, obstruction, detraction.

=Adjure.= Entreat, beseech, pray, supplicate, implore, beg; swear by.

ANT. _Defy, deprecate, remonstrate, dare, expostulate, warn._

=Adjustment.= Arrangement, disposal; settlement, agreement,
understanding; fitting, adaptation, conformity; regulation,
rectification, accommodation.

ANT. _Disturbance, disorder, confusion; dissension, divergence;
non-conformity._

=Administer.= Dispense, distribute, supply; direct, manage, control,
superintend; offer, proffer, tender.

ANT. _Withhold, refuse, retain; betray, mismanage; repulse, rebuff._

=Admiration.= Wonder, approval, love, surprise, astonishment,
appreciation, reverence, high regard.

ANT. _Disapproval, contempt, dislike._

=Admire.= Honor, esteem, approve, adore, wonder at, venerate, extol,
marvel at, applaud, revere, respect.

ANT. _Despise, dislike, execrate, hate, abhor, scorn, detest._

=Admissible.= Allowable, lawful, permissible, possible, probable.

ANT. _Absurd, preposterous, improper, wrong, unlawful._

=Admission.= Admittance, entrance, access; avowal, acknowledgment,
concession, concurrence, allowance.

ANT. _Denial, contradiction, rejection, negation._

=Admit.= Receive; accept, acknowledge, own, confess; permit, allow,
suffer.

ANT. _Exclude, debar; disown, deny; dismiss, reject, repudiate._

=Admonish.= Advise, warn, caution, counsel, censure, rebuke, reprove;
forewarn, remind, dissuade; instruct, teach, apprise, acquaint.

ANT. _Encourage, urge, countenance, applaud, abet, instigate._

=Admonition.= Caution, warning, advice, counsel, instruction, reminder,
hint, reproof, reprehension.

ANT. _Applause, encouragement, incitement, urging, instigation._

=Ado.= Trouble, toil, labor, pains; bustle, stir, fuss, noise, turmoil.

ANT. _Quiet, calm, composure, tranquillity._

=Adopt.= Appropriate, assume; approve, accept, support, maintain;
affiliate, father.

ANT. _Reject, discard; renounce, abandon, disclaim; disown, repudiate._

=Adoration.= Worship, devotion, homage, reverence, veneration, idolatry.

ANT. _Execration, disesteem, abomination, abhorrence, hatred,
detestation._

=Adorn.= Beautify, decorate, embellish, ornament, garnish, illustrate,
gild, bedeck, grace, dignify, honor, exalt.

ANT. _Mar, spoil, deface, disfigure, deform, denude, strip._

=Adroit.= Dexterous, expert, skilful, apt, handy, quick, clever, ready,
deft, ingenious, cunning.

ANT. _Clumsy, unskilful, awkward, bungling, unhandy, maladroit._

=Adulation.= Flattery, extravagant compliment, fulsome praise, fawning,
sycophancy, blandishment, obsequiousness.

ANT. _Defamation, obloquy, ridicule, satire, sarcasm, detraction,
aspersion, libel._

=Adumbrate.= Shadow, outline, indicate, hint, trace, delineate; typify,
represent, symbolize; darken, obscure, hide, conceal.

ANT. _Fulfil, realize, embody; misrepresent; reveal, illumine._

=Advance=, _n._ Progress, improvement, growth; offer, proposal,
overture, tender, proposition; rise, appreciation.

ANT. _Regress, return, retrogression; diminution; depreciation._

=Advance=, _v._ Push _or_ send forward, propel; promote, elevate,
dignify, exalt; improve, strengthen, benefit; propose, offer; furnish,
lend, loan; increase, augment, raise; proceed, progress; thrive,
prosper; accelerate.

ANT. _Retard, hinder, withhold, withdraw; suppress, degrade, depress;
oppose, recall, weaken, retreat; lessen, diminish._

=Advantage.= Benefit, profit, expediency, favorable opportunity,
blessing; behalf, account, interest; privilege, convenience, assistance,
utility, service.

ANT. _Loss, disappointment, frustration, difficulty, dilemma._

=Advent.= Approach, coming, arrival, accession.

ANT. _Departure, exit, exodus, retirement._

=Adventitious.= Accidental, incidental, extrinsic, non-essential,
foreign, casual; redundant, superfluous.

ANT. _Intrinsic, pertinent, regular, proper, necessary, appropriate._

=Adventure.= Chance, hazard, risk, venture, experiment, trial; event,
incident, occurrence, contingency, crisis.

ANT. _Matter-of-fact, matter-of-course; prospect; monotony, routine._

=Adventurous.= Bold, daring, venturesome, rash, reckless, headlong;
dangerous, perilous, uncertain; fearless, enterprising.

ANT. _Timid, nervous, hesitating, cautious, cowardly._

=Adversary.= Foe, enemy, antagonist, opponent, rival, assailant.

ANT. _Ally, helper, assistant, accomplice, aider, abettor, accessory._

=Adverse.= Opposite, contrary, conflicting; hostile, injurious, harmful;
unlucky, unfortunate, disastrous.

ANT. _Favorable, friendly, propitious, fortunate, lucky._

=Adversity.= Calamity, affliction, trouble, disaster, woe, distress,
suffering.

ANT. _Success, prosperity, advancement, good luck._

=Advert to.= Consider, notice, remark, heed, attend, refer, allude,
mention, touch upon; regard.

ANT. _Ignore, pass, drop, overlook, omit._

=Advertent.= Mindful, regardful, attentive, watchful, observant,
thoughtful, considerate, heedful.

ANT. _Thoughtless, heedless, inconsiderate, inattentive._

=Advertise.= Announce, publish, proclaim, declare, circulate, noise
abroad; offer for sale; inform, notify, apprise; promulgate.

ANT. _Suppress, ignore, hush, conceal; mislead, misinform._

=Advice.= Counsel, suggestion, admonition, instruction, caution;
tidings, intelligence, notice; deliberation, care, forethought;
recommendation, exhortation, information.

ANT. _Remonstrance, restraint, expostulation, prohibition; deception,
delusion._

=Advisable.= Judicious, expedient, politic, prudent, desirable,
beneficial, profitable; proper, fitting.

ANT. _Imprudent, undesirable, inexpedient, improper, detrimental._

=Advocate.= Counsel, lawyer, attorney; defender, promoter, friend,
patron, supporter, pleader, maintainer.

ANT. _Accuser, impugner, gainsayer, adversary, opponent._

=Affable.= Open, free, frank, unreserved; accessible, familiar; cordial,
social, courteous, polite, obliging, urbane, benign, gracious, mild,
well-bred; condescending.

ANT. _Distant, unapproachable, inaccessible, haughty, contemptuous,
supercilious._

=Affair.= Business, concern, function, matter, circumstance, question,
subject; event, incident, occurrence, performance; battle, combat,
engagement, skirmish, collision, brush, encounter.

ANT. _Detail, item, feature, point._

=Affect.= Influence, change, transform, modify, alter; concern,
interest, touch, move, impress; crave, yearn, desire, like; assume,
adopt, feign, pretend; operate, act on; melt, soften, subdue, overcome.

ANT. _Shun, repel, repudiate, spurn, dislike, eschew._

=Affectation.= Airs, mannerism, pretension, pretense, foppery, display.

ANT. _Simplicity, artlessness, naturalness, genuineness._

=Affection.= Feeling, passion, attachment, fondness, tenderness, love;
propensity, disposition; endearment, devotion, partiality; attribute,
quality, characteristic, mark.

ANT. _Indifference, repulsion, disaffection, repugnance._

=Affiance.= Trust, confidence, homage, reliance, betrothal, fealty,
faith, plighting.

ANT. _Disloyalty, distrust, treason, suspicion, infidelity._

=Affiliate.= Associate, adopt, join, connect, incorporate, annex.

ANT. _Sever, transplant, separate, disjoin, dissociate._

=Affinity.= Relationship, kin, consanguinity, propinquity; likeness,
resemblance, relation, analogy, connection, correspondence; sympathy,
attraction.

ANT. _Repugnance, discordance, antipathy, antagonism._

=Affirm.= Assert, swear, state, declare, maintain, allege, protest,
confirm, ratify, approve, endorse, aver, asseverate, assure, avouch,
establish.

ANT. _Deny, doubt, demur, contradict, negative, gainsay, impugn, oppose,
dispute._

=Affirmation.= Avowal, declaration, statement, assertion, testimony,
deposition, confirmation, ratification, approval, endorsement.

ANT. _Doubt, denial, contradiction, disputation, disapproval._

=Affix.= Join, annex, attach, fasten, connect to, unite to, append.

ANT. _Remove, detach, separate, unfasten._

=Affliction.= Adversity, misfortune, grief, sorrow, distress,
tribulation, disaster, trial, misery, calamity, pain, anguish, trouble,
hardship.

ANT. _Consolation, relief, blessing, gratification, pleasure._

=Affluence.= Wealth, fortune, riches, opulence, abundance, plenty,
profusion.

ANT. _Want, scarcity, poverty, penury, lack, indigence._

=Afford.= Supply, furnish, contribute, bestow, offer, confer, bear,
endure, support, yield, impart, administer.

ANT. _Withhold, deny, retain, stint, grudge, withdraw._

=Affray.= Quarrel, tussle, scuffle, scrimmage, collision, brawl,
disturbance, fight, rumpus, struggle, contest, strife, encounter, feud,
tumult.

ANT. _Peace, amity, friendship, good will._

=Affront.= Outrage, insult, abuse, annoyance, displeasure, offense,
provocation, wrong, vexation, wound, exasperation, irritation.

ANT. _Courtesy, homage, amends, compliment, apology._

=Afire.= Ablaze, burning, ignited, aflame.

ANT. _Out, quenched, extinguished._

=Afloat.= Adrift, at sea, abroad, loose; happening, betiding, brewing.

ANT. _Moored, anchored, aground, stranded, fixed, steadfast, firm._

=Afoot.= Afloat, preparing, forthcoming, ready, brewing, on hand, astir.

ANT. _Unprepared, unprovided for, inactive, sluggish, latent._

=Aforesaid.= Above-mentioned, foregoing, preceding, abovenamed.

ANT. _Following, subsequent, subjoined, forthcoming, after-cited._

=Afraid.= Fearful, timid, apprehensive, anxious, alarmed, terrified,
frightened.

ANT. _Fearless, bold, confident, reckless, venturesome, indifferent,
secure, hopeful, audacious._

=Afresh.= Anew, again, newly, frequently, repeatedly, once more.

ANT. _Uniformly, connectedly, continuously._

=After.= Subsequent, later; following, behind, rear, back, posterior;
concerning, about, for, in relation to; in imitation of, in the pattern
of.

ANT. _Before, preceding, introducing; in front of; opposite; facing;
previous or prior to, afore; in advance; previously, already._

=Again.= Anew, afresh, repeatedly; further, moreover, besides; on the
contrary; back, in answer _or_ restitution, in return; once more.

ANT. _Once, continuously, uninterruptedly, uniformly._

=Against.= Opposite, across, adverse to, counter to, athwart; facing,
fronting, close up to, in contact with; for, in preparation for, in
expectation of; in compensation for, in requital of, to match.

ANT. _With, for, beside, accompanying, aiding, promoting._

=Agape.= Yawning, open-mouthed; wondering, gazing, dazed, amazed;
curious, inquisitive, agog, astare, eager.

ANT. _Listless, lukewarm, incurious, indifferent._

=Age.= Duration; period, date, epoch, time; maturity, generation; era,
century.

ANT. _Infancy, youth, boyhood, childhood; moment, instant._

=Agent.= Actor, doer, operator, promoter, performer; cause, force,
power; deputy, factor, attorney, representative, substitute; means,
instrument.

ANT. _Counteragent, counteractor, opponent, neutralizer; chief,
principal; originator, inventor._

=Agglomeration.= Accumulation, heap, pile, mass, conglomeration,
cluster.

ANT. _Dispersion, division, separation, sifting, dissipation._

=Aggrandize.= Exalt, honor, elevate, dignify, promote, advance, enrich,
augment.

ANT. _Degrade, impoverish, debase, humiliate, dishonor, lower._

=Aggravate.= Exasperate, provoke, wound, make worse, intensify,
embitter, heighten.

ANT. _Soothe, assuage, palliate, diminish, conciliate, alleviate._

=Aggregation.= Collection, accumulation, mass, heap, pile, amount,
total, sum, result, whole, agglomeration.

ANT. _Dispersion, dissipation, separation, division; unit; element,
individual, ingredient, item._

=Aggression.= Attack, invasion, encroachment, assault, injury, offense,
onslaught, provocation, intrusion.

ANT. _Retaliation, repulsion, retreat, resistance, evacuation._

=Aghast.= Dismayed, horrified, terrified, frightened; amazed, astounded,
startled, astonished, dumfounded.

ANT. _Cool, fearless, indifferent, unmoved, unaffected, unexcited._

=Agile.= Nimble, active, lively, smart, prompt, alert, supple, brisk,
quick, ready, sprightly, spry.

ANT. _Slow, heavy, clumsy, bulky, awkward, inert, ponderous._

=Agitate.= Disturb, trouble, shake, jar, convulse; excite, rouse,
ferment; fluster, hurry, disconcert; discuss, controvert, debate,
examine, ventilate, investigate; deliberate, contrive, devise, plan.

ANT. _Calm, allay, pacify, smooth, compose, quiet; solve, determine,
settle._

=Ago.= Past, gone, since.

ANT. _Future, coming, hereafter, hence._

=Agony.= Anguish, torture, torment, distress, throe, pangs, pain,
suffering, woe, excruciation.

ANT. _Assuagement, comfort, relief, composure, ease, enjoyment._

=Agree.= Accept, assent, approve, comply, consent, concur, admit,
accede.

ANT. _Contend, disagree, deny; dissent, dispute, protest, oppose, demur,
differ; decline._

=Agreeable.= Suitable, proper, appropriate, befitting, accordant,
conformable, consonant, welcome, amiable, pleasing, gratifying.

ANT. _Unpleasant, disobliging, obnoxious, disagreeable, unwelcome,
offensive, inharmonious, unaccommodating._

=Agreement.= Contract, compact, bond, bargain, covenant, harmony,
liaison, obligation, undertaking, treaty.

ANT. _Promise, understanding, parole; discord, dissension._

=Agriculture.= Farming, husbandry, cultivation of the soil, tillage.

ANT. _Fallowness, sterility, unproductiveness, waste._

=Aground.= Ashore, stranded, not afloat; exhausted in resources.

ANT. _Afloat, loose, abroad, adrift; flush._

=Ahead.= In front, forward, onward, in advance.

ANT. _Abaft, astern, back, behind, aft._

=Aid.= Help, support, assist, serve, befriend, minister to, relieve,
succor; supply, give alms to; foster, protect, encourage, favor.

ANT. _Oppose, discourage, thwart, baffle, deter, confront._

=Ailing.= Sick, ill, indisposed, unwell, feeble, infirm, weakly,
delicate, unhealthy, pining.

ANT. _Well, healthy, energetic, strong, vigorous._

=Ailment.= Disease, malady, indisposition, distemper, complaint.

ANT. _Health, sanity, convalescence, vigor, recovery._

=Aim.= Direction, course, tendency, bent, proclivity, bearing;
intention, purpose, design, scheme; reason; view, scope, drift, mark,
goal, point; endeavor, attempt, aspiration, determination.

ANT. _Deviation, divergence, deflection, digression, aberration;
tangent; venture, leap, fluke, chance, hazard, speculation; neglect,
avoidance, carelessness, oversight._

=Air.= Atmosphere, gas; breeze, vapor, zephyr, wind; weather;
appearance, aspect, manner, sort, style, way, behavior, carriage,
bearing, expression, look, demeanor, mien, fashion; tune.

=Airy.= Aërial, thin, rare, ethereal; light, subtle, sublimated;
sprightly, buoyant, vivacious, volatile, jolly, jovial, light-hearted;
graceful, lithe, pliant, flexible, showy, jaunty, flaunting, garish;
windy, empty.

ANT. _Thick, ponderous, heavy, inert, clumsy, dull, sluggish, wooden,
slow, cheerless, sullen, doleful, leaden, lugubrious._

=Akin.= Related, allied, homogeneous, cognate, similar, congenial,
sympathetic.

ANT. _Foreign, alien, hostile, heterogeneous, dissimilar._

=Alacrity.= Readiness, briskness, activity, quickness, willingness,
promptness, compliance, cheerfulness, eagerness, gaiety, agility.

ANT. _Slowness, reluctance, repugnance, aversion, refusal, shrinking,
recoil, disinclination._

=Alarm.= Summons, tocsin, distress signal, war-cry; fear, terror,
apprehension, consternation, dismay, dread, affright.

ANT. _Lullaby; confidence, quiet, composure, assurance, courage._

=Alert.= Lively, prompt, ready, prepared, vigilant, wide-awake,
bustling, active, brisk, nimble, watchful, sprightly, agile.

ANT. _Slow, lazy, absent, oblivious, sluggish, dilatory, drowsy._

=Alien=, _n._ Foreigner, stranger.

ANT. _Citizen, countryman, native, naturalized person._

=Alien=, _a._ Strange, foreign, hostile, remote, distant, contrasted,
contrary, unlike, unconnected.

ANT. _Pertinent, essential; domesticated, naturalized; germane, akin,
appropriate._

=Alienation.= Estrangement, transfer, conveyance, disaffection,
variance, rupture, breach; (_relating to the mind_) insanity,
aberration, delusion, lunacy, delirium, mania, imbecility.

ANT. _Confederacy, coalition, alliance, league, union; sanity,
soundness, sobriety, rationality._

=Alight.= Perch, settle, drop, lodge; dismount, descend.

ANT. _Soar, spring, ascend, start, mount._

=Alike.= Similar, kindred, same, resembling, equivalent, homogeneous,
identical, analogous, uniform, akin, allied.

ANT. _Different, unequal, dissimilar, unlike, heterogeneous, distinct,
various._

=Aliment.= Food, nourishment, subsistence, fare, diet, regimen,
nutriment, viands, meat, sustenance.

ANT. _Poison, bane; starvation, exhaustion; venom, scourge._

=Alive.= Living, quick, subsisting, animate, alert, active, breathing;
sensitive, susceptible; operative; cheerful, joyous; brisk.

ANT. _Dead, defunct, lifeless, deceased; inanimate, dull; departed,
cold; dispirited._

=All=, _n._ Whole, totality.

ANT. _Part, piece, share, portion._

=All=, _a._ Whole, entire, complete, total; each, every.

ANT. _Some, part._

=Allay.= Repress, restrain, check, subdue, silence, still, hush, soothe,
compose, calm, appease, lull, alleviate, mitigate, solace, abate,
relieve, palliate.

ANT. _Aggravate, arouse, excite, stir, kindle, fan, provoke._

=Allege.= Declare, affirm, claim, maintain, state, asseverate; advance,
aver, introduce; profess, cite.

ANT. _Contradict, gainsay, refute, deny, disprove, quash._

=Allegiance.= Fealty, loyalty, devotion, homage, faithfulness,
obedience.

ANT. _Treason, rebellion, sedition, disloyalty, disaffection._

=Allegory.= Parable, fable, myth, story, tale, apologue, metaphor,
illustration, simile.

ANT. _History, fact, narrative, chronicle, record._

=Alleviate.= Abate, mitigate, reduce, relieve, lessen, assuage, remove,
soften, moderate, lighten.

ANT. _Augment, increase, heighten, intensify, magnify, aggravate,
enhance, embitter._

=Alliance.= Connection, relationship, affinity; confederacy, league,
union, treaty, co-partnership, coalition; affiliation, similarity.

ANT. _Separation, estrangement, divorce; antagonism, disruption, enmity,
hostility, schism, secession._

=Allot.= Divide, apportion, distribute, deal out, dispense; assign,
grant, give, appoint, destine.

ANT. _Refuse, retain, misdeal, deny, confiscate, appropriate, seize,
withhold._

=Allow.= Grant, own, confess, admit; permit, let, authorize; suffer,
tolerate, endure; yield, give, grant; approve, sanction, abate, remit.

ANT. _Protest, refuse, deny, disapprove, forbid, disallow, reject,
withstand, resist._

=Allowance.= Leave, permission, sanction, approval; admission,
acknowledgment, assent; commission; qualification, exception; ration.

ANT. _Refusal, disapproval, denial; ratification, confirmation._

=Alloy=, _n._ Admixture, adulteration, deterioration, debasement,
disparagement, drawback.

ANT. _Genuineness, enhancement, purity, integrity._

=Allude.= Intimate, insinuate, point, refer, suggest, signify, hint,
imply, indicate, mention.

ANT. _Demonstrate, specify, declare._

=Allure.= Decoy, entice, coax, attract, tempt, inveigle, seduce.

ANT. _Dissuade, repel, warn, chill, damp, drive away, deter, alarm,
terrify._

=Allusion.= Hint, suggestion, intimation, reference, implication,
innuendo.

ANT. _Mention, demonstration, specification._

=Ally=, _n._ Assistant, helper, aider, friend, associate, colleague,
partner, accessory, accomplice.

ANT. _Opponent, adversary, foe, enemy, antagonist._

=Aloft.= Above, skyward, heavenward, overhead, in the air.

ANT. _Beneath, earthward, below._

=Alone.= Solitary, sole, single, isolated.

ANT. _Accompanied, associated._

=Along.= Lengthwise, onward, forward; together, beside, simultaneously.

ANT. _Across, sidewise or sideways, lateral; apart, tandem._

=Aloof.= Apart, distant, away, off.

ANT. _Close, near, together, unitedly._

=Aloud.= Distinctly, audibly, vociferously, clamorously, sonorously.

ANT. _Softly, silently, inaudibly._

=Also.= As well, likewise, too, similarly, withal, besides, in addition,
in like manner.

ANT. _Nevertheless, notwithstanding, on the contrary, but, yet, in spite
of, on the other hand._

=Alter.= Change, turn, vary, modify, shift, substitute, remodel,
transform, convert.

ANT. _Conserve, perpetuate, preserve, arrest, solidify, retain._

=Alteration.= Change, variation, modification, shifting, mutation.

ANT. _Changelessness, identity, fixity, permanence._

=Altercation.= Dispute, contention, controversy, difference, quarrel,
wrangle, dissension.

ANT. _Concord, agreement, compromise, reconciliation, unanimity,
harmony, consonance._

=Alternate.= Reciprocal, every other one, one after another, in turn,
interchangeable, mutual.

ANT. _Continuous, successive, consequent, proximate, sequent._

=Alternative.= Choice, option, preference, election, pick, resource.

ANT. _Compulsion, quandary, necessity; fixity, changelessness._

=Although.= Albeit, even if, supposing, grant that.

ANT. _Yet, notwithstanding._

=Altitude.= Height, elevation, loftiness, ascent, eminence.

ANT. _Depth, declivity, descent, abasement._

=Altogether.= Collectively, conjointly, wholly, quite, completely,
totally, utterly, entirely, thoroughly, fully, in the mass.

ANT. _Partially, piecemeal, by instalments, partly, incompletely, by
halves, wanting; individually, separately._

=Altruism.= Philanthropy, unselfishness, public spirit, devotion to
others, self-sacrifice, self-forgetfulness, generosity.

ANT. _Selfishness, self-indulgence, worldliness, meanness; egoism._

=Always.= Ever, forever, eternally, for aye, evermore, everlastingly,
perpetually; uniformly, invariably, generally, habitually.

ANT. _Now, momently, instantly, suddenly; sometimes, occasionally._

=Amalgamate.= Mix, commingle, unite, combine, blend, compound,
incorporate, join, fuse, consolidate.

ANT. _Disintegrate, decompose, disperse, separate, dissipate, analyze._

=Amaranthine.= Of the amaranth; fadeless, imperishable, undying,
immortal, perennial; purplish, amethystine.

ANT. _Ephemeral, perishable, mortal, fading._

=Amass.= Accumulate, heap up, collect, gather, hoard, store up.

ANT. _Disperse, divide, scatter, spend, squander, waste, dissipate;
portion, distribute, parcel._

=Amateur.= Lover, votary, devotee; beginner, neophyte, novice, tyro,
dilettante.

=Amazement.= Astonishment, bewilderment, wonder, marvel, stupefaction,
confusion, perplexity, awe.

ANT. _Anticipation, calmness, coolness, familiarity, preparation,
stoicism, self-possession, steadiness, composure._

=Amazing.= Astonishing, astounding, wonderful, surprising, marvelous,
prodigious, strange, miraculous, stupendous, extraordinary.

ANT. _Common, familiar, trivial, commonplace, frequent, hackneyed,
usual, customary._

=Ambagious.= Winding, devious, sinuous; tortuous, indirect, evasive,
circuitous; diffuse, dull, tedious; dubious, enigmatical, vague.

ANT. _Direct, straight, frank, open, simple, straightforward, plain,
clear, lucid, unmistakable._

=Ambassador.= Minister, envoy, legate, deputy, plenipotentiary.

=Ambient.= Surrounding, encompassing, enfolding, circling, investing.

ANT. _Penetrating, infiltrating, permeating, intervening._

=Ambiguous.= Doubtful, dubious, uncertain, indefinite, vague, obscure,
indistinct, equivocal, enigmatical.

ANT. _Obvious, plain, clear, lucid, unmistakable._

=Ambition.= Emulation, rivalry, aspiration, competition, opposition.

ANT. _Contentment, moderation, indifference, satisfaction._

=Amelioration.= Amendment, improvement, promotion, bettering, elevation.

ANT. _Degeneration, deterioration, injury, detriment._

=Amenable.= Liable, responsible, answerable, accountable; open,
impressible, pliant, docile.

ANT. _Obstinate, irresponsible, independent, autocratic._

=Amend.= Improve, mend, repair, ameliorate, reform, correct, rectify.

ANT. _Harm, corrupt, spoil, debase, aggravate._

=Amends.= Compensation, atonement, expiation, recompense, indemnity.

ANT. _Insult, injury, fault, offense._

=Amenity.= Softness, mildness, suavity, gentleness, refinement,
amiability.

ANT. _Austerity, ungraciousness, discourtesy, moroseness._

=Amiable.= Agreeable, gentle, good-natured, pleasing, winsome,
attractive, charming, lovable.

ANT. _Crusty, hateful, sullen, surly, crabbed, cruel, unlovely, gruff,
disagreeable, ill-tempered._

=Amicable.= Cordial, kind, friendly, harmonious, peaceable, propitious,
favorable, sociable, amiable.

ANT. _Unkind, cold, distant, hostile, adverse, unfriendly._

=Amid.= Among, between, in the midst of, betwixt, surrounded by.

ANT. _Outside, without, beyond, afar from, away from._

=Amiss.= Wrong, improper, faulty, incorrect, inaccurate, inopportune.

ANT. _Correct, right, faultless, perfect, effective, true._

=Amount=, _n._ Sum, total, aggregate, whole; effect, substance, purport.

ANT. _Portion, instalment, part; failure, deficiency._

=Ample.= Liberal, large, spacious, plentiful, copious, lavish,
exuberant, bountiful, generous.

ANT. _Niggardly, stingy, scant, mean, narrow, insufficient._

=Amplify.= Augment, enlarge, expand, expatiate, increase, develop,
widen, dilate, extend.

ANT. _Abbreviate, condense, reduce, abridge, amputate, epitomize,
summarize._

=Amusement.= Diversion, sport, play, fun, entertainment, merriment,
pastime, game, frolic, relaxation.

ANT. _Weariness, disgust, satiety, tedium, monotony, strenuosity._

=Analogy.= Likeness, relation, resemblance, similitude, comparison.

ANT. _Unlikeness, incongruity, disproportion, disagreement._

=Analysis.= Separation, dissection, investigation, partition.

ANT. _Synthesis, composition, aggregation, combination, coherence._

=Anarchy.= Misrule, disorder, lawlessness, violence, confusion.

ANT. _Law, order, government, control, organization, subjection._

=Anatomy.= Analysis, dissection; skeleton; dismemberment.

ANT. _Synthesis, organization, union, construction; body._

=Ancient.= Old, antique, antiquated, obsolete, primeval, aged.

ANT. _Modern, young, fresh, new, juvenile, upstart._

=Ancillary.= Auxiliary, helping, instrumental; subsidiary, subordinate,
subservient.

ANT. _Alien, adverse, redundant, obstructive, impertinent, irrelative,
counteractive._

=Angelic.= Seraphic, celestial, pure, ethereal, adorable, rapturous,
heavenly, divine, spiritual.

ANT. _Demoniac, demoniacal, diabolical, hellish, fiendish, foul._

=Anger.= Fury, ire, offense, passion, choler, indignation, rage, temper,
vexation, displeasure, animosity, wrath, resentment.

ANT. _Patience, self-control, self-restraint, forbearance, leniency,
mildness, forgiveness, giveness, charity, love._

=Angry.= Provoked, indignant, exasperated, irritated, wrathful, furious,
resentful, mad, passionate, sulky, piqued, galled.

ANT. _Calm, unresentful, peaceful, self-controlled, good-tempered,
forgiving, lenient._

=Anguish.= Agony, torture, torment, pang, acute distress, extreme
suffering.

ANT. _Ease, pleasure, relief, solace, assuagement, ecstasy._

=Animal.= Brute, beast, living organism, sentient being; fauna.

ANT. _Man; vegetable; angel; inanimate object, substance; soul, spirit._

=Animate.= Enliven, vivify, quicken, invigorate, revive, stimulate,
waken, rouse, excite, provoke, encourage, inspire, elate.

ANT. _Deaden, discourage, deter, depress, dishearten, stifle._

=Animation.= Life, vitality, spirit, vivacity, energy, exhilaration,
sprightliness, courage, force, buoyancy, vigor, liveliness.

ANT. _Dulness, deadness, spiritlessness, inertness, stolidity._

=Animosity.= Hatred, enmity, malignity, antipathy, aversion, acrimony,
strife, bitterness, hostility, dissension, malice, anger.

ANT. _Congeniality, unanimity, friendship, companionship, harmony,
concord, regard, alliance, kindness, sympathy._

=Annals.= Chronicles, records, registers, rolls, archives.

ANT. _Romance, tradition, hearsay, legend, lays._

=Annex.= Add, affix, attach, adjoin, append, subjoin, tag, join, unite,
connect.

ANT. _Detach, disconnect, withdraw, separate, remove, disengage._

=Annihilation.= Extermination, obliteration, eradication, destruction;
non-existence; oblivion, non-being, eternal blank; Nirvana.

ANT. _Perpetuation, immortality; genesis, evolution, development._

=Annotation.= Note, comment, remark, observation, gloss, scholium,
explanation, illustration, elucidation.

ANT. _Narrative, text, assertion, proposition, statement._

=Announce.= Proclaim, publish, report, herald, make known, state,
reveal, tell, declare, communicate, promulgate, circulate, enunciate.

ANT. _Suppress, secrete, hide, cover up, conceal, bury, withhold._

=Announcement.= Notice, proclamation, declaration, advertisement,
notification, manifesto, promulgation.

ANT. _Suppression, concealment, secrecy, equivocation, ambiguity,
insinuation._

=Annoyance.= Trouble, discomfort, vexation, torment, infliction,
nuisance, irritation.

ANT. _Gratification, delight, ease, pleasure, relief._

=Annual=, _n._ Yearly publication, year-book, annals; plant living but a
year.

ANT. _Perennial, biennial, triennial; exotic._

=Annul.= Cancel, abrogate, recall, repeal, revoke, countermand, reverse,
rescind, abolish, nullify, supersede, invalidate.

ANT. _Conserve, confirm, maintain, enact, establish._

=Anomalous.= Abnormal, unnatural, irregular, peculiar, exceptional,
aberrant, unusual, singular, eccentric, erratic.

ANT. _Normal, regular, usual, ordinary, common, wonted._

=Anon.= Soon, shortly, forthwith, immediately, instantly, directly, ere
long; afterward, presently, again.

ANT. _Herewith, now; already, previously._

=Anonymous.= Nameless, unacknowledged, of unknown authorship.

ANT. _Identified, authorized, authenticated, attested, signed._

=Answer=, _v._ Reply, rejoin, respond; be accountable, responsible, or
liable, go surety; correspond, be similar; do, serve, suit, pass;
refute, defend; satisfy, fulfil.

ANT. _Challenge, defy, question, interrogate, query, summon._

=Answerable.= Refutable, responsible, amenable, liable, accountable;
corresponding, correlative, suitable, proportionate.

ANT. _Independent, irresponsible, irrefutable; unsuitable, dissimilar,
different._

=Antagonism.= Opposition, contradiction, hostility, animosity, enmity.

ANT. _Amity, alliance, association._

=Antecedent=, _a._ Preceding, previous, prior, foregoing, anterior,
precursory.

ANT. _Subsequent, posterior, sequent, following._

=Antedate.= Date before the true time; anticipate, forestall, foretaste.

ANT. _Postdate, follow, succeed, supervene._

=Anticipate.= Forestall, expect, foretaste, antedate, forecast,
apprehend, hope for, look forward to.

ANT. _Postdate, follow; reflect upon, recall, recollect, remember;
despair of, doubt, dread, fear._

=Anticipation.= Expectation, prospect, hope, trust, contemplation,
abeyance, foreboding, apprehension, presentiment; prescience, prevision,
forethought.

ANT. _Realization, consummation, despair, enjoyment, surprise, doubt,
dread, wonder, fear._

=Antipathy.= Repugnance, repulsion, aversion, detestation, abhorrence,
hatred, hostility, loathing.

ANT. _Attraction, affinity, congeniality, sympathy, harmony._

=Antiquated.= Quaint, obsolete, bygone, ancient, archaic, old-fashioned.

ANT. _Modern, modish, new, recent, stylish, fashionable, fresh._

=Antiquity.= Ancient times, eld, early days; ancients, people of early
days; great age; (_pl._) relics of ancient days, archeology.

ANT. _Modernity; futurity, eventuality, posterity; the present, to-day._

=Anxiety.= Perplexity, apprehension, care, concern, solicitude, worry,
dread, trouble, foreboding, misgiving, eagerness, diffidence.

ANT. _Ease, confidence, contentment, apathy, acquiescence, calmness,
nonchalance, assurance._

=Apathy.= Stoicism, calmness, composure, lethargy, unconcern,
indifference, insensibility, immobility, quietude, phlegm, stillness.

ANT. _Fury, frenzy, susceptibility, sensitiveness, anxiety, excitement,
agitation, feeling, passion, vehemence, emotion._

=Ape=, _v._ Mimic, imitate, counterfeit, copy, affect, personate,
represent.

ANT. _Vary, modify, change._

=Aperture.= Opening, hole, gap, rift, chasm, loophole, orifice, cleft.

ANT. _Closure, blank wall; seclusion, imperviousness._

=Apex.= Acme, vertex, pinnacle, summit.

ANT. _Base, nadir, foot, root._

=Aphorism.= Adage, maxim, proverb, saying, dictum, apothegm, saw.

ANT. _Lecture, disquisition, discourse, sermon._

=Apiece.= Each, individually, severally, distributively, separately.

ANT. _Together, collectively, synthetically, in the aggregate._

=Apocalyptic.= In _or_ from “The Revelation of St. John the Divine”;
prophetic, mystical, mysterious; manifesting, revealing, unveiling.

ANT. _Concealing, obscuring, shrouding, eclipsing._

=Apocryphal.= Unauthentic, uncanonical, legendary, fictitious, false,
equivocal, doubtful, spurious.

ANT. _Palpable, authorized, accepted, authentic, genuine, current,
verified, attested._

=Apology.= Plea, excuse, defense, confession, acknowledgment,
justification, vindication, explanation, extenuation.

ANT. _Charge, censure, imputation, condemnation, insult, complaint,
offense, wrong._

=Apostate.= Renegade, turncoat, backslider, deserter, pervert, traitor.

ANT. _Adherent, supporter, zealot, dogmatist, fanatic._

=Apothegm.= Saying, dictum, proverb, aphorism, precept, byword.

ANT. _Sermon, discourse, tirade, harangue._

=Appall.= Terrify, frighten, dismay, shock, daunt, alarm, affright.

ANT. _Reassure, embolden._

=Apparel.= Clothes, dress, raiment, attire, costume, habit, guise,
garments, robes, vesture, wardrobe, equipment, trappings.

ANT. _Nudity, deshabille, rags, tatters._

=Apparent.= Seeming, probable, likely, obvious, conspicuous, manifest,
clear, patent, evident, plain, legible, specious.

ANT. _Real, hidden, dubious, improbable, doubtful, unimaginable,
unsupposable, minute._

=Appeal.= Address, invoke, entreat, implore, supplicate, sue, petition.

ANT. _Protest, defy, abjure, disdain, deprecate, repudiate._

=Appearance.= Semblance, look, show, pretense, guise, fashion; arrival,
advent, apparition; demeanor, air, complexion, manner.

ANT. _Disappearance, evanition, departure, vanishing._

=Appease.= Calm, pacify, soothe, quell, mollify, mitigate, lull;
propitiate, placate, satisfy, reconcile.

ANT. _Aggravate, exasperate, provoke, inflame, incense, excite._

=Appellation.= Epithet, title, description, designation, name.

ANT. _Anonymousness, namelessness._

=Appendage=, =Appendix=. Attachment, addition, adjunct, supplement.

ANT. _Main body, original, whole, total._

=Appertain.= Belong, inhere, adhere, regard, concern, touch, relate.

ANT. _Be remote, far-fetched, or forced, have no bearing upon._

=Appetite.= Longing, craving, desire, relish, gust, zest, liking.

ANT. _Aversion, loathing, repugnance, antipathy, disgust._

=Applause.= Praise, approbation, commendation, compliment, plaudit,
acclamation, éclat, clapping of hands.

ANT. _Denunciation, censure, blame, sibilation, vituperation, hissing._

=Appliances=, _n. pl._ Means, instruments, appointments, appurtenances,
tools, adjuncts, equipment; resources, steps, measures, ways;
contrivances.

=Applicable.= Fit, appropriate, suitable, pertinent, apt, proper,
relevant, germane; adjustable.

ANT. _Irrelevant, useless, unavailable, impertinent._

=Applicant.= Petitioner, solicitor, suitor, candidate, aspirant.

=Apply.= Use, employ, exercise, appropriate; execute, carry out,
practice; devote, engage, dedicate; request, petition.

ANT. _Divert, misuse, discard, divorce._

=Appoint.= Determine, establish, fix; assign, allot, designate;
nominate, name, create; equip, supply, furnish; direct, command, decree,
enjoin, impose, require, ordain.

ANT. _Reserve, cancel, disarrange, reverse, withhold, retain, undo,
suspend, recall, withdraw._

=Appointment.= Assignation, assignment, agreement, arrangement; meeting,
tryst; station, position, office, place; decree, command, order, edict,
ordinance, mandate, requirement, law.

=Apportion.= Appoint, allot, appropriate, divide, distribute, share,
grant, dispense, assign, deal.

ANT. _Retain, collect, consolidate, receive, gather, divert._

=Apposite.= Apt, pertinent, suitable, seasonable, apropos, fit,
applicable, adapted.

ANT. _Untimely, irrelevant, unfitting, impertinent, misplaced._

=Appraise.= Estimate, prize, value, rate, fix a price for, survey,
assess, assize.

ANT. _Undervalue, discard, misprize; discount, rebate, allow._

=Appreciate.= Estimate justly, value highly, esteem, prize, raise the
value of; recognize, respect.

ANT. _Undervalue, misjudge, ignore, misconceive; depreciate, disdain._

=Apprehend.= Arrest, seize, take, catch, capture; imagine, conceive,
regard; perceive, realize, understand, appreciate; fear, forebode.

ANT. _Miss, lose, misunderstand, ignore, misconceive._

=Apprehension.= Arrest, capture; understanding, intelligence, mind,
reason; notice, cognizance; conception, imagination; knowledge,
discernment, perception, sense; opinion, fancy, sentiment, notion, fear,
suspicion, anxiety.

ANT. _Escape, non-detection; sensibility, emotion; apathy, lethargy;
illiteracy, stupidity, stolidity; confidence, nonchalance._

=Apprise.= Give notice, inform, tell, publish, advise, acquaint.

ANT. _Deceive, mislead, hoodwink, mystify._

=Approach=, _v._ Advance, draw near, bring near, go near, push; broach,
address confidentially; resemble closely, be like, similar, _or_ equal.

ANT. _Diverge, retreat, go back; retard, restrain; be unlike._

=Approbation.= Praise, commendation, approval, liking; support, consent,
sanction, indorsement, concurrence, assent.

ANT. _Censure, protest, denial, disapproval, dissatisfaction._

=Approve.= Praise, commend, sanction, support, encourage, authorize.

ANT. _Disparage, condemn, disown, repudiate, dislike._

=Approximation.= Approach, nearness, similarity, likeness, contiguity,
resemblance, propinquity, neighborhood.

ANT. _Remoteness, variation, distance, difference, divergence._

=Appurtenant.= Belonging, connected, appended, attached, coordinate.

ANT. _Isolated, detached, unallied, independent._

=A priori.= Theoretically; necessarily, apodictically, constitutionally,
absolutely, primordially, inductively.

ANT. _A posteriori; practically, according to experience; deductively
from facts._

=Apropos.= Opportune, seasonable, apposite, timely, apt, suitable.

ANT. _Inopportune, irrelevant, untimely, inapt, unsuitable._

=Aptitude.= Disposition, knack, endowment, tendency, inclination,
fitness, suitability, bias, propensity.

ANT. _Unreadiness, unskilfulness, repugnance, incongruity._

=Arbiter.= Umpire, judge, referee; controller, master, lord.

ANT. _Appellant, claimant, litigant, disputant._

=Arbitrary.= Despotic, autocratic, tyrannical, overbearing, peremptory;
capricious, wilful, fanciful; imperious, dictatorial.

ANT. _Considerate, lenient, obliging, equitable._

=Arbitration.= Mediation, intercession, interposition, intervention;
arbitrament, umpirage, trial, judgment, decision.

ANT. _Litigation, contention, disputation, appeal, dissension._

=Ardent.= Passionate, fervent, intense, vehement, fierce, fiery; hot,
burning; zealous, enthusiastic, strenuous.

ANT. _Cool, cold, indifferent, torpid, apathetic, dispassionate,
phlegmatic._

=Argument.= Reasoning, proof, evidence, controversy, discussion, debate;
subject, topic, theme, thesis; summary, abstract, outline.

ANT. _Assertion, assumption; dogma._

=Aridity.= Dryness, parchedness, sterility, unfertility, barrenness;
dulness, indifference, torpidity, insensibility.

ANT. _Moisture, fertility, verdancy, luxuriance, productivity._

=Arise.= Ascend, mount, get up, stand up; rebel, revolt; result,
eventuate.

ANT. _Descend, dismount; submit, cower; cause, instigate._

=Aristocracy.= Government of nobles; nobility, peerage, gentry.

ANT. _Democracy; people, populace, masses, rabble._

=Arm=, _v._ Equip, array, furnish, gird, accouter, provide; fortify,
cover, protect, guard; prepare.

ANT. _Divest, disarm; expose._

=Army.= Soldiery, legion, armament, forces, host, phalanx, troops.

ANT. _Individual; citizens._

=Aromatic.= Fragrant, spicy, balmy, redolent, odoriferous, ambrosial.

ANT. _Scentless, malodorous, fetid, offensive, noisome, rank._

=Arouse.= Excite, provoke, instigate, stimulate, animate, kindle, warm,
whet, summon, awaken.

ANT. _Allay, mitigate, moderate, still, quiet, assuage, quell._

=Arraign.= Accuse, charge, indict, impeach, denounce; prosecute.

ANT. _Acquit, discharge, condone, release._

=Arrange.= Settle, determine, adjust; dispose, group, marshall, rank,
range, distribute, place; plan, contrive, project, devise, construct,
organize.

ANT. _Confuse, disturb, jumble, disperse, disorder, derange._

=Array=, _n._ Order, parade, show, exhibition, collection, arrangement,
line of battle, disposition.

ANT. _Disorder, confusion, jumble._

=Arrest.= Apprehend, capture, seize, detain, hold, take prisoner; stop.

ANT. _Liberate, free, dismiss, release, discharge; expedite._

=Arrival.= Advent, coming; comer, person _or_ thing arrived.

ANT. _Departure, going._

=Arrive.= Reach, get to, come; attain, touch, overtake; happen.

ANT. _Depart, set out_ or _forth, be gone_.

=Arrogant.= Haughty, insolent, proud, lordly, disdainful, supercilious,
self-important, egoistic, overbearing, dogmatic, imperious.

ANT. _Humble, diffident, polite, bashful, servile, considerate._

=Art.= Craft, business, calling, employment, trade; practical knowledge;
creation of beauty; skill, dexterity, sagacity, aptitude, cleverness,
ingenuity; cunning, artifice, deceit, guile.

ANT. _Misrepresentation, caricature; candor, simplicity; incompetency,
inability._

=Article.= Thing, substance, commodity; part, portion, particular,
point, item, member; essay, paper, monograph, brochure.

ANT. _Nothing, nullity, cipher; totality, entirety, unity, integer._

=Articulate.= Join, unite, connect, fasten together; enunciate, utter
distinctly, pronounce.

ANT. _Disperse, separate, rend, dissect, disjoin, disconnect; whisper;
render mute, silence, muzzle._

=Artifice.= Cunning, craft, machination, stratagem, guile, device,
contrivance, cheat, imposture, trick, ruse, maneuver, wile.

ANT. _Fairness, frankness, candor, openness, sincerity, truth, honesty,
artlessness, ingenuousness, simplicity._

=Artificial.= Unnatural, factitious; feigned, counterfeit, fictitious,
spurious, sham; affected, forced, strained.

ANT. _Natural, genuine, spontaneous, transparent, artless, unaffected._

=Artist.= Designer, contriver, skilled workman, artisan; mechanic,
operative; painter; sculptor, carver; master, master-hand.

=Ascend.= Rise, mount, soar, aspire, go up, tower.

ANT. _Descend, fall, sink._

=Ascendancy.= Power, authority, sway, dominion, rule, mastery, control,
government, influence.

ANT. _Subordination, servility._

=Ascertain.= Determine, establish, settle, fix, define, verify;
discover, find out, get at.

ANT. _Guess, surmise, suppose, presume, conjecture._

=Ascetic.= Austere, rigid, severe, self-denying, abstinent, stern,
puritanical.

ANT. _Lenient, indulgent, epicurean, pampered, mild, tolerant._

=Ascribe.= Impute, attribute, assign, refer, charge, set down.

ANT. _Dissociate, exclude; deny, refuse; disconnect._

=Ask.= Request, petition, solicit, entreat, beg, beseech, supplicate,
require of, crave, demand.

ANT. _Refuse, reject, deny; command, claim, exact, extort, enforce,
insist._

=Aspect.= Air, mien, look, countenance, expression, feature, bearing;
state, attitude, posture, condition, appearance; direction, outlook,
prospect.

=Asperity.= Acrimony, sourness, sharpness; sternness, severity,
bitterness, sullenness, ill-temper; roughness, unevenness.

ANT. _Sweetness, pleasantness; gentleness, mildness; smoothness._

=Asperse.= Slander, calumniate, traduce, vilify, attack, abuse, blemish,
besmirch, vituperate, disparage, censure, slur, malign.

ANT. _Eulogize, vindicate, clear, defend, extol, praise, shield._

=Aspiration.= Pronouncing with the rough breathing; yearning, longing,
ardent desire, craving, spiritual ambition.

ANT. _Apathy, inertia, indifference, dulness, aversion, repudiation,
avoidance._

=Assault.= Attack, invasion, charge, onset, onslaught, aggression.

ANT. _Resistance, defense, repulsion, retaliation, undermining._

=Assemble.= Gather, collect, convene, congregate, meet, come together.

ANT. _Disperse, scatter, dismiss._

=Assembly.= Concourse, company, gathering, congregation, assemblage,
meeting, convocation, throng; congress, parliament, legislature, synod,
diet, council, convention; ball, dance, dancing party.

ANT. _Dispersion, dismissal, disunion, disruption._

=Assent=, _n._ Acquiescence, acknowledgment, approval, concurrence,
approbation, accord, consent, agreement, compliance.

ANT. _Disagreement, dissent, difference, protest, declension._

=Assertion.= Asseveration, protestation, allegation; position,
statement, word, declaration; vindication, defense, maintenance.

ANT. _Denial, contradiction, abandonment, protest, disavowal,
retraction, repudiation, confutation, abjuration._

=Assess.= Tax, value, appraise, estimate, compute, fix, assign,
determine, impose.

ANT. _Discount, rebate, allow._

=Assiduous.= Diligent, industrious, untiring, indefatigable, devoted,
constant, attentive, painstaking, laborious, persistent, active.

ANT. _Indolent, remiss, inattentive, lazy, desultory, inconstant._

=Assignment.= Appointment, allotment; specification, fixing,
determination, offer, presentation; transfer, allowance.

ANT. _Withdrawal, refusal; acceptance, reception._

=Assimilate.= Make similar, cause to resemble; digest, appropriate,
incorporate, absorb.

ANT. _Contrast, reject, separate, segregate._

=Assist.= Help, aid, succor, relieve, support, befriend, serve; speed,
sustain, promote, further, coöperate with, patronize.

ANT. _Hinder, oppose, antagonize, prevent, resist, counteract._

=Associate=, _n._ Companion, comrade, chum, friend, helpmate, partner,
colleague, coadjutor, accomplice, ally, consort, confederate, peer.

ANT. _Antagonist, enemy, foe, opponent, rival, stranger, opposer._

=Association.= Federation, fellowship, alliance, companionship, society,
union, partnership, lodge, company, confederacy, corporation,
fraternity, club.

ANT. _Solitude; disintegration; independence, separation, disunion,
estrangement, disruption, avoidance; individuality._

=Assortment.= Arrangement, allotment, distribution; set, class, group,
parcel, collection; variety, miscellany.

ANT. _Disarrangement, displacement, misplacement; conglomeration._

=Assuage.= Soothe, pacify, mitigate, ease, alleviate, abate, calm.

ANT. _Excite, inflame, provoke, aggravate, exasperate._

=Assume.= Arrogate, feign, pretend, take, usurp, accept, affect,
appropriate, claim.

ANT. _Waive, allow, surrender; doff; concede, grant, abandon, resign;
demonstrate, prove, argue._

=Assumption.= Presumption, hypothesis, theory, postulate, conjecture;
acceptance of, responsibility for; usurpation, arrogance, haughtiness,
conceit, lordliness, impudence, effrontery.

ANT. _Truth, fact; timidity, distrust, misgiving, consternation._

=Assurance.= Confidence, effrontery, presumption, assumption, arrogance,
impudence, self-reliance, boldness, assertion; pledge.

ANT. _Doubt, distrust, hesitancy, misgiving, timidity, confusion,
dismay, shyness._

=Astonish.= Amaze, startle, surprise, astound, stupefy, stagger.

ANT. _Encourage, embolden, assure._

=Astute.= Keen, discerning, acute, sagacious, shrewd, sharp, cunning,
subtle, discriminating, knowing, perspicacious, crafty.

ANT. _Stupid, unintelligent, imbecile, dull, idiotic, shortsighted,
shallow._

=Atrocious.= Infamous, outrageous, nefarious, villainous, diabolical,
heinous, flagrant, horrible.

ANT. _Humane, noble, honorable, admirable, chivalrous, generous._

=Attachment.= Adherence, friendship, regard, tenderness, love, esteem,
affection, devotion, inclination, union.

ANT. _Alienation, aversion, coolness, distance, estrangement,
indifference, antipathy, animosity, dislike, enmity, divorce._

=Attack=, _v._ Assault, storm, assail, invade, charge, rush upon, spring
upon; censure, criticize; combat, besiege, beset.

ANT. _Withstand, defend, resist, support, shield, aid, uphold, shelter,
vindicate, protest._

=Attain.= Achieve, accomplish, gain, master, secure, earn, obtain, win,
acquire, accomplish.

ANT. _Lose, fail of, forfeit, give up, abandon, let go, miss._

=Attainment.= Winning, getting, accomplishing, securing; erudition,
acquirement, wisdom, accomplishment, mental resources, information,
learning, enlightenment.

ANT. _Inspiration, intuition, genius; ignorance._

=Attempt.= Try, undertake, seek, endeavor, essay, attack, strive.

ANT. _Abandon, shun, drop, dismiss, neglect._

=Attendance.= Presence; persons present; train, retinue; ministration,
service, waiting on.

ANT. _Absence; non-attendance; neglect, abandonment._

=Attention.= Care, notice, observation, consideration, watchfulness,
alertness; study, reflection, application; respect, courtesy,
politeness, civility, regard; courtship, devotion, wooing.

ANT. _Indifference, carelessness, heedlessness, abstraction,
distraction, absence of mind; neglect, preoccupation, ignoring._

=Attenuate.= Rarefy, thin, reduce, diminish, make slender, slim, _or_
spare, lessen.

ANT. _Amplify, dilate, swell, develop, enlarge, broaden, expand,
increase._

=Attest.= Bear witness, certify, indorse, corroborate, support,
authenticate; invoke, adjure; prove, show, manifest, exhibit.

ANT. _Controvert, contradict, disprove, deny, upset, refute; conceal;
vitiate._

=Attire.= Dress, apparel, robes, garments, habiliments, habit, raiment,
uniform, costume, livery.

ANT. _Nudity, nakedness._

=Attitude.= Position, pose, posture, situation, standing, aspect.

ANT. _State, condition, essence; amorphism._

=Attraction.= Drawing, allurement, lure, fascination, charm, enticement,
witchery, grace.

ANT. _Repulsion, aversion, disinclination, repugnance._

=Attribute=, _n._ Quality, property, characteristic, peculiarity, mark.

ANT. _Essence, substance, nature, being._

=Attribute=, _v._ Ascribe, assign, impute, refer, charge, connect,
associate.

ANT. _Separate, sever, sunder, disconnect, deny, dissociate._

=Audacious.= Bold, daring, fearless, courageous, venturesome, intrepid,
dauntless; presumptuous, forward, assuming, impudent, impertinent,
insolent.

ANT. _Timid, cowardly, cautious; unenterprising; retiring._

=Augur=, _v._ Foretell, portend, predict, presage, prophesy, divine,
prognosticate, betoken.

ANT. _Demonstrate, establish, settle, prove, warrant, calculate._

=August.= Awful, imposing, majestic, stately, grand, regal, kingly,
princely, noble, dignified.

ANT. _Mean, common, vulgar, beggarly, commonplace, paltry._

=Auspicious.= Successful, fortunate, lucky, happy, prosperous;
propitious, promising, opportune, favorable.

ANT. _Hopeless, abortive, unpromising, unsatisfactory, discouraging._

=Austere.= Severe, hard, stiff, stern, uncompromising, unrelenting,
ascetic, rigid, formal.

ANT. _Affable, kindly, indulgent, genial, bland, mild, tender._

=Authentic.= Genuine, trustworthy, veritable, accepted, authorized,
certain, accredited, sure, true, reliable, original, legitimate.

ANT. _False, fictitious, spurious, unauthorized, apocryphal, fabulous,
counterfeit._

=Author.= Creator, maker, contriver, originator, inventor; writer,
composer.

ANT. _Destroyer, demolisher, spoiler, annihilator._

=Authority.= Power, government, empire, dominion; supremacy, control,
influence, interest; order, precept, sanction, liberty, warranty;
expert, master, connoisseur.

ANT. _Anarchy, license, insubordination, misrule, lynch law; embargo,
restriction, hindrance, proscription, prohibition, injunction,
interdiction; weakness, wrong, usurpation._

=Autocratic.= Absolute, unlimited, tyrannical, oppressive, disdainful,
overbearing, arrogant.

ANT. _Subordinate, dependent, responsible, constitutional._

=Automatic.= Self-moving, self-acting.

ANT. _Voluntary, free, optional._

=Auxiliary=, _n._ Assistant, helper, confederate, aid, ally, accessory,
promoter, subordinate.

ANT. _Opponent, antagonist, hinderer, opposer._

=Available.= Serviceable, useful, profitable, beneficial, advantageous.

ANT. _Useless, inappropriate, irrelevant, inoperative._

=Avaricious.= Grasping, sordid, greedy, covetous, miserly, stingy.

ANT. _Liberal, bountiful, extravagant, wasteful, prodigal, unselfish._

=Avenge.= Punish, retaliate, revenge, vindicate.

ANT. _Forgive, pardon, overlook, condone, waive, forego, remit._

=Avenue.= Access, entrance, entry, approach, passage; alley, walk,
street, road; route, channel.

=Aver.= Assert, declare, say, protest, affirm, asseverate, allege.

ANT. _Deny, contradict, disavow._

=Average.= Medium, medial, middling, ordinary, tolerable, moderate,
mediocre, passable.

ANT. _Extreme, excessive, perfect, extraordinary, excellent._

=Aversion.= Dislike, hatred, repugnance, disgust, loathing, antipathy,
abhorrence, detestation, unwillingness.

ANT. _Sympathy, congeniality, ardor, eagerness, avidity, love, desire,
affection._

=Avidity.= Eagerness, longing, desire, yearning; rapacity, craving,
greediness.

ANT. _Apathy, indifference, coldness, aversion, loathing._

=Avoid.= Quit, shun, abandon, escape, elude, withdraw, forsake, dodge.

ANT. _Seek, court, approach, accost, address, affect._

=Avouch.= Assert, affirm, declare, protest, profess, asseverate.

ANT. _Deny, contradict, gainsay._

=Avow.= Confess, own, acknowledge, admit, profess, proclaim, testify.

ANT. _Disavow, repudiate, deny, contradict, disclaim, ignore._

=Awaken.= Rouse, kindle, excite, provoke.

ANT. _Allay, quiet, subdue._

=Award.= Grant, allot, accord, distribute, assign, decree, determine.

ANT. _Refuse, withhold, retain, misappropriate, deny._

=Aware.= Conscious, sensible, cognizant, knowing, apprised, mindful.

ANT. _Unconscious, ignorant, insensible._

=Awe.= Fear, dread, reverence, veneration, terror, wonder.

ANT. _Contempt, familiarity, irreverence, disrespect, insolence._

=Awful.= Dread, grand, imposing, majestic, noble, portentous, appalling,
august, alarming, horrible, frightful, shocking, terrible.

ANT. _Commonplace, contemptible, despicable, vulgar, undignified._

=Awkward.= Clumsy, bungling, ungainly, uncouth, rough, unskilful.

ANT. _Clever, skilful, handy, dexterous, adroit._ =Awry.= Oblique,
slanting, twisted, crooked, distorted, athwart.

ANT. _Straight, direct, true, right._

=Axiom.= Truism, postulate, self-evident proposition, necessary truth.

ANT. _Paradox, sophism, contradiction, nonsense, absurdity._

=Azure.= Blue, sky-color, cerulean.




                                   B


=Babble.= Chatter, prattle, jibber; prate, gossip, tattle; tell secrets,
blab, blurt out; murmur.

ANT. _Hush, suppress; enunciate._

=Babel.= Tumult, disorder, clamor, confusion, discord, din, pother.

ANT. _Silence; articulation, distinctness, enunciation; monotony._

=Back=, _a._ and _ad._ Remote, hindmost, in the rear; again, return.

ANT. _Near, foremost, in advance._

=Back=, _v._ Support, aid, second, sustain, assist; retire, retreat,
withdraw; move backward, cause to go backward.

ANT. _Fail, disappoint; advance, push._

=Backbiter.= Slanderer, defamer, traducer, calumniator, detractor,
cynic.

ANT. _Advocate, upholder, defender, vindicator._

=Backslider.= Recreant, apostate, renegade, deserter, abjurer.

ANT. _Confessor, zealot, bigot, adherent._

=Backward.= Averse, indisposed, reluctant, loath, unwilling, hesitating,
wavering; dull, slow, stupid, stolid; late, tardy.

ANT. _Forward, eager, willing, ready, prompt; quick, bright; previous,
antecedent, prior._

=Bad.= Evil, wicked, depraved, abandoned, corrupt, immoral, unfair,
unprincipled, villainous; pernicious, mischievous, hurtful, injurious,
detrimental, unwholesome; unlucky, unfortunate; sad, unwelcome,
distressing, disappointing; sorry, mean, shabby, vile, wretched,
abominable; poor, imperfect; serious, hard, severe.

ANT. _Good, perfect, right, holy, beautiful, pleasant._

=Baffle.= Frustrate, thwart, defeat, circumvent, checkmate, undermine;
bewilder, perplex, confound, disconcert.

ANT. _Aid, assist, advance, encourage, promote._

=Balance.= Poise, hold in equilibrium; weigh, compare, estimate;
neutralize, counteract, compensate; equalize, square, adjust.

ANT. _Upset, cant, tilt, overbalance, subvert._

=Bald.= Bare, hairless; treeless, unsheltered, naked, verdureless;
unadorned, prosaic, dull, vapid, tame, inelegant; literal, unvarnished;
mere, unsupported, uncorroborated.

ANT. _Adorned, periwigged; forested, shaded; bright, elegant,
rhetorical; ornate, polished, witty, scintillating._

=Baleful.= Harmful, hurtful, injurious, baneful, pernicious, deadly,
ruinous.

ANT. _Innocent, beneficial, salutary, advantageous._

=Balk.= Frustrate, defeat, foil.

ANT. _Aid, promote, instigate._

=Banish.= Dismiss, drive out, eject, expel, exile, ostracize, evict,
expatriate.

ANT. _Welcome, admit, protect, domesticate, harbor._

=Banquet.= Feast, treat, regalement, entertainment, festivity, carousal,
cheer.

ANT. _Fast, starvation, abstinence._

=Banter=, _n._ Badinage, irony, raillery, ridicule, satire, chaff,
mockery, jeering, derision.

ANT. _Discourse, discussion._

=Barbarous.= Brutal, atrocious, cruel, inhuman, merciless, savage,
barbaric, barbarian.

ANT. _Civilized, humane, polite, refined, tender, delicate, cultured,
elegant, nice, courtly._

=Bare.= Nude, naked, unclothed, exposed; sheer, simple, mere; bald,
unadorned, meager; poor, destitute, indigent, empty.

ANT. _Dressed, protected; rich, luxurious, costly._

=Bargain.= Agreement, contract, stipulation, transaction; purchase,
speculation, haggling, getting, proceeds; cheap purchase.

ANT. _Loss, misprofit; cheat._

=Barren.= Sterile, childless, unprolific; unfertile, unproductive;
uninstructive, ineffectual.

ANT. _Productive, fertile, luxuriant, fecund; profitable, useful._

=Barrier.= Obstruction, hindrance, obstacle, bar, barricade, rampart;
restraint, restriction.

ANT. _Thoroughfare, entrance, admittance, opening, passage._

=Base.= Cheap, worthless, inferior; vulgar, humble, unknown; mean,
contemptible, servile; shameful, scandalous, vile.

ANT. _Noble, honored, exalted, pure, valued, lofty, esteemed, refined._

=Bashful.= Modest, shy, retiring, reserved, diffident.

ANT. _Bold, forward, pert, impudent, confident, conceited, egoistic._

=Basis.= Base, foundation, groundwork.

ANT. _Apex, top, superstructure._

=Bathe.= Wash, lave, cover, flood, immerse, suffuse.

ANT. _Dry, expose._

=Battle=, _n._ Fight, contest, skirmish, combat, encounter, bout,
engagement, strife, action, conflict.

ANT. _Armistice, truce, concord._

=Bauble.= Trifle, toy, plaything, trinket, gimcrack, knickknack.

ANT. _Valuable, jewel, ornament, decoration, gem, possession._

=Bays.= Crown, wreath, garland, chaplet; honors, renown, plaudits,
praise, glory, applause.

ANT. _Disgrace, contumely, stigma, brand._

=Beach.= Shore, strand, margin, sands, marge, rim, coast, seashore,
seaboard.

ANT. _Ocean, sea, deep, main._

=Beacon=, _n._ Signal fire, mark, sign, guide, light, flame.

ANT. _Shadow; dark; will-o’-the-wisp, ignis fatuus._

=Beam=, _v._ Shine, emit rays, beacon, gleam, glitter, be radiant.

ANT. _Die out, grow dark, go out._

=Bear.= Support, sustain, hold up, carry; have, hold, possess; suffer,
undergo, endure, tolerate, submit to; permit, allow; maintain, cherish,
harbor; be responsible for; produce, yield, give birth to; generate.

ANT. _Drop, drag; release, give up; protest, resist, rebel, resent,
reject._

=Bearing.= Behavior, deportment, demeanor, appearance, aspect, position,
carriage, mien, air; relation, connection; patience, endurance;
direction, course, aim; effect, force, meaning, scope; producing; bed,
socket.

ANT. _Misbehavior; disconnection, independence, irrelevancy; pendency,
suspension; diversion, deflection; inanity, absurdity._

=Beat.= Strike, thrash, flog, cudgel, pound, scourge, whip, batter,
smite, pommel, overcome, chastise, conquer, defeat, castigate, bruise,
bastinado, belabor, switch, spank, worst, vanquish.

ANT. _Soothe, stroke, caress, pat, shield, protect, mollify, heal._

=Beatific.= Ravishing, enrapturing, enchanting, transporting, ecstatic.

ANT. _Tormenting, disgusting, obnoxious._

=Beatitude.= Bliss, felicity, blessedness.

ANT. _Suffering, tribulation, pain, dolor._

=Beautiful.= Handsome, lovely, charming, fair, pretty, graceful,
exquisite, beauteous, bewitching, attractive, picturesque, comely.

ANT. _Hideous, repulsive, ugly, deformed, frightful, ghastly, grim._

=Because.= Since, inasmuch as, for, as.

ANT. _Yet, notwithstanding, however, although, nevertheless._

=Beckon.= Signal, sign, call by gesture, nod.

ANT. _Ignore, repulse._

=Become.= Suit, adorn, fit, set off, be appropriate to; get _or_ grow
to, turn to, change into; befall, bechance, happen to.

ANT. _Disagree, clash, mismatch._

=Becoming.= Befitting, beseeming, fit, graceful, proper, neat, suitable,
congruous, worthy.

ANT. _Unseemly, indecent, derogatory, unsuitable._

=Befall.= Happen, occur, chance, betide.

ANT. _Impend, threaten, loom._

=Befitting.= Decent, becoming, suitable, proper, appropriate, expedient.

ANT. _Compulsory, obligatory; improper, inexpedient._

=Before.= Preceding, in front of; prior to, previous; in advance of,
ahead of; hitherto; above, in a former place _or_ previous passage;
formerly, of old, already; under the judgment _or_ control of.

ANT. _Behind, after, subsequently, later._

=Beg.= Beseech, pray, ask, request, supplicate, solicit, sue, implore,
importune.

ANT. _Require, demand, extort, exact, insist; refuse._

=Beggar.= Mendicant, supplicant, pauper, suitor, applicant.

ANT. _Bestower, giver, benefactor._

=Beggary.= Want, penury, indigence, destitution.

ANT. _Riches, wealth, affluence, abundance, plenty._

=Beginning.= Origin, commencement, fountain, source, spring, start,
opening, initiation, arising, outset, rise, inception, inauguration.

ANT. _End, finish, fulfilment, outcome, conclusion, termination, result,
effect, expiration, completion._

=Beguile.= Cheat, deceive, befool; amuse, entertain, cheer, solace.

ANT. _Enlighten, advise; weary, bore._

=Behavior.= Conduct, deportment, manners, breeding, carriage, bearing,
action, demeanor, life.

ANT. _Misconduct, misdemeanor._

=Behest.= Command, injunction, charge, precept.

ANT. _Option, liberty._

=Behind.= Back, astern, rearward.

ANT. Before, in front of.

=Behold.= See, look, discern, gaze, scan, observe, contemplate.

ANT. _Ignore, miss, wink, overlook, disregard, connive._

=Behoof.= Advantage, profit.

ANT. _Loss, detriment, disadvantage._

=Being.= Reality, existence, actuality; essence, inmost nature,
substance, life, vital principle, root, heart.

ANT. _Nonentity, nullity, non-existence._

=Beleaguer.= Besiege, beset, blockade, invest; compass, block up,
surround, obstruct, environ.

ANT. _Abandon; conquer, subdue._

=Belief.= Trust, confidence, conviction, credence, persuasion, reliance,
assurance; dogma, creed, tenets, opinion, view; credit, acceptance,
assent, currency.

ANT. _Distrust, denial, discredit, dissent, rejection, disavowal._

=Belligerent.= Warlike, contending, conflicting, hostile, rival,
opposed, adverse, antagonistic, pugnacious, contentious, quarrelsome.

ANT. _Peaceful, friendly, forbearing, pacific, neutral._

=Belonging=, _n._ Quality, gift, endowment, attribute; property, goods,
estate, chattel, possession; appendage, appurtenance, accessory.

=Belonging=, _a._ Related, connected, appertaining, congenial, cognate,
accompanying.

ANT. _Alien, optional, independent, irrelevant._

=Below.= Under, beneath, underneath, hereinafter.

ANT. _Above, beforementioned, previously._

=Bend.= Curve, twist, crook, bow, deflect, deviate, diverge, twine;
influence, persuade, incline, submit.

ANT. _Straighten, stiffen, direct; resist, break, crush._

=Beneath.= Below, under, underneath; unworthy of, unbefitting.

ANT. _Above, superior to; over, aloft._

=Benediction.= Benison, blessing, beatitude; gratitude, thanks, praise;
benefit, grace, boon.

ANT. _Curse, censure, execration, ingratitude._

=Benefactor.= Patron, supporter, upholder, friend, contributor.

ANT. _Destroyer, enemy, oppressor, brute._

=Beneficence.= Charity, bounty, liberality, benevolence.

ANT. _Malevolence, hatred, stinginess, miserliness, niggardliness._

=Benefit.= Boon, service, advantage, profit, favor, blessing.

ANT. _Evil, loss, damage, calamity, injury, privation._

=Benevolence.= Kindness, humaneness, charitableness, good will,
altruism, beneficence, liberality, philanthropy, benignity, bounty,
humanity, sympathy, munificence, generosity, unselfishness,
kind-heartedness.

ANT. _Malevolence, malignity, selfishness, stinginess, unkindness,
brutality, churlishness, barbarity, illiberality, self-seeking,
niggardliness, harshness_.

=Benign.= Kind, gracious, amiable, gentle, friendly, benevolent, humane,
obliging, good.

ANT. _Hateful, harsh, brutal, churlish._

=Bequeath.= Will, leave, devise; hand down, transmit, impart.

ANT. _Withhold, alienate, disinherit._

=Bereavement.= Deprivation, loss, destitution, affliction, forlorn
condition, desolation.

ANT. _Blessing, compensation, reparation, consolation, restitution,
restoration, substitution._

=Bereft.= Stripped, despoiled, deprived.

ANT. _Endowed, blessed, enriched, compensated._

=Beseech.= Beg, implore, pray, ask, solicit, entreat, petition,
importune.

ANT. _Grant, requite, confer; disdain, defy._

=Beset.= Surround, circle, hem in, besiege, beleaguer; embarrass.

ANT. _Defend, defy, repel._

=Beside.= Near, close together; aside from; out of.

ANT. _Far, distant._

=Besides= or =Beside=. Except, save, distinct from; moreover,
furthermore, else, beyond that.

ANT. _Apart, separate from; exclusively; finally._

=Bestow.= Give, present, award, grant, confer; place, stow, store.

ANT. _Receive; seize, appropriate, usurp; disperse, throw away._

=Bet.= Stake, wager, pledge.

ANT. _Plan, calculate, dispose._

=Betide.= Happen, bechance, befall, come to pass, occur, take place.

ANT. _Result, be destined_ or _doomed_.

=Betimes.= Seasonably, in good time or season.

ANT. _Inopportune, late, tardy, unseasonable._

=Betoken.= Signify, denote, indicate, represent, imply, prove, show,
augur; presage, prefigure, foretell, portend.

ANT. _Mask, hide, mislead, belie, misrepresent._

=Betray.= Reveal, expose, divulge, deliver up, deceive; manifest, show,
indicate; lure, ensnare, entrap, beguile; seduce, ruin, corrupt.

ANT. _Protect, preserve, foster, cherish, conceal, suppress, guard._

=Betrothal.= Engagement, plighting, affiancing.

=Better.= Amend, ameliorate, improve, correct, advance, reform.

ANT. _Make worse, degrade, wreck, weaken, cripple, impair, injure._

=Between.= Amid, among, betwixt.

ANT. _Outside, beyond, without._

=Bewail.= Bemoan, lament, sorrow, grieve.

ANT. _Rejoice, joy, exult._

=Beware.= Take care, be cautious, be wary, look out, mind.

ANT. _Be reckless, careless; neglect, ignore._

=Bewilderment.= Confusion, embarrassment, daze, maze, perplexity,
mystification.

ANT. _Enlightenment, self-possession, calmness, discernment,
perspicacity._

=Bewitch.= Charm, enchant, fascinate, captivate.

ANT. _Repulse, avoid, recoil, annoy, harass._

=Beyond.= Over, across, remote, farther than, before; yonder, above,
exceeding.

ANT. _Beside, near, at hand, close; behind, back; below, less than._

=Bias.= Bent, inclination, tendency, leaning, proneness, proclivity,
propensity, partiality, predilection.

ANT. _Repulsion, reaction, repugnance._

=Bicker.= Wrangle, quarrel, dispute, squabble.

ANT. _Agree, sympathize, understand, harmonize._

=Bidding.= Command, order, direction, appointment, mandate; offer, bid,
proposal.

ANT. _Request, solicitation; refusal, rebuff._

=Bide.= Dwell, stay, reside, wait, tarry, remain; endure, bear.

ANT. _Depart, go, move, migrate; resist, rebel, protest._

=Big.= Large, great, wide, bulky, huge, gross, fat; proud, arrogant,
haughty, pompous.

ANT. _Small, little, least, thin, narrow; humble, subservient,
unassuming._

=Bigot.= Zealot, fanatic, dogmatist, devotee.

ANT. _Skeptic, liberal, apostate, proselyte, doubter, agnostic._

=Bigoted.= Intolerant, opinionated, prejudiced, dogmatical,
narrow-minded, one-sided.

ANT. _Liberal, broad-minded, open to conviction._

=Bill.= Account, charge, score, amount due, reckoning; draft of law;
poster, placard, advertisement.

=Bind.= Fetter, tie, fasten, shackle, restrict, restrain, secure;
compel, oblige, engage.

ANT. _Free, loose, set free, untie._

=Birth.= Family, parentage, origin, source, lineage, nativity, descent,
extraction, race; rise.

ANT. _Death, extinction._

=Bit.= Part, piece, fragment, morsel.

ANT. _Whole, mass, aggregation._

=Biting.= Gnawing, sharp, severe, sardonic, censorious, piercing,
sarcastic, trenchant.

ANT. _Pleasant, gentle, soothing, genial, flattering._

=Bitter.= Harsh, caustic, cutting, savage, acidulous, acrimonious,
irate, sharp, sour, stinging, pungent, virulent.

ANT. _Sweet, honeyed, nectared, luscious, dulcet, saccharine._

=Blacken.= Slander, malign, defame, daub, bespatter, befoul, asperse,
traduce, vilify, decry, calumniate.

ANT. _Clear, eulogize, vindicate, whiten, whitewash._

=Blackguard.= Rascal, scoundrel, villain.

ANT. _Gentleman._

=Blame.= Censure, rebuke, chide, reprove, reproach, condemn, vituperate,
reprobate, reprehend, dispraise.

ANT. _Approve, praise, exonerate, acquit, exculpate._

=Blameless.= Pure, innocent, irresponsible, without fault.

ANT. _Guilty, implicated, blameworthy, faulty._

=Blanch.= Bleach, whiten, whitewash.

ANT. _Blacken, stain, dye, darken, color._

=Bland.= Soft, gentle, mild, affable, gracious, tender, benign,
courteous, complaisant.

ANT. _Harsh, abrupt, rough, biting, savage, severe, impolite._

=Blandishment.= Flattery, coaxing, fascination, wheedling, attraction,
charm, fawning, cajolery.

ANT. _Bluntness, unmannerliness, roughness, scolding, severity,
sternness._

=Blank.= Bare, drear, bleak, void, empty; utter, pure, simple, mere,
unqualified, unmitigated; amazed, astonished, confused, disconcerted.

ANT. _Full, replete; complex; modified, qualified; composed, controlled,
self-possessed, cognizant, intelligent._

=Blasphemy.= Profanity, sacrilege, impiety, swearing.

ANT. _Reverence, godliness, veneration._

=Blast.= Shrivel, destroy, blight, kill, ruin, wither, annihilate;
explode, rend, burst.

ANT. _Restore, expand, swell._

=Blazon.= Exhibit, show off, blaze, blare, trumpet, proclaim, publish.

ANT. _Conceal, hush, cover, hide, suppress, shroud, bury._

=Bleach.= Blanch, whiten.

ANT. _Blacken, darken, soil, stain._

=Bleak.= Windy, exposed, bare; cold, chill, raw, desolate, comfortless,
cheerless.

ANT. _Sheltered, protected, warm, balmy, cheerful, comfortable._

=Blemish.= Blot, spot, flaw, fault, imperfection, stain; defacement,
tarnish, disfigurement, disgrace, defect, dishonor, stigma, taint.

ANT. _Purity, unsulliedness, honor, integrity, wholeness._

=Blend.= Mix, unite, fuse, merge, mingle, amalgamate, combine, coalesce,
harmonize.

ANT. _Separate, run, dissociate, divide._

=Bless.= Delight, gladden, make happy, thank, glorify, exalt, praise,
extol, felicitate, cheer.

ANT. _Curse, anathematize, sadden, grieve._

=Blessing.= Benediction, benison; good, benefit, happiness, profit,
boon, gain; glory, praise, gratitude.

ANT. _Malediction, curse; bereavement, impoverishment, calamity,
deprivation, disaster, damage, detriment._

=Blight.= Pestilence, withering, blast, destruction.

ANT. _Development, maturity._

=Blind.= Sightless, unseeing, eyeless, undiscerning, ignorant,
unconscious, uninformed.

ANT. _Clear-sighted, far-seeing, discerning, penetrating, conscious,
keen, aware, sensitive._

=Blink.= Wink, ignore, connive, overlook.

ANT. _Notice, note, mark._

=Bliss.= Blessedness, happiness, joy, ecstasy, rapture, felicity,
beatitude.

ANT. _Torment, woe, suffering, misery, accursedness._

=Blithe.= Merry, joyous, cheerful, gay, lively, airy, sportive,
blithesome, mirthful, jocund, elated, vivacious, joyful.

ANT. _Dejected, heavy, dull, sullen._

=Block.= Obstruct, arrest, stop, fill.

ANT. _Free, open, clear._

=Blockhead.= Dunce, dolt, stupid fellow, numskull, ninny, simpleton,
ignoramus, dullard, booby.

ANT. _Sage, adept, savant, philosopher, schoolman, luminary._

=Blood-thirsty.= Cruel, savage, ferocious, murderous, bloody,
bloody-minded, gory, barbarous, inhuman, ruthless, sanguinary.

ANT. _Humane, kind, merciful, mild, tender, compassionate._

=Bloom=, _n._ Blossom, flower, flowering, efflorescence; flush,
freshness, prime, vigor, glow; delicacy, innocence.

ANT. _Decay, decadence, blight, blast, roughness, toughness,
ghastliness, superannuation, cadaverousness, coarseness._

=Bloom=, _v._ Blossom, bud, flower, germinate, sprout, blow, develop.

ANT. _Blight, be blasted, wither._

=Blooming.= Flourishing, flowering; young, beautiful, fair, fresh.

ANT. _Fading, waning, old, unsightly, deformed, blasted, withered._

=Blot.= Sully, spot, tarnish, spoil, discolor, pollute, stain, erase,
blur, blotch, smear, smutch, obliterate.

ANT. _Cleanse, clear, whiten, blanch; perpetuate, preserve._

=Blot out.= Erase, cancel, expunge, obliterate, efface, destroy, wipe
out.

ANT. _Restore, replace._

=Blow=, _n._ Knock, thump, stroke, box, buffet, calamity, cuff, cut,
concussion, disaster, lash, misfortune, rap, shock, stroke, wound,
affliction, blast, gale, gust; disappointment.

ANT. _Relief, comfort, blessing, consolation, assuagement._

=Bluff.= Abrupt, blunt, inconsiderate, open, rough, unmannerly, uncivil,
blustering, bold, brusque, coarse, discourteous, frank, impolite,
plain-spoken, rude.

ANT. _Bland, courteous, genial, polite, refined, reserved, urbane,
polished._

=Blunder.= Error, mistake, misunderstanding, fault, slip, oversight,
inaccuracy, delusion.

ANT. _Accuracy, correctness, truthfulness, exactness, ratification,
foresight, achievement, success, correction._

=Blunt=, _a._ Obtuse, dull, pointless, edgeless, brusk, abrupt, plain,
informal, stupid, stolid.

ANT. _Sharp, keen, acute, sensitive, polished, courteous, refined._

=Blunt=, _v._ Subdue, numb, harden, dull, make dull, deaden, paralyze,
stupefy; moderate, allay, mitigate, assuage.

ANT. _Quicken, sharpen, instigate, excite, stimulate, animate,
vitalize._

=Blush=, _n._ Bloom, color, reddening, carnation, complexion; shame,
confusion, guiltiness.

ANT. _Pallor; innocence, purity, unconsciousness; boldness, effrontery._

=Bluster.= Storm, rage, insult, roar, swagger, vaunt, boast.

ANT. _Cringe, whine, whimper._

=Boast.= Vaunt, brag, swagger, magnify, make much of, swell, bluster,
triumph, glory, vapor.

ANT. _Whine, cringe; minimize, apologize._

=Bodily.= Corporeally; completely, wholly, altogether, entirely,
collectively, unitedly.

ANT. _Spiritually, ghostly; piecemeal, partially, gradually,
fragmentarily._

=Body.= Material _or_ physical substance; carcass, corpse; trunk, stem,
bulk, main part; person, individual, mortal, creature, being; company,
society, corporation; system; consistency, substance; ashes, form, dust,
frame, remains, clay.

ANT. _Intellect, intelligence, soul, spirit, mind; branch, limb; world,
universe; mass, conglomeration._

=Boil.= Bubble, rage, effervesce, explode, fume.

ANT. _Calm, subside, cool, recover._

=Boisterous.= Loud, unrestrained, stormy, noisy, furious, violent,
clamorous.

ANT. _Quiet, silent, unostentatious, mild, gentle, peaceful, calm,
serene, self-possessed._

=Bold.= Courageous, fearless, adventurous, brave, intrepid, dauntless,
audacious, daring, valiant.

ANT. _Timorous, fearful, retiring, shy, bashful._

=Bolster.= Support, prop, help, sustain, aid, buoy, patch, defend,
maintain.

ANT. _Depress, fail, relax._

=Bombast.= Bluster, pomposity, fustian, braggadocio, rhodomontade.

ANT. _Modesty, humility, veracity, moderation, temperance._

=Bond.= Tie, fastening, manacle, fetter; compact, obligation, security.

ANT. _Option, freedom, parole, honor, discretion._

=Bondage.= Servitude, slavery, imprisonment, captivity, incarceration,
subjection, serfdom, confinement, thraldom.

ANT. _Liberty, freedom, manumission, independence._

=Bondsman.= Slave, serf, captive, vassal, prisoner.

ANT. _Freeman, gentleman, master, lord._

=Bonny.= Fair, pretty, pleasant, handsome, shapely, buxom.

ANT. _Homely, ugly, unseemly, deformed, ill-favored._

=Bonus.= Premium, douceur, boon, benefit.

ANT. _Fine, penalty, discount, mulct._

=Booby.= Dunce, idiot, numskull.

ANT. _Wiseacre, solon, oracle._

=Bookish.= Pedantic, studious, learned, erudite, educated.

ANT. _Illiterate, ignorant._

=Boor.= Rustic, clown, lout, peasant, countryman, plowman, swain,
bumpkin.

ANT. _Gentleman, courtier._

=Boorish.= Rude, rustic, clownish, loutish, ungainly, awkward, coarse,
rough, gawky.

ANT. _Polite, civil, polished, urbane, courtly, affable, gracious._

=Bootless.= Useless, unavailing, unprofitable, profitless, vain.

ANT. _Effectual, profitable, useful, effective._

=Booty.= Plunder, prey, spoil, pillage, loot.

ANT. _Restitution, fine, forfeiture, confiscation, penalty._

=Border.= Edge, limit, boundary, brink, rim, verge, enclosure, confine,
band.

ANT. _Land, tract, interior, center, space, substance._

=Bore.= Pierce, perforate, penetrate, drill; weary, plague, trouble,
vex, worry, annoy.

ANT. _Delight, gratify, please._

=Bosom.= Breast, heart, affection; hollow, depths, midst, inmost
recesses; retreat, retirement, quiet, privacy.

ANT. _Surface, exterior, expanse; manner, deportment, demeanor._

=Both.= Twain, two.

ANT. _Either, each, every, neither, none, not any, no one._

=Bother.= Worry, pester, perplex, harass, plague, tease, vex, molest,
annoy, excite.

ANT. _Aid, assist, calm, quiet, compose._

=Bottom.= Deep, profound, base, foot; foundation, basis, groundwork;
valley, meadow; ship, vessel; seat; grounds, lees, sediments; stamina,
power of endurance.

ANT. _Top, height, acme, apex, summit, crown, brow; surface._

=Bound=, _v._ Skip, leap, frisk, jump, spring; confine, limit,
circumscribe, terminate, restrict, restrain.

ANT. _Hobble, limp, crawl, creep, shamble; enlarge, open, extend, spread
out._

=Boundary.= Margin, limit, confines, border, bound, frontier, line,
marge, verge, termination, term, barrier, bourn, edge, enclosure,
landmark; circumference.

ANT. _Land, region, estate, interior, territory; center, citadel;
inside._

=Boundless.= Unlimited, illimitable, unbounded, measureless, infinite.

ANT. _Narrow, restricted, confined, circumscribed._

=Bountiful.= Liberal, generous, benevolent, unselfish, munificent.

ANT. _Miserly, selfish, stingy, niggardly._

=Bounty.= Liberality, gift, generosity, charity, benefaction, benignity,
benevolence, munificence, donation; premium, reward, bonus.

ANT. _Closeness, stinginess, niggardliness, miserliness._

=Bower.= Recess, arbor, retreat, alcove, summerhouse.

ANT. _Open place._

=Brag.= Boast, vaunt, bully, swagger.

ANT. _Cringe, whine, whimper._

=Braid.= Bind, weave, plait, tie.

ANT. _Unbind, dishevel._

=Branch.= Member, bough, limb, shoot, arm, twig, scion, offshoot,
ramification; section, department, division; article, part, portion;
tributary; derivative line, cognate stock.

ANT. _Trunk, stock, stem; race, family, house._

=Brand=, _v._ Denounce, mark, stigmatize, disgrace.

ANT. _Honor, decorate, distinguish._

=Brandish.= Flourish, wield, whisk, shake, wave.

ANT. _Suspend, stay, arrest._

=Bravado.= Boasting, bragging, bluster.

ANT. _Diffidence, reserve, concealment, modesty._

=Brave.= Fearless, heroic, undaunted, undismayed, adventurous, bold,
courageous, daring, dauntless, gallant, intrepid, valiant, venturesome,
doughty, chivalrous, chivalric, splendid, courteous.

ANT. _Afraid, cringing, fearful, shrinking, timid, timorous, frightened,
cowardly, faint-hearted, pusillanimous, churlish, discourteous,
fearsome._

=Brawny.= Muscular, strong, powerful, athletic, sinewy, herculean,
robust, stout.

ANT. _Weak, fragile, delicate, feeble, effeminate, lean._

=Breach.= Break, rupture, opening, fracture, flaw, fissure, rent;
violation, infringement, non-observance; quarrel, difference, variance,
dissension, schism, alienation.

ANT. _Integrity, wholeness, flawlessness, completeness; reconciliation,
healing; conservation, observance; inviolateness; union, fidelity,
amalgamation._

=Break.= Fracture, rend, part, sever, shatter, smash, shiver; weaken,
impair, enfeeble, enervate; tame; make bankrupt; dismiss, discard,
degrade, cashier; mitigate, assuage; interrupt, stop, cut short; open,
unfold; destroy, sunder, burst, rive, crack, crush, demolish, rupture,
split, transgress.

ANT. _Fasten, join, mend, secure, unite, weld, attach, bind, solder,
heal, piece, conjoin, rejoin; protect, conserve; encourage, strengthen,
preserve; observe, obey._

=Breast.= Bosom, heart, affection, conscience.

=Breathless.= Out of breath; lifeless, dead; exhausted, eager, absorbed,
attentive, fascinated; astonished, astounded, bewildered.

ANT. _Calm, collected, cool, composed; indifferent, uninterested._

=Breed=, _n._ Lineage, race, pedigree, progeny, stock, line, family,
extraction, strain.

ANT. _Ancestor, source, original, origin._

=Breed=, _v._ Bring forth, bear, beget, produce; nurture, foster,
nourish; discipline, educate, instruct, train, teach, school; occasion,
originate, generate, procreate, propagate, cause, evolve.

ANT. _Destroy, extirpate, stifle, extinguish._

=Breeding.= Discipline, instruction, education, nurture, training,
schooling; manners, deportment.

ANT. _Ill manners, misbehavior; ignorance, illiteracy._

=Brevity.= Shortness, terseness, conciseness, compression, pithiness,
succinctness, pointedness; abbreviation, abridgment.

ANT. _Prolixity, diffuseness, verbosity, length, protraction,
elongation, extension, tediousness._

=Brew.= Concoct, compound, mix, hatch, foment, excite; prepare, collect,
gather, grow; threaten, impend; form.

ANT. _Disperse, break, spoil, mar, miscompound._

=Bridle=, _v._ Restrain, curb, control, govern, check; bristle, ruffle;
master, moderate, compress, repress.

ANT. _Relax, loosen, give vent, liberate, discharge; soothe, calm._

=Brief.= Short, concise, succinct.

ANT. _Long, tedious, diffuse._

=Bright.= Shining, resplendent, luminous, glowing, lustrous, beaming,
gleaming, glistening, blazing, flaming, flashing, radiant, ruddy,
refulgent, brilliant, dazzling, sparkling, scintillating, burnished;
lucid, clear, transparent, pellucid, lambent, cloudless, limpid;
glorious, famous, illustrious; intelligent, acute, discerning, keen,
ingenious; auspicious, promising, propitious, favorable, inspiring;
cheerful, merry, lively, happy, animated.

ANT. _Opaque, dull, dark, gloomy, black, ebon, shadowy, rayless,
sunless, murky, cloudy, overcast, pitchy, lurid; obscure, mysterious,
enigmatical, mystic, unintelligible, occult, recondite, abstruse,
cabalistic, transcendental; disheartening, discouraging, dismal,
cheerless; ignorant, unlettered, untaught, imbecile, rude, benighted;
foul, infamous, horrible, damnable, vile, infernal, wicked, sullen,
atrocious, dejected._

=Brilliant.= Bright, radiant, flashing, lustrous, glorious, luminous,
effulgent, beaming, sparkling; illustrious, distinguished, celebrated,
famous, renowned, eminent.

ANT. _Dark, dull, stupid, gloomy; notorious, infamous; obscure,
insignificant._

=Bring.= Bear, fetch, convey; conduct, guide, lead, attend, accompany,
convoy; obtain, gain, procure, produce; induce, prevail upon.

ANT. _Remove, export, send, exclude, debar, transport, abstract,
subtract._

=Brisk.= Lively, quick, vivacious, active, alert, animated, prompt,
sprightly, nimble, spry, agile.

ANT. _Slow, heavy, dull, sluggish, indolent, inactive, unenergetic,
stagnant._

=Bristling.= Full, crowded, swarming, stocked, multifarious,
multitudinous; bristly, standing on end like bristles; ruffled,
roughened, corrugated, bespined; bridled, angered, offended.

ANT. _Smooth, soothed, allayed; prone; bare, nude, scant, devoid,
vacant._

=Brittle.= Fragile, crumbling, shivery, frail, easily broken.

ANT. _Tough, stout, strong, hardy._

=Broach.= Open, pierce, tap; suggest, hint, approach, break; utter,
publish, proclaim, give out; originate, propound.

ANT. _Repress, cork, bottle, secrete, conceal, hide._

=Broad.= Wide; large, ample, extensive, vast, spacious, capacious;
liberal, tolerant, free, hospitable; spread, diffused, open; gross,
vulgar, indecent, coarse.

ANT. _Narrow; contracted, restricted, confined, limited; prejudiced,
illiberal, bigoted, reserved; veiled, enigmatical, shrouded, shaded;
refined, delicate, sketchy; specific, pointed._

=Broil.= Affray, quarrel, contention.

=Brook.= Tolerate, bear, suffer, endure, abide, submit to, undergo,
permit.

ANT. _Resist, resent, reject._

=Brotherhood.= Fraternity, fellowship, association, sodality, society.

=Browbeat.= Bully, intimidate, bulldoze, overawe.

ANT. _Rally, support._

=Bruise.= Pommel, crush, squeeze, break, pound, batter, deface.

ANT. _Heal, soothe._

=Brunt.= Shock, attack, impulse, onslaught, onset, assault.

ANT. _Repulse, resistance, endurance._

=Brutal.= Brutish, animal, beastly, bestial; savage, ferocious, cruel,
harsh, uncivil, rude, rough, gruff, impolite, brusque; sensual, carnal.

ANT. _Humane, self-controlled, civilized, enlightened, elevated, noble,
refined, intelligent, grand._

=Bubble.= Toy, trifle, fancy, conceit, dream, vision, froth, trash.

ANT. _Prize, treasure, reality, substance, jewel, good, advantage._

=Buffoon.= Wag, clown, jester, mountebank, harlequin, droll, punch,
fool.

ANT. _Wit, genius, pedant, philosopher._

=Build.= Make, form, shape, figure, model; construct, erect, raise.

ANT. _Demolish, overthrow, destroy._

=Building.= Architecture, edifice, structure, fabric, pile, erection.

ANT. _Ruin, demolition, dilapidation, dismantlement._

=Bulk.= Magnitude, size, volume, mass; greatness, amplitude,
massiveness; majority, major part, most, principal part; dimension.

ANT. _Portion, section, atom, particle; diminution, tenuity,
contraction, dismemberment, disintegration._

=Bulwark.= Rampart, fortress, fortification, stronghold, intrenchment,
bastion, parapet, citadel.

ANT. _Siege, bombardment, cannonade, boarding, storming._

=Bungler.= Botcher, clown, fumbler, clumsy workman, novice.

ANT. _Adept, adroit, master, artist, proficient workman, professor._

=Buoy=, _v._ Float, support, sustain; elevate, inspire, assure, animate,
cheer.

ANT. _Sink, drown, depress, swamp; crush, betray, fail, deject,
overcome._

=Buoyant.= Light; cheerful, hopeful, sprightly, vivacious, joyous,
blithesome, jocund, sportive, jubilant, elastic, floating.

ANT. _Heavy, dejected, depressed, moody, joyless, cheerless,
desponding._

=Burden.= Load, weight; cargo, freight; capacity, tonnage: impediment,
incubus, grievance, trial, trouble, affliction, sorrow; chorus, refrain;
topic, drift, tenor, point, substance.

ANT. _Ease, lightness; facility, airiness, light-heartedness;
consolation, assuagement, alleviation, liberation, mitigation._

=Burial.= Interment, sepulture, entombment, burying.

ANT. _Exhumation, disinterment._

=Burlesque.= Parody, travesty, caricature, ridicule, farce.

ANT. _Classic, history, fact._

=Burn.= Char, consume, cremate, scorch, set on fire, singe, ignite,
incinerate, kindle, blaze, cauterize, glow, smolder.

ANT. _Smother, stifle, subdue, extinguish, cool, put out; subside,
glimmer, lower, pale._

=Burnish.= Brighten, polish, make to glisten, glaze, gloss.

ANT. _Dull, bedim, cloud, scratch, abrade._

=Burst.= Break, open, explode, blow up, rend, split, crack, discharge,
shatter, disrupt.

ANT. _Cohere, hold, stand, stick together, adhere._

=Bury.= Inter, cover up, entomb, inearth, inhume, inurn; shroud,
conceal, secrete, hide; immure, confine; cancel, compose, hush, cover
with oblivion.

ANT. _Resurrect, exhume, disinter, excavate, expose, resuscitate;
publish, announce, advertise._

=Business.= Employment, craft, trade, commerce, handicraft, traffic,
transaction, work, vocation, job, affairs, avocation, profession,
occupation, calling, concern, duty, office, interest.

ANT. _Stagnation, leisure, inactivity._

=Bustle.= Activity, stir, commotion, excitement, haste, hurry, energy,
eagerness, flurry.

ANT. _Idleness, inactivity, vacation, stagnation, quiet, indolence,
indifference, unconcern._

=Busy.= Engaged, employed, occupied; diligent, industrious, active,
working, sedulous; brisk, stirring, bustling, agile, spry, nimble;
meddling, officious.

ANT. _Idle, lazy, indolent, slothful._

=But.= Save, except, furthermore, barely, besides, however, just, only,
notwithstanding, though, unless, yet, still, merely, nevertheless,
provided, moreover.

=Buxom.= Bonny, blithe, shapely.

ANT. _Lean, slender, ill-shaped._

=Buy.= Purchase, bargain, acquire; bribe, corrupt, pervert, suborn,
subsidize.

ANT. _Sell, hawk, retail, vend._

=By.= Through, with; at, on; from, according to; near, close by; past;
along, over; before, in the sight of, in the name of; per, at.




                                   C


=Cabal.= Confederacy, conspiracy, conclave, combination, faction, crew,
junto, gang, coterie, plot, political intrigue, league.

=Cadaverous.= Bloodless, pallid, pale, wan, ghastly, deathlike, ashy.

ANT. _Rosy, blushing, sanguine, incarnadine._

=Cage=, _v._ Imprison, immure, confine, incarcerate.

ANT. _Liberate, free, dismiss, unbar._

=Caitiff.= Rascal, miscreant, villain, wretch, coward, sneak, traitor,
scoundrel, vagabond.

ANT. _Gentleman, patriot, philanthropist._

=Cajole.= Coax, wheedle, flatter, fawn upon, blandish; deceive, entrap,
beguile, inveigle, impose upon.

ANT. _Scold, chide, warn._

=Calamitous.= Disastrous, unfortunate, unlucky, adverse, untoward,
deplorable, ruinous, inauspicious, wretched, distressing, grievous,
ill-starred, troublous, hapless, ill-omened.

ANT. _Fortunate, auspicious, felicitous, propitious, favorable,
advantageous._

=Calamity.= Disaster, misfortune, catastrophe, mishap, trial, trouble,
affliction, adversity, distress, hardship, ill luck, visitation.

ANT. _Blessing, boon, advantage, good fortune, benefaction._

=Calculate.= Number, reckon, sum up, count, compute, account, estimate,
enumerate, rate; consider, deem, apportion, investigate.

ANT. _Guess, risk, chance, conjecture, stake._

=Calculating.= Wary, cautious, scheming, crafty, cool, hard, selfish;
careful, circumspect, sagacious, farsighted.

ANT. _Shortsighted, improvident, rash, careless._

=Calculation.= Reckoning, computation; expectation, anticipation,
prospect; foresight, forethought, caution, wariness, discretion,
prudence, deliberation.

ANT. _Omission, carelessness, imprudence, indiscretion,
inconsideration._

=Caliber.= Diameter, gage, capacity; faculty, scope, talent, ability,
gifts, parts, endowment.

ANT. _Smallness, thinness; imbecility, incapacity, puerility._

=Call.= Cry, bellow, clamor, ejaculate, scream, roar, shout, shriek,
bawl, yell, exclaim, vociferate; invite, summon, send for, bid;
assemble, convene, muster; elect, ordain, appoint; invoke, appeal to.

ANT. _Be silent, hush, list, listen, harken, be still; ignore; disperse;
disdain, defy._

=Calm.= Composed, peaceful, placid, quiet, still, tranquil,
self-possessed, serene, undisturbed, dispassionate, sedate, collected,
imperturbable, unruffled.

ANT. _Frantic, frenzied, passionate, furious, raging, stormy, violent,
boisterous, agitated, excited, fierce, turbulent, wild, heated,
wrathful, disturbed._

=Calumniate.= Slander, traduce, defame, vilify, revile, asperse.

ANT. _Praise, commend, vindicate, laud, honor, eulogize; shield._

=Calumny.= Slander, aspersion, defamation, detraction, abuse, obloquy.

ANT. _Vindication, justification; eulogy, panegyric._

=Camp.= Encampment, bivouac.

=Cancel.= Obliterate, scratch out, erase, efface, expunge, cross off;
abolish, abrogate, nullify, annul, revoke, rescind, make void, repeal.

ANT. _Confirm, enact, perpetuate, approve, enforce, uphold, sustain,
maintain, establish, record, write._

=Candid.= Honest, open, straightforward, transparent, unbiased, artless,
frank, guileless, ingenuous, naive, sincere, impartial, innocent,
unprejudiced, aboveboard, simple, truthful, unsophisticated, fair.

ANT. _Deceitful, designing, foxy, sharp, shrewd, crafty, artful, sly,
tricky, subtle, adroit, cunning, insincere, diplomatic, intriguing,
wily._

=Candidate.= Aspirant, solicitant, petitioner, canvasser, claimant,
solicitor.

ANT. _Non-competitor; resigner, abandoner, abjurer._

=Canvass.= Debate, discuss, dispute, agitate; examine, investigate,
scrutinize, sift, study, consider; solicit votes from, apply for.

ANT. _Admit, pass, misexamine, allow, ignore, disregard._

=Capability.= Capacity, ability, skill, power, competency, efficiency,
caliber, force, faculty, scope, brains, talent.

ANT. _Dulness, inability, inaptitude, difficulty, awkwardness._

=Capacity.= Space, magnitude, volume, dimensions, extent, size, tonnage,
caliber; faculty, gift, talent, genius, competency, capability,
discernment, cleverness, skill, aptitude; sphere, office, province,
character, function.

ANT. _Restriction, narrowness, contractedness, incapacity; incompetency,
inefficiency, inability._

=Capital=, _n._ Metropolis; large letter; stock, sum invested; head of a
column _or_ pillar; mental, physical, _or_ financial resources.

=Capital=, _a._ Chief, principal, essential, leading, cardinal; fatal,
forfeiting life; excellent, prime, first-class, first-rate, consummate,
high, important.

ANT. _Subordinate, inferior, unimportant, minor; defective, mean._

=Capitulate.= Surrender, yield, submit, stipulate.

ANT. _Resist, contend, struggle._

=Caprice.= Vagary, freak, whim, fancy, crotchet.

ANT. _Purpose, plan, determination, conviction, seriousness._

=Capricious.= Wayward, fanciful, freakish, whimsical, inconstant,
uncertain, fitful, fickle, changeable.

ANT. _Firm, inflexible, unswerving, constant, decided, serious._

=Captious.= Carping, hypercritical, censorious; crabbed, snappish,
touchy, cross, snarling, acrimonious, contentious; insidious, ensnaring.

ANT. _Appreciative, commendatory, complimentary, encouraging,
flattering, laudatory, approving._

=Captivate.= Charm, enchant, fascinate, enamor, bewitch, please highly,
lead captive, win, catch.

ANT. _Disenchant, disillusionize; disgust._

=Captivity.= Thraldom, confinement, duress, imprisonment, bondage,
subjection, slavery, servitude, durance.

ANT. _Freedom, liberty, independence._

=Capture.= Seize, catch, arrest, apprehend, make captive; prize.

ANT. _Liberate, free, release; acquit._

=Care.= Anxiety, trouble, solicitude, concern, vigilance, worry, charge,
caution, attention, heed, forethought, management, perplexity,
watchfulness, wariness, precaution, oversight, prudence.

ANT. _Indifference, heedlessness, negligence, oversight, remissness,
slight, recklessness, disregard, carelessness, inattention._

=Career.= Course, line of achievement, passage, race, flight, procedure,
conduct, progress, active life, success.

=Careful.= Thoughtful, provident, considerate, reflective, heedful,
diligent, pensive, regardful, contemplative.

ANT. _Careless, thoughtless, improvident, unthinking, heedless,
inconsiderate, rash, wanton, idle, dreamy, trifling._

=Caress=, _v._ Embrace, fondle, kiss, pet, pamper, coddle, court,
flatter.

ANT. _Vex, tease, affront, annoy, provoke, persecute._

=Cargo.= Freight, load, goods, lading, consignment, merchandise.

=Caricature.= Imitation, mimicry, parody, travesty, burlesque,
exaggeration, extravaganza, takeoff, farce, monstrosity.

ANT. _Portraiture, resemblance, representation, reproduction._

=Carnage.= Massacre, bloodshed, slaughter, havoc, butchery.

ANT. _Deliverance, ransom, quarter, redemption._

=Carnal.= Sensual, fleshly, lustful, lascivious; natural, unregenerate,
earthly, temporal.

ANT. _Spiritual, ethereal, refined, pure, exalted, temperate,
self-controlled._

=Carnival.= Festival, revel, masquerade, rout.

ANT. _Fast, retirement, Lent, penance, mortification._

=Carol.= Sing, warble, chirp, twitter, chant, whistle, hum; hymn.

ANT. _Whine, lament, dirge, cry, croak, weep, groan, moan._

=Carousal.= Feast, festival, banquet, revel, debauch, wassail, orgies.

ANT. _Fast, abstinence, starvation; temperance, moderation;
self-denial._

=Carp.= Cavil, find fault, object to, pick flaws, challenge, censure,
hypercriticize.

ANT. _Concede, admit, compliment, approve, applaud, acquiesce, assent._

=Carpet.= Covering for floor; table _or_ board (_metaphorical_),
consideration, consultation.

ANT. _Shelf_ (metaphorical), _rejection, oblivion, disposal_.

=Carry.= Convey, move, transport, lift, bring, bear, transmit, support,
sustain, take; impel, urge, push forward; signify, infer, involve,
implicate.

ANT. _Drop, let go, throw down, fall under, shake off; retard, impede;
leave, be separate from._

=Case.= Box; covering, sheathe; state, condition, plight, predicament;
instance, example, occurrence; circumstance, event, contingency; suit,
action, process, trial, cause; question, subject of discussion; form,
inflection.

ANT. _Hypothesis, supposition, fancy, theory, conjecture;
generalization, principle, universality._

=Cash.= Coin, money, specie, currency, capital.

ANT. _Paper money, greenbacks, bills._

=Cast.= Hurl, throw, pitch, fling, drive, thrust, sling, toss; shed, lay
aside; calculate, compute, reckon; found, form; direct, turn; assign,
appoint, allot; impart, shed, diffuse, communicate.

ANT. _Raise, elevate, erect; accept, approve, retain, carry;
miscalculate; break, dismember, dissipate._

=Caste.= Grade, rank, order, lineage, dignity, respect.

ANT. _Abasement, degradation, disrepute, taboo, reproach, ostracism._

=Castigate.= Whip, flagellate, cane.

ANT. _Reward, encourage, caress, pat._

=Casual.= Accidental, incidental, fortuitous, chance, contingent.

ANT. _Regular, certain, fixed, ordinary, periodic, systematic._

=Casuistry.= Sophistry, fallacy, quibble; refinement.

ANT. _Reason, common sense, conscience._

=Catalogue.= List, register, index, enrolment, entry, record, roll,
inventory, schedule.

ANT. _Non-registration, obliteration, oblivion, forgetfulness;
non-entry, oversight, omission._

=Catastrophe.= Revolution, disaster, mishap, misfortune, calamity,
cataclysm, blow, visitation.

ANT. _Victory, triumph, benefit, ovation, success, felicitation,
blessing._

=Catch.= Grasp, seize, clutch, capture, clasp, secure, snatch, take,
arrest, ensnare, entrap, grip, lay hold; comprehend, apprehend,
understand.

ANT. _Lose, miss, fail of, let go, give up, release, restore._

=Categorical.= Plain, absolute, distinct, positive, declaratory,
affirmative.

ANT. _Obscure, ambiguous, dubious, hypothetical, contingent, mystical,
enigmatical._

=Category.= Class, division, order, rank; universal aspect, primitive
relation.

ANT. _Essence, truth, being, substance, nature._

=Causality.= Causation, potentiality, eventuality, operativeness.

ANT. _Counteractivity, barrenness, sterility; finality._

=Cause.= Agent, origin, source, creator, spring; reason, power;
designer, antecedent, originator, author, producer; condition,
principle.

ANT. _Effect, result, end, production, issue, accomplishment,
development, consequence, creation, fruit, event, outcome, outgrowth._

=Caution.= Care, heed, wariness, circumspection, forethought,
discretion; warning, admonition, advice, counsel.

ANT. _Temerity, heedlessness, unguardedness, improvidence, imprudence._

=Cavalier=, _a._ Arrogant, haughty, overbearing, insolent, disdainful.

ANT. _Courteous; subservient, servile; civil, polite._

=Cavil.= Carp, object, censure.

ANT. _Approve, allow, concede._

=Cavity.= Opening, gap, aperture, hole, fissure.

ANT. _Obstruction, filling._

=Cease.= End, finish, desist, leave off, quit, stop, refrain, abstain,
discontinue, pause, terminate.

ANT. _Begin, commence, continue, originate, inaugurate, start, set
going, set in operation._

=Celebrated.= Famous, renowned, distinguished, famed, illustrious,
eminent, glorious, notable, exalted.

ANT. _Obscure, unknown, unnotable, mean, insignificant, inconspicuous._

=Celebration.= Solemnization, observance, commemoration, laudation,
praise, commendation.

ANT. _Oblivion, desuetude, non-observance._

=Celebrity.= Fame, renown, reputation, glory, honor, repute, eminence,
distinction; person of note, “lion.”

ANT. _Obscurity, ignominy, disgrace, contempt, meanness; infamy;
oblivion._

=Celerity.= Rapidity, speed, haste, velocity, swiftness, fleetness,
despatch.

ANT. _Slowness, tardiness, inertness._

=Celestial.= Heavenly, angelic, supernal, ethereal, atmospheric,
immortal, seraphic, divine, godlike.

ANT. _Earthly, terrestrial; human, mortal; infernal._

=Censure.= Blame, disapproval, reproach, disapprobation, reprimand,
condemnation, remonstrance, rebuke.

ANT. _Praise, approval, eulogy, commendation, encouragement._

=Center.= Middle, midst.

ANT. _Perimeter, rim, bound, circumference, boundary._

=Central.= Convenient, medial, accessible.

ANT. _Remote, inaccessible, inconvenient._

=Centralize.= Concentrate, collect, localize.

ANT. _Disperse, distribute._

=Ceremonial=, _n._ Ritual, rites, formalities, etiquette.

=Ceremonial=, _a._ Ritualistic, formal, official, ministerial, pompous,
sumptuous, scenic, functional.

ANT. _Private, unostentatious, undramatic, unimposing, unassuming._

=Ceremonious.= Stately, lofty, courtly; formal, studied, punctilious;
prim, precise.

ANT. _Brusk, blunt, supercilious, plain, simple._

=Certain.= Sure, infallible, positive, undeniable, unfailing; assured,
fixed, regular, established; true, accurate, unmistakable.

ANT. _Dubious, irregular, undecided, doubtful, exceptional, casual._

=Certainty.= Assurance, conviction, confidence, positiveness.

ANT. _Hesitation, doubt, misgiving, conjecture, indecision._

=Certify.= Acknowledge, avow, declare, prove, inform, assure, attest.

ANT. _Disavow, misinform, disprove._

=Cessation.= Stop, pause, abeyance, suspension, lull, respite.

ANT. _Incessancy, continuity, continuance._

=Chafe.= Vex, irritate, gall, rub, chagrin, tease, worry, harass, annoy,
fret; rage, fume; nettle, exasperate, anger.

ANT. _Soothe, coax, calm, console, humor; submit, endure, succumb._

=Chaff.= Banter, badinage, nonsense, frivolity; refuse, trash.

ANT. _Sense, reason, pith, gist, seriousness, substance._

=Chagrin.= Humiliation, shame, mortification, confusion, discomposure,
dismay, disappointment.

ANT. _Delight, glory, exultation, triumph, rejoicing._

=Challenge=, _v._ Dare, brave, defy; demand, require, claim; object to,
take exceptions.

ANT. _Pass, allow, grant, concede, permit; retract, retreat._

=Champion.= Defender, protector, vindicator; hero, winner, chief,
victor, combatant.

ANT. _Renegade, traitor, deserter, coward; adversary, opponent._

=Chance.= Hazard, casualty, accident, luck, fortune.

ANT. _Law, sequence, purpose, design, intention, causation, certainty._

=Change=, _n._ Transformation, variation, transition, conversion,
innovation, diversion, novelty, variety, vicissitude, alteration,
transmutation.

ANT. _Fixity, identity, constancy, uniformity, firmness, permanence,
persistence, steadiness._

=Change=, _v._ Alter, transform, vary, turn, veer, shift, qualify,
modify, exchange, diversify, convert, metamorphose, substitute.

ANT. _Continue, endure, stay, hold, keep, retain, abide, remain,
persist._

=Changeless.= Stationary, undeviating, immovable, reliable, consistent.

ANT. _Fluctuating, vacillating, capricious, variable, plastic._

=Character.= Mark, figure, sign, symbol, emblem, letter; constitution,
nature, disposition, turn, cast, bent; temperament, moral qualities,
personality, traits, habits; person, individual; repute, reputation.

ANT. _Anonymousness; disrepute; vagueness; indefiniteness._

=Characteristic.= Attribute, peculiarity, trait, sign, indication, mark,
feature, distinction, singularity, property, idiosyncrasy.

ANT. _Nondescript, generality, miscellany, commonness._

=Charge=, _v._ Load, freight, burden; intrust; impute, ascribe; accuse,
impeach, incriminate, arraign, indict; command, order, require, bid;
attack, assault.

ANT. _Free, acquit, liberate, discharge._

=Charitable.= Benign, bountiful, liberal; lenient, mild, considerate.

ANT. _Selfish, harsh, exacting, revengeful, churlish, censorious._

=Charity.= Benevolence, liberality, bounty, generosity, philanthropy.

ANT. _Harshness, ill will, malignity, malevolence._

=Charlatan.= Quack, mountebank, impostor, pretender, humbug, cheat.

ANT. _Victim, dupe, gull._

=Charm.= Spell, incantation, enchantment; fascination, attraction,
allurement; witchery, sorcery, magic, necromancy.

ANT. _Fear, repulsion, disenchantment, disillusion._

=Chary.= Careful, cautious, wary; frugal, sparing, saving, reluctant.

ANT. _Liberal, lavish, profuse, extravagant._

=Chase.= Pursue, track, hunt, follow, prosecute; emboss, enchase.

ANT. _Flee, shun, elude, evade; abandon, relinquish._

=Chaste.= Pure, spotless, immaculate, modest, virtuous, simple, refined,
classic, elegant.

ANT. _Corrupt, impure, flashy, gaudy; coarse, inelegant._

=Chasten.= Discipline, chastise, subdue, afflict, punish, soften, try.

ANT. _Indulge, pamper, spoil, demoralize._

=Chattels.= Goods, wares, effects, furniture.

ANT. _Freehold._

=Cheap.= Common, inexpensive, mean, worthless, vile, paltry, low-priced,
poor, indifferent.

ANT. _Rare, costly, expensive, high, precious._

=Cheat=, _n._ Fraud, trick, artifice, swindle, deceit, fiction,
imposture.

ANT. _Truth, reality, fact, honesty, authenticity, certainty, openness,
sincerity._

=Check=, _v._ Restrain, curb, stop, bridle, hinder, impede, inhibit;
reprove, chide, reprimand, rebuke.

ANT. _License, indulge, allow, loose, liberate, abet, instigate._

=Cheer=, _n._ Gladness, joy, gaiety, mirth, merriment, cheerfulness,
happiness, hope, conviviality, plenty, hospitality.

ANT. _Gloom, dearth, sullenness, niggardliness, unsociableness._

=Cheerful.= Glad, lively, mirthful, animated, jocund, jolly, blithe,
buoyant, merry, joyous.

ANT. _Gloomy, dejected, unhappy, lifeless, dull, depressing, melancholy,
joyless, dispiriting._

=Cherish.= Foster, nurture, protect, shelter, treasure, comfort, cheer.

ANT. _Abandon, afflict, check, discourage._

=Chief=, _a._ Head, important, excellent, high, principal, consummate.

ANT. _Subordinate, minor, inferior._

=Chieftain.= Captain, commander, general, leader, chief.

ANT. _Vassal, minion, adherent, retainer, attendant, follower._

=Childish.= Puerile, weak, infantine; silly, foolish, trivial, trifling.

ANT. _Manly, strong, wise, sagacious; important, momentous._

=Chimerical.= Visionary, imaginary, unreal, dreamy, fanciful, fabulous.

ANT. _Real, actual, substantial, veritable._

=Chivalrous.= Knightly, gallant, gentlemanly, heroic, valiant, spirited.

ANT. _Dastardly, recreant, sneaking._

=Choice=, _n._ Option, preference, alternative, selection, election,
free will.

ANT. _Necessity, compulsion; refusal; force; fate, predestination._

=Choice=, _a._ Select, dainty, rare, valuable, cherished, exquisite,
precious.

ANT. _Common, ordinary, despicable, cheap, inferior._

=Choose.= Select, pick out, cull, prefer, elect.

ANT. _Cast away, reject, decline, refuse, leave, throw aside._

=Chronicle.= Annals, records, register, memorials, archives, history.

ANT. _Legend, romance, tradition._

=Cipher.= Zero, nothing, nonentity, naught; character, symbol, device,
monogram; secret character, private alphabet; nobody, person of no
account.

ANT. _Infinity; somebody, celebrity, star, notability, colossus._

=Circular.= Round, annular, spherical, ring-shaped.

ANT. _Linear, direct, straight._

=Circulate.= Move in a circle; diffuse, spread, disseminate, promulgate,
propagate, publish, notify; travel.

ANT. _Suppress, hush, cease, stagnate; center, monopolize, appropriate._

=Circumference.= Periphery, circuit, boundary, outline, enclosure.

ANT. _Center, interior._

=Circumlocution.= Verbosity, prolixity, wordiness, diffuseness,
periphrasis, redundance, tautology.

ANT. _Brevity, compression, condensation, shortness, succinctness,
terseness, compactness, conciseness, directness, plainness._

=Circumscribe.= Define, limit, delineate, enclose, confine, restrict.

ANT. _Distend, dilate, expand, amplify, enlarge, extend._

=Circumspect.= Cautious, wary, heedful, attentive, careful, prudent,
watchful, scrupulous, vigilant.

ANT. _Careless, reckless, incautious, heedless, unwary._

=Circumstance.= Event, situation, occurrence, position, detail,
incident, feature, accompaniment, particular, point, item, condition.

ANT. _Deed, case, transaction, business, affair._

=Cite.= Call, summon, name, select, refer to, quote, mention.

ANT. _Discard, dismiss, dispute, contradict, reject, challenge,
disprove._

=Citizen.= Inhabitant, dweller, townsman, burgher, resident, subject,
denizen.

ANT. _Foreigner, alien, exile, visitor, tramp, transient, tourist,
sight-seer._

=Civilization.= Culture, cultivation, refinement, amelioration,
humanization.

ANT. _Demoralization, savagery, barbarism, rudeness._

=Claim=, _n._ Assertion, requisition, demand, call; title, privilege,
right, pretension.

ANT. _Disclaimer, surrender, abjuration, waiver._

=Claim=, _v._ Demand, ask, require, call for, assert, insist, request,
maintain, pretend.

ANT. _Repudiate, waive, concede, forego, abjure._

=Clamor=, _n._ Noise, uproar, hubbub, outcry, vociferation, exclamation.

ANT. _Silence, reticence, acquiescence; repression, stifling._

=Clandestine.= Secret, private, furtive, stealthy, underhand, sly,
surreptitious, hidden.

ANT. _Open, aboveboard, sincere, frank._

=Class.= Company, grade, order, rank, caste, clan, circle, association,
club, clique, coterie, set.

=Classical.= Refined, elegant, polished, chaste, pure.

ANT. _Corrupt, barbarous, uncouth, debased, inelegant._

=Classification.= Grouping, disposition, arrangement, distribution,
category, genus, designation, order, species, nature, character;
homogeneity.

ANT. _Individuality, speciality, singularity, distinction,
heterogeneity._

=Clause.= Portion, section, passage, paragraph, stipulation, article,
chapter, provision.

ANT. _Document, instrument, writing._

=Clean=, _a._ Pure, neat, clear, spotless, cleansed, untarnished,
upright.

ANT. _Foul, impure, untidy, hampered, unclean._

=Cleanse.= Purify, wash, clean, disinfect, lave, scour, sponge, scrub,
sweep, wipe, rinse, dust, purge.

ANT. _Defile, pollute, stain, deprave, sully, taint, befoul,
contaminate, corrupt, vitiate._

=Clear=, _a._ Pure, bright, transparent, free, serene, unclouded,
obvious, manifest, pellucid, unadorned, plain, distinct, evident, lucid,
intelligible, explicit, straightforward, perspicuous.

ANT. _Mysterious, unintelligible, vague, opaque, foggy, dim, cloudy,
dubious, turbid, ambiguous._

=Clever.= Gifted, expert, capable, apt, bright, ingenious, quick-witted,
skilful, adroit, dexterous, intellectual, happy, smart, talented, keen,
knowing, intelligent, quick, sharp.

ANT. _Foolish, slow, stupid, idiotic, thickheaded, witless, bungling,
awkward, dull, ignorant, clumsy, senseless._

=Climax.= Acme, top, summit, culmination, height, consummation, zenith,
head.

ANT. _Base, floor, nadir, anticlimax, depth; bathos._

=Cling.= Stick, cleave, fasten, hold, adhere.

ANT. _Drop, relax, swerve, let go._

=Close.= Packed, condensed, compressed, narrow, restricted, solid;
secret, reserved; niggardly.

ANT. _Ample, wide, open, spacious, patent, public, advertised;
open-handed, free, liberal._

=Clownish.= Rude, rustic, boorish, awkward, clumsy, bucolic, cloddish.

ANT. _Polite, affable, civil, urbane._

=Clumsy.= Awkward, inexpert, uncouth, bungling, unskilful, unwieldly.

ANT. _Neat, skilful, clever, expert, adroit, dexterous, workmanlike._

=Coalesce.= Blend, mix, harmonize, unite, consolidate, combine, adhere.

ANT. _Disagree, sunder, separate, sever._

=Coalition.= League, union, alliance, confederacy, combination, compact,
amalgamation.

ANT. _Disruption, rebellion, disagreement, sedition, mutiny._

=Coarse.= Of large fibers, crude, rough, gross; indecent, indelicate,
unrefined, unpolished, vulgar, common, ordinary.

ANT. _Fine, choice, delicate, gentle._

=Coax.= Wheedle, flatter, cajole, fawn, allure, seduce, circumvent.

ANT. _Coerce, impel, drive, intimidate._

=Coerce.= Impel, restrain, inhibit, force, compel, drive, check,
intimidate.

ANT. _Persuade, coax, permit, urge, induce, tempt._

=Coexistent.= Contemporary, concurrent, coincident, simultaneous.

ANT. _Preceding or succeeding._

=Cogent.= Forcible, powerful, effective, irresistible, convincing,
conclusive, persuasive, potent, urgent.

ANT. _Weak, feeble, powerless, ineffectual._

=Cogitate.= Meditate, think, reflect, consider, ponder, contemplate.

ANT. _Dream, idle, wish._

=Cognizance.= Knowledge, observation, notice, recognition, experience.

ANT. _Ignorance, oversight, neglect._

=Coherent.= Compact, consecutive, close, logical, consistent.

ANT. _Rambling, loose, discursive, aberrant._

=Coincidence.= Chance, fortuity, harmony, agreement, casualty,
concurrence, contemporaneousness.

ANT. _Design, purpose, asynchronism, anachronism, difference._

=Cold.= Frigid, chilly, frosty, icy, polar, wintry; dull, lifeless,
unimpassioned, sluggish, apathetic, indifferent, spiritless.

ANT. _Hot, warm, ardent, impassioned, fiery, burning, fervid, vehement,
passionate._

=Colleague.= Associate, coadjutor, collaborator, helper, companion,
partner, assistant, ally, confederate.

ANT. _Opponent, rival, antagonist, competitor._

=Collect.= Gather, glean, amass, garner, muster, congregate, assemble,
convoke, accumulate.

ANT. _Distribute, dispense, divide, assort, deal._

=Collision.= Clash, shock, impact, concussion, encounter, contact,
opposition, conflict.

ANT. _Divergence; concord, harmony, agreement, coincidence, concert,
unity, amity, unison._

=Colloquy.= Dialogue, conversation, talk, discourse, consultation,
conference.

ANT. _Babel, tumult, outcry, clamor; silence, taciturnity._

=Collusion.= Connivance, accompliceship, confederacy.

ANT. _Frustration, betrayal, exposure._

=Color.= Hue, tint, tinge, shade, complexion; pigment, paint; pretense,
speciousness, varnish, appearance, semblance, excuse, makeshift.

ANT. _Paleness; transparency, openness._

=Combat.= Conflict, encounter, battle, struggle, contest, contention.

ANT. _Truce, surrender, mediation._

=Combination.= Association, connection, union; alliance, league;
mixture, compound.

ANT. _Division, disruption, analysis, dissolution._

=Comfortable.= Agreeable, satisfactory, pleasant, convenient,
commodious, snug, genial.

ANT. _Miserable, distressed, forlorn, wretched, cheerless._

=Comic.= Laughable, droll, funny, comical, farcical, ludicrous,
ridiculous.

ANT. _Serious, solemn, grave, tragic, melancholy._

=Command.= Order, direct, bid, instruct, charge, enjoin; rule, govern.

ANT. _Beg, petition, supplicate, entreat; obey, yield, comply._

=Commemorate.= Celebrate, observe, perpetuate.

ANT. _Forget, abolish, ignore._

=Commence.= Begin, start, inaugurate, undertake.

ANT. _Finish, conclude, terminate._

=Commend.= Approve, encourage, applaud, praise.

ANT. _Blame, condemn, censure, denounce._

=Comment.= Remark, observe, explain, note, expound, interpret,
illustrate.

ANT. _Confuse, obscure, mystify, confound, misrepresent._

=Commerce.= Trade, traffic, business, exchange.

ANT. _Embargo, inactivity, boycott._

=Commit.= Assign, confide, trust, relegate, entrust, consign.

ANT. _Omit, let pass, disregard, misconsign._

=Commodious.= Ample, spacious, convenient, comfortable, suitable.

ANT. _Narrow, cramped, ill-contrived._

=Commodity.= Staple, ware, stock, produce, article.

ANT. _Drug, refuse._

=Common.= Ordinary, habitual, everyday, familiar, frequent; coarse,
vulgar, mean, low.

ANT. _Exceptional, scarce, refined, rare._

=Commotion.= Excitement, disturbance, agitation, turmoil, tumult,
disorder.

ANT. _Quiet, tranquillity, calm, subsidence, pacification._

=Communicate.= Divulge, impart, disclose, tell, announce, publish.

ANT. _Secrete, suppress, conceal, withhold, reserve; repress; disavow._

=Communion.= Fellowship, intercourse, participation.

ANT. _Alienation, exclusion, deprivation, ostracism._

=Community.= Aggregation, society, commonwealth, neighborhood;
fraternity, similarity, sympathy, homogeneity.

ANT. _Hostility, animosity, heterogeneity._

=Commute.= Exchange, replace, barter, compensate, mitigate, modify,
lessen, diminish.

ANT. _Disallow; charge; increase, enlarge._

=Compact=, _n._ Agreement, bond, contract, treaty, covenant.

ANT. _Promise, intention._

=Compact=, _a._ Dense, close, solid, firm, compressed; concise, terse,
pithy, short, brief, laconic, compendious, succinct, sententious.

ANT. _Diffuse; sparse, straggling; broadspread, unshapely; prolix,
verbose._

=Companion.= Associate, partner, mate, comrade, colleague.

ANT. _Rival, antagonist, adversary._

=Companionable.= Sociable, pleasant, affable, genial, friendly,
agreeable.

ANT. _Reserved, haughty, distant, cold, solitary, inaccessible._

=Company.= Concourse, gathering, crowd, throng, meeting, multitude,
assembly, conclave, conference, congregation, convention, convocation.

ANT. _Privacy, retirement, solitude, dispersion, loneliness, seclusion._

=Compare.= Collate, estimate, declare similar, liken, parallel.

ANT. _Contrast, disconnect, pit, distinguish._

=Compass.= Surround, enclose; effect, achieve, consummate, complete.

ANT. _Expand, liberate; fail, bungle, mismanage._

=Compassion.= Pity, sympathy, condolence, kindness, clemency, mercy.

ANT. _Cruelty, antipathy, retaliation, vindictiveness._

=Compatible.= Consistent, accordant, congruous, congenial, harmonious.

ANT. _Hostile, adverse, impossible, destructive, contradictory._

=Compel.= Force, oblige, make necessary, coerce, constrain, necessitate.

ANT. _Hinder, prevent, delay, block, hamper, encumber._

=Compensation.= Recompense, reward, requital, satisfaction, reparation,
amends, indemnification.

ANT. _Damage, injury, deprivation._

=Compete.= Contend, rival, strive, struggle.

ANT. _Share, participate._

=Competence.= Ability, capableness; sufficiency, enough, adequacy.

ANT. _Inability, weakness; poverty, want, indigence._

=Competition.= Rivalry, emulation, contest.

ANT. _Alliance, co-partnership._

=Complacent.= Pleased, satisfied, contented, amiable, pleasant, affable.

ANT. _Morose, austere, unmannerly._

=Complain.= Murmur, grumble, remonstrate, find fault, repine, lament,
grieve, expostulate.

ANT. _Approve, commend, applaud, congratulate, rejoice._

=Complement.= Fulfilment, totality, counterpart, supply, correlative.

ANT. _Deficit, abatement, deficiency._

=Complete=, _a._ Perfect, finished, total, whole, entire; concluded,
consummated, ended; adequate, exhaustive, thorough.

ANT. _Partial, inadequate, imperfect, unfinished._

=Complex.= Confused, involved, mixed, entangled, complicated, composite,
manifold, mingled, intricate, obscure.

ANT. _Direct, obvious, plain, uniform, simple, homogeneous, unraveled._

=Complexion.= Face, feature, appearance, look, hue, character,
indication.

ANT. _Heart, core; reticence, concealment, inexpression._

=Compliance.= Yielding, submission, acquiescence, docility, obedience.

ANT. _Resistance, repulsion, refusal._

=Compliment.= Flattery, praise, homage, commendation, encomium.

ANT. _Insult, contempt, discourtesy._

=Complimentary.= Commendatory, flattering, laudatory.

ANT. _Disparaging, abusive, defamatory, denunciatory._

=Component.= Constituent, factor, element, ingredient.

ANT. _Compound, entirety, sum, aggregate._

=Comport.= Conduct, behave, demean; accord, agree, harmonize.

ANT. _Contrast, militate, differ; misdemean, misconduct._

=Compose.= Compile, construct, constitute; soothe, allay, calm; write.

ANT. _Analyze, dissect; irritate, excite; criticize._

=Composition.= Formation, making; compound, mixture; arrangement, union,
combination; writing, invention; agreement, compromise.

ANT. _Examination, analysis, criticism; disturbance; segregation._

=Composure.= Tranquillity, calm, repose, self-possession, serenity.

ANT. _Restlessness, perturbation._

=Compound=, _n._ Mixture, combination, amalgamation, coalescence,
synthesis.

ANT. _Analysis, dissolution, resolution._

=Comprehend.= Understand, conceive, grasp; include, enclose, embrace.

ANT. _Misunderstand, misconstrue; except, exclude._

=Comprehension.= Conception, understanding, perception, apprehension,
capacity, intellect, reason, mind, intelligence.

ANT. _Idiocy, nescience, misunderstanding, misconception._

=Comprehensive.= Ample, wide, inclusive, extensive, capacious,
compendious.

ANT. _Narrow, shallow, restricted._

=Compress.= Condense, squeeze, contract, epitomize, abridge.

ANT. _Expand, diffuse, dilate._

=Comprise.= Include, involve, contain, comprehend, embrace, imply.

ANT. _Except, bar out, omit, reject._

=Compromise.= Adjust, arbitrate, settle; engage, pledge, commit;
implicate, involve, endanger.

ANT. _Contend, fight; repudiate, disallow; exonerate, extricate._

=Compulsion.= Force, coercion, constraint, control.

ANT. _Coaxing, persuasion, inducement._

=Compunction.= Regret, remorse, contrition, penitence.

ANT. _Assurance, self-complacency, satisfaction._

=Compute.= Number, calculate, reckon, count; value, estimate, appraise.

ANT. _Guess, conjecture, surmise._

=Comrade.= Companion, compeer, colleague, associate, partner, friend.

ANT. _Opponent; stranger, alien._

=Concatenation.= Connection, continuity; series, chain, succession.

ANT. _Intermission, severing, disconnection._

=Concave.= Hollow, depressed, excavated.

ANT. _Convex, protuberant, tumular._

=Conceal.= Hide, suppress, secrete, disguise.

ANT. _Reveal, expose, make manifest, lay bare, confess, publish,
divulge._

=Concede.= Surrender, admit, resign, yield, allow.

ANT. _Refuse, claim, contend, contradict, deny, contest._

=Conceit.= Notion, whim, vagary, idea, abstraction, affectation,
imagination.

ANT. _Reality, fact, substance; simplicity, humility._

=Conceited.= Egoistical, opinionated, vain.

ANT. _Simple, unassuming, unaffected._

=Conceive.= Imagine, apprehend, believe, design, think, understand.

ANT. _Express, produce, execute._

=Concentrate.= Convene, assemble, congregate, muster, centralize.

ANT. _Scatter, disperse, dispense, dismiss._

=Concern.= Interest, anxiety, solicitude; affair, matter, institution.

ANT. _Indifference, carelessness, disregard._

=Concerning.= About, regarding, in relation to, respecting, in respect
to, relative to, of.

ANT. _Disregarding, omitting._

=Concert.= Agreement, harmony, concord, concordance, combination, union,
association.

ANT. _Opposition, disagreement, discord._

=Concession.= Surrender, grant, boon, acknowledgment, admission.

ANT. _Refusal, denial, withdrawal._

=Conciliate.= Win, gain, pacify, reconcile, propitiate.

ANT. _Alienate, irritate, estrange, lose, antagonize._

=Concise.= Succinct, condensed, terse, pregnant, pointed, brief, short,
laconic.

ANT. _Prolix, verbose, diffuse, discursive, rambling, pointless._

=Conclave.= Assembly, synod, cabinet, council, bureau.

ANT. _Throng, mob, populace, concourse, crowd._

=Conclude.= Close, end, terminate, finish; decide, determine.

ANT. _Begin, commence, undertake, initiate; prolong, protract._

=Conclusion.= End, termination, finale, finis.

ANT. _Commencement, beginning, initiation._

=Conclusive.= Final, decisive, positive, definitive, indisputable.

ANT. _Dubious, vague, uncertain, problematical, theoretical,
indeterminate._

=Concoct.= Brew, prepare, compound, mix.

ANT. _Spoil, upset, overbrew._

=Concoction.= Compound, brew, mixture; scheme, fiction.

ANT. _Rawness, crudity; simplicity._

=Concomitant.= Attending, coincident, attendant, synchronous.

ANT. _Antecedent; diverse, unconnected; subsequent._

=Concord.= Harmony, agreement, friendship, unanimity, accord.

ANT. _Variance, animosity, discord._

=Concourse.= Assembly, throng, crowd, mob, assemblage, gathering,
multitude.

ANT. _Conclave, cabal, cabinet; desert, solitude._

=Concrete.= Solid, firm, compact; complex, conglomerate; individualized,
specific, particular.

ANT. _Loose, shifting, yielding, unresisting; abstract, general._

=Concur.= Approve, harmonize, agree; help, combine, conspire.

ANT. _Disagree, dissent, part, differ, disapprove, separate._

=Concussion.= Collision, encounter, crash, impact, percussion.

ANT. _Inter-divergence; escape; tangency; failure, missing._

=Condemn.= Blame, censure, denounce, convict, sentence, reprove, doom.

ANT. _Acquit, exonerate, absolve, pardon, justify, praise, approve._

=Condense.= Concentrate, abridge, shorten.

ANT. _Expand, amplify, enlarge._

=Condescend.= Deign, vouchsafe, stoop.

ANT. _Scorn, spurn, disdain._

=Condescension.= Graciousness, favor.

ANT. _Arrogance, haughtiness, pride._

=Condign.= Adequate, deserved, merited, suitable, meet, just.

ANT. _Unmerited, inadequate; excessive or scant._

=Condiment.= Sauce, seasoning, preserve, pickle, relish, appetizer.

=Condition.= Situation, case, circumstances, plight; rank, estate,
grade; proviso, consideration, stipulation.

ANT. _Concession, adaptation; relation, dependence._

=Conditionally.= Provided, provisionally, hypothetically, contingently.

ANT. _Absolutely, positively, categorically._

=Condole.= Console, commiserate, sympathize.

ANT. _Congratulate, rally, exhilarate._

=Condone.= Pardon, overlook, forgive.

ANT. _Atone, expiate, satisfy._

=Conduce.= Subserve, promote, forward, advance, contribute to, aid.

ANT. _Defeat; counteract, neutralize._

=Conduct.= Lead, direct, guide, convoy, escort; command, govern; manage,
regulate; rule, superintend.

ANT. _Mislead; mismanage; follow._

=Confection.= Candy, cake, condiment, concoction, sweetmeat.

=Confederacy, Confederation.= Alliance, league, treaty, union,
coalition, federation, compact.

ANT. _Secession, disruption, disunion._

=Conference.= Discourse, conversation, talk; interview, colloquy,
parley, consultation; convention, convocation, meeting.

ANT. _Silence; monologue; dispersion._

=Confess.= Acknowledge, admit, disclose, own, allow, grant, concede,
avow.

ANT. _Deny, conceal, repudiate, disavow, hide, dissemble._

=Confession.= Admission, avowal, acknowledgment; creed, doctrines,
tenets, catechism, subscription.

ANT. _Heresy, apostasy, protest, refutation, renunciation, abjuration._

=Confide.= Trust, rely, lean, hope, depend, believe, put confidence in.

ANT. _Doubt, mistrust, disbelieve, disprove, despair of._

=Confident.= Assured, sure, positive, certain; bold, presumptuous,
impudent, sanguine.

ANT. _Dubious, doubtful, undecided, vacillating._

=Confidential.= Intimate, secret, private; trusty, faithful.

ANT. _Public, patent, open; treacherous, insidious, traitorous._

=Configuration.= Outline, shape, form, contour.

ANT. _Shapelessness, indeterminateness; distortion, deformity._

=Confine=, _v._ Limit, bound, imprison, restrict, circumscribe, enclose.

ANT. _Widen, expand, liberate, unfasten, loosen, extend, dilate._

=Confirm.= Sanction, uphold, assure, establish, strengthen,
substantiate, settle, corroborate.

ANT. _Shatter, weaken, upset, annul, abrogate, cancel, destroy, shake._

=Confiscate.= Forfeit, seize, escheat, condemn, sequestrate.

ANT. _Release, restore, refund._

=Conflagration.= Fire, arson, ignition, incendiarism, combustion.

ANT. _Extinction, quenching; smoldering._

=Conflict.= Contest, battle, struggle, encounter; clashing,
interference, disagreement, discord.

ANT. _Amity, reconciliation, pacification, arbitration._

=Conform.= Agree, consent, harmonize, comply, correspond, comport.

ANT. _Dissent, disagree; antagonize, secede; vary, differ._

=Confound.= Confuse, perplex, bewilder, mystify; surprise, astonish,
astound, startle; destroy, ruin, overwhelm; disconcert, abash, shame.

ANT. _Clear, set right, arrange, enlighten; save, protect; calm,
console, soothe, restore._

=Confront.= Oppose, threaten, encounter, challenge, face, intimidate.

ANT. _Encourage, abet, countenance._

=Confuse.= Mingle, confound; derange, disturb, perplex, embarrass,
obscure, mortify.

ANT. _Arrange; relieve, assist, allay; calm, restore._

=Congeal.= Freeze, convert to ice, benumb.

ANT. _Melt, thaw, dissolve._

=Congenial.= Kindred, similar, sympathetic, suited, natural, proper,
agreeable.

ANT. _Disagreeable, abhorrent, unnatural, alien, dissimilar, unsuited,
unsympathetic._

=Congenital.= Coeval, connatural, innate, inherent, ingenerate.

ANT. _Unnatural, assumed, extraneous, acquired, artificial,
adventitious._

=Congeries, Congestion.= Conglomeration, aggregation, accumulation,
plethora, repletion.

ANT. _Dissipation, diffusion, clearance, dispersion._

=Congratulate.= Felicitate, compliment, rejoice with.

ANT. _Console, condole with, commiserate._

=Congregate.= Assemble, collect, meet, convene, gather, throng.

ANT. _Disperse, disappear, separate, part, scatter._

=Congregation.= Assembly, meeting, audience, conference.

ANT. _Dispersion, dismissal._

=Congress.= Parliament, conclave, cabinet, council, assembly,
legislature, synod, convention, conference.

ANT. _Cabal, sedition, uprising, mob; intrigue._

=Congruous.= Accordant, agreeing, harmonious, coherent, suitable,
consistent, proper, appropriate.

ANT. _Discordant, heterogeneous, inharmonious, improper, unsuitable._

=Conjecture=, _n._ Supposition, surmise, guess, hypothesis, theory,
notion, divination.

ANT. _Calculation, inference, deduction, proof; fact, surety, certainty,
security._

=Conjuncture.= Combination, concurrence; emergency, crisis, exigency,
juncture.

ANT. _Provision, preparation, arrangement._

=Connection.= Conjunction, combination, union, association, dependence.

ANT. _Independence, disjunction, dissociation, dissolution._

=Conquer.= Overcome, subjugate, master, vanquish, subdue, rout, defeat,
overpower, overthrow, prevail over, reduce, win, surmount, worst,
checkmate, beat, crush, down, discomfit.

ANT. _Surrender, capitulate, cede, forfeit, fly, yield, retreat,
withdraw, retire, submit, succumb, fall, lose, resign, fail._

=Conquest.= Victory, subjugation, triumph.

ANT. _Defeat, failure, surrender, submission._

=Conscience.= Moral sense, intuition, integrity, principle.

ANT. _Irresponsibility, laxity, undutifulness, unscrupulousness._

=Conscientious.= Scrupulous, exact, upright, high-principled, honest,
honorable, equitable, incorruptible, fair, faithful.

ANT. _Lax, unprincipled, unscrupulous, reprobate, dishonorable,
faithless._

=Conscious.= Sensible, cognizant, aware, intelligent, advised, apprised,
assured, sure, certain, informed; thinking, reflecting, rational,
intellectual.

ANT. _Insensible, unaware, ignorant, dead, cold, deaf; irrational,
thoughtless._

=Conscription.= Drafting, impressment.

ANT. _Volunteering, enlistment._

=Consecrate.= Dedicate, ordain; sanctify, hallow.

ANT. _Desecrate, defile._

=Consecutive.= Sequent, continuous, orderly, following.

ANT. _Disordered, rambling, discursive, illogical._

=Consent.= Assent, approve, agree, yield, comply, acquiesce.

ANT. _Refuse, resist, decline, dissent._

=Consequence.= Result, issue, sequel, effect, outgrowth, event, end,
upshot; importance, dignity, moment.

ANT. _Cause, occasion, origin; axiom, postulate, premise, antecedence;
insignificance, paltriness._

=Consequential.= Following, resulting, coherent, cogent, connected;
pompous, self-conceited, arrogant, vainglorious.

ANT. _Incoherent, illogical; affable, accessible, humble, considerate._

=Conservation.= Protection, perpetuation, preservation, maintenance.

ANT. _Neglect, exposure, destruction, abolition._

=Conservative.= Stationary, traditional, opposed to change.

ANT. _Radical, progressive, changeable, transitional, modifiable,
innovating._

=Consider.= Think, ponder, meditate, reflect, investigate, weigh,
deliberate, observe, attend, regard.

ANT. _Guess, conjecture, ignore, chance, hazard._

=Considerate.= Kindly, thoughtful, reflective, careful, prudent,
deliberate, serious, charitable, forbearing, cautious.

ANT. _Rash, careless, imprudent, thoughtless, rude, selfish,
overbearing, injudicious._

=Consignment.= Custody, commission, delegation; sending, shipping.

ANT. _Miscommitment._

=Consistency.= Density, solidity, compactness, coherence; agreement,
congruity, correspondence, uniformity, harmony, invariableness.

ANT. _Tenuity, subtility, volatility; incoherence, incongruity,
contrariety, contradiction._

=Console.= Comfort, condole with, sympathize, encourage, soothe,
assuage, solace.

ANT. _Distress, grieve, disturb, annoy, sadden, trouble, wound, hurt._

=Consolidate.= Solidify, harden, condense, compress, compact; thicken,
strengthen, solder, cement, fuse; conjoin, combine.

ANT. _Dissolve, melt, vaporize, weaken, dissipate, sublimate, pulverize;
dissect, disjoin._

=Conspicuous.= Visible, apparent, discernible, plain, clear,
perceptible, noticeable; eminent, distinguished, prominent, famous,
noted, manifest.

ANT. _Invisible, microscopic, hidden, imperceptible, unseen; ordinary,
mediocre, commonplace._

=Conspiracy.= Intrigue, treason, cabal, plot, machination, combination;
sedition.

ANT. _Legislation, congress, parliament, synod._

=Constant.= Fixed, immutable, invariable, unchanging, permanent,
perpetual; resolute, firm, steady; persevering, assiduous; incessant,
unbroken, continuous; faithful, true, loyal, devoted.

ANT. _Irregular, exceptional, casual, incidental, fickle, faithless,
broken, treacherous, untrustworthy, false._

=Consternation.= Amazement, terror, alarm, dismay, panic, bewilderment.

ANT. _Fearlessness, boldness, composure, presence of mind._

=Constituent.= Elector, patron, voter, supporter, sender; ingredient,
component, element.

ANT. _Representative, nominee; constitution, system, compound, whole._

=Constitution.= Organization, formation; quality, character,
temperament, peculiarity, characteristic; charter, law.

ANT. _Conspiracy, rebellion, tyranny, anarchy, despotism, destruction,
disorganization; disposition, mood, frame of mind, temper._

=Construct.= Build, erect, invent, form, shape, combine.

ANT. _Demolish, overthrow, destroy, derange._

=Construction.= Building, erection, composition, fabrication; structure,
formation, form, figure; explanation, version, rendering,
interpretation.

ANT. _Dislocation, dismemberment, dissolution; misunderstanding,
misconception._

=Consult.= Deliberate, take counsel, confer, advise with, canvass,
question, consider, regard.

ANT. _Dictate, counteract, contradict._

=Consume.= Eat up, devour; destroy, lavish, dissipate, waste, spend.

ANT. _Discard, reject, throw aside; preserve, replenish, supply,
provide._

=Consummate=, _a._ Perfect, excellent, supreme, finished, complete.

ANT. _Common, faulty, defective, ordinary, mediocre._

=Consummation.= Achievement, attainment, completion, termination,
accomplishment, fulfilment, realization, close, finish, finale.

ANT. _Beginning, attempt, inception, initiation, source, origin._

=Consumption.= Expenditure, use, waste, extinction, destruction.

ANT. _Development, increase, growth, enlargement, augmentation._

=Contact.= Touch, junction, contiguity, closeness, union.

ANT. _Adjacence, proximity; separation, distance, isolation._

=Contagion.= Infection; contamination, taint, pestilence, corruption.

ANT. _Prevention; antisepsis, disinfection._

=Contain.= Include, embody, comprehend, comprise, embrace; restrain,
hold.

ANT. _Omit, exclude, drop, discharge; yield, give way._

=Contaminate.= Taint, defile, corrupt, sully.

ANT. _Cleanse, purify._

=Contemn.= Despise, scorn, disdain, slight.

ANT. _Venerate, respect._

=Contemplate.= Meditate, study, ponder, survey, reflect; intend, design.

ANT. _Overlook, waive, abandon; execute, complete, do._

=Contemptible.= Despicable, abject, base, worthless, mean, low.

ANT. _Respectable, venerable; worthy, estimable, important, grave._

=Contend.= Strive, fight, struggle, combat; debate, argue, dispute;
affirm, assert, maintain, claim.

ANT. _Concede, allow, surrender._

=Content.= Satisfied, pleased, easy, willing, resigned, gratified.

ANT. _Reluctant, unwilling, unsatisfied, rebellious, discontent._

=Contention.= Strife, dissension, quarrel, rupture, dispute, debate,
controversy, altercation.

ANT. _Peace, amity, harmony, concord, reconciliation._

=Contingent=, _a._ Casual, happening, fortuitous, dependent, incidental,
provisional, uncertain.

ANT. _Independent, absolute, positive, uncontrolled, uninfluenced,
unaffected._

=Continual.= Incessant, ceaseless, invariable, perpetual, constant,
uninterrupted, unbroken, unremitting, continuous.

ANT. _Exceptional, irregular, casual, contingent, intermittent,
interrupted, suspended._

=Continually.= Constantly, perpetually, ever, always, repeatedly,
frequently, continuously.

ANT. _Occasionally, rarely, sometimes._

=Continue.= Remain, endure, persist; abide, stay, tarry; persevere, be
constant or steadfast.

ANT. _Stop, cease, fail, pause._

=Contract=, _n._ Compact, stipulation, agreement, arrangement, bargain,
covenant, pact, obligation, pledge, engagement, bond.

ANT. _Promise, parole, assurance, understanding, assumption._

=Contract=, _v._ Narrow, abbreviate, abridge, lessen, reduce, compress;
shrivel, shrink; agree, stipulate, bargain.

ANT. _Expand, amplify, dilate; reverse, cancel, abandon._

=Contradict.= Deny, gainsay, dispute, impugn, controvert; oppose,
counteract, annul, thwart, abrogate.

ANT. _Maintain, argue, confirm, state, affirm, endorse._

=Contrary.= Opposite, opposed, adverse, counter; conflicting,
contradictory, antagonistic, repugnant; perverse, obstinate, stubborn,
headstrong.

ANT. _Compatible, agreeing, kindred, compliant, submissive; consistent._

=Contrast=, _v._ Differentiate, discriminate, oppose, compare.

ANT. _Resemble, be like or similar, liken, harmonize._

=Contribute.= Add, give, coöperate, assist, subscribe, supply.

ANT. _Refuse, withhold, deny._

=Contribution.= Donation, offering, gift, subscription, subsidy, aid,
assistance.

ANT. _Withholding, retention, reservation._

=Contrive.= Plan, design, devise, invent, project, form, frame, scheme,
plot, consider; manage, make out; concert, adjust.

ANT. _Hit, chance, venture, bungle, hazard; mismanage, miscontrive._

=Control=, _v._ Direct, manage, rule, command, sway, superintend;
hinder, repress, restrain, curb, check.

ANT. _License, free; neglect, abandon; mismanage, misconduct._

=Controversy.= Dispute, altercation, contention, disagreement.

ANT. _Agreement, unanimity, coincidence._

=Contumacy.= Obstinacy, stubbornness, perverseness, pertinacity,
obduracy; disobedience, insolence.

ANT. _Docility, tractableness, flattering, fawning, servility._

=Contumely.= Obloquy, reproach, opprobrium, insolence, abuse, contempt,
scorn, disdain, arrogance.

ANT. _Regard, consideration, adulation, obsequiousness._

=Convene.= Assemble, meet, congregate, summon, master, collect.

ANT. _Dismiss, disperse, disband, dissipate._

=Convenient.= Suitable, fit, appropriate, proper, adapted; advantageous,
commodious, comfortable, useful, serviceable.

ANT. _Inconvenient, useless, awkward, superfluous; inopportune._

=Convention.= Assemblage, conference, meeting, concourse, session,
synod, congress, convocation; treaty, compact.

ANT. _Recess, dissolution, prorogation; dispersion, scattering; promise,
understanding, parole._

=Conventional.= Usual, customary, ordinary, habitual, regular, wonted,
prevalent, social, everyday; stipulated.

ANT. _Unusual, erratic, extraordinary; legal, compulsory._

=Conversant.= Familiar, skilled, acquainted, proficient, versed.

ANT. _Strange, ignorant, unversed, unlearned._

=Conversation.= Converse, communion, intercourse, parley, talk, chat,
conference, communication, discourse, colloquy, dialogue.

ANT. _Speech, oration, harangue, soliloquy, apostrophe, monologue,
silence, taciturnity._

=Converse=, _a._ Opposite, reverse, contrary, counter, contradictory.

ANT. _Identical, one, same, indistinguishable; direct, primary._

=Conversion.= Alteration, transmutation, change, transformation.

ANT. _Permanence, identity, persistence, conservation._

=Convertible.= Equivalent, interchangeable, identical; reversible.

ANT. _Variant, contrary, incommensurate._

=Convey.= Take, transfer, move, change, carry, shift, transmit,
transport, remove, consign, relegate.

ANT. _Retain, preserve, hold, cling to, possess._

=Conviction.= Belief, assurance, persuasion; confutation, refutation;
proof, detection.

ANT. _Doubt, disbelief, misgiving; vindication, justification._

=Convince.= Persuade, satisfy, enlighten, indoctrinate, inoculate.

ANT. _Mislead, mystify, perplex, puzzle, unsettle, upset; turn,
convert._

=Convivial.= Social, festive, hospitable, jovial, jolly, companionable,
gay.

ANT. _Inhospitable, unsocial, unneighborly, churlish; abstemious,
ascetic, austere._

=Convocation.= Convention, congress, assemblage, council, synod.

ANT. _Dispersion, disruption, dismission, dismissal._

=Convolution.= Coil, involution, spiral, twist, contortion.

ANT. _Unfolding, evolution, unraveling, explication._

=Convoy.= Escort, guard, attendance, protection.

ANT. _Capture, betrayal, onset, onslaught, hold up._

=Convulse.= Disturb, shake, agitate.

ANT. _Calm, compose, soothe, assuage._

=Cool.= Somewhat cold, chilling, frigid, freezing; unimpassioned,
composed, collected, unruffled, self-possessed, sedate, placid, quiet;
indifferent, unconcerned, apathetic.

ANT. _Hot, warm, burning, heated, excitable, ardent, eager._

=Coöperate.= Assist, abet, help, conspire, concur, co-labor.

ANT. _Oppose, thwart, rival, counteract, conflict, hinder, defeat,
frustrate._

=Coördinate.= Equal, equivalent, proportionate, commensurate,
tantamount, equipollent.

ANT. _Subordinate; disparate, extraneous; inferior, superior._

=Copy.= Portraiture, facsimile, duplicate, imitation, likeness, image,
transcript, counterfeit.

ANT. _Model, original, pattern, example, prototype, archetype,
exemplar._

=Cordial.= Earnest, warm, hearty, ardent, affectionate, sincere,
invigorating, refreshing, pleasing, grateful.

ANT. _Cool, formal, ceremonious, distant, reserved, disinclined._

=Corner.= Angle, bend, crotch, knee; nook, recess, niche, retreat.

ANT. _Abutment, protrusion, prominence, convexity, projection._

=Corollary.= Inference, conclusion, deduction, consequence.

ANT. _Problem, proposition._

=Corporal, Corporeal.= Fleshly, bodily, material, physical.

ANT. _Spiritual, mental, intellectual, moral, ethereal, immaterial._

=Corps.= Body of troops, division of army, squadron, band, company.

ANT. _Aggregate, army, host, mass, force, organization._

=Corpse.= Remains, dead body, cadaver, carcass, dust.

ANT. _Soul, spirit, individual, personality, mentality._

=Corpulent.= Fat, fleshy, plump, obese, portly, round, stout.

ANT. _Lean, thin, attenuated, emaciated, slight, slender, frail._

=Correct.= True, exact, accurate, proper, faultless, right.

ANT. _False, untrue, wrong, inexact, inaccurate, fallacious, defective._

=Corrective.= Regulative, preventive, alterative, preservative,
rectifying, modifying, improving, reformatory.

ANT. _Confirmative, stimulative, intensitive, provocative, conducive._

=Correlation.= Interrelation, correspondence, apposition,
interdependence, mutuality, reciprocation, interchange, reciprocity.

ANT. _Contradiction, independence, opposition, inconsistency,
incongruity._

=Correspond.= Agree, suit, match, fit, tally, harmonize, answer,
correlate, stand counter; communicate, write.

ANT. _Vary, disagree, clash, jar; ignore, disregard, neglect._

=Correspondence.= Adaptation, agreement, congruity; writing, letter,
despatches, communication.

ANT. _Conversation; withdrawal, non-intercourse; incongruity, discord,
disagreement._

=Corroborate.= Strengthen, establish, sustain, support, confirm.

ANT. _Weaken, confute, rebut, invalidate, shake, enfeeble, overthrow._

=Corrode.= Consume, eat away, waste, impair, rust, canker, wear,
crumble.

ANT. _Renew, restore._

=Corrupt=, _v._ Defile, pollute, infect, taint, vitiate, demoralize,
contaminate, debase, spoil, deteriorate.

ANT. _Cleanse, purify, better, correct, ameliorate._

=Corruption.= Decay, decomposition, pollution, defilement, infection,
contamination, adulteration; depravity, immorality, laxity, wickedness;
dishonesty, bribery.

=Cost.= Price, worth, expenditure, expense, charge, disbursement,
outlay; preciousness, richness, splendor; loss, damage, pain.

=Costume.= Dress, livery, robes, uniform.

ANT. _Disguise, incognito; nudity, nakedness._

=Council.= Cabinet, bureau, chamber, conclave, synod, convocation,
meeting, conference, parliament, consultation, convention.

ANT. _Cabal, league, conspiracy; multitude, mob._

=Counsel.= Advice, consultation, opinion, suggestion, recommendation,
instruction, caution, admonition; deliberation, forethought; plan,
design, scheme; purpose; lawyer, barrister, attorney.

=Count.= Compute, reckon, add, tell, estimate, number, enumerate, sum,
calculate.

ANT. _Guess, conjecture, surmise, think, fancy._

=Countenance=, _v._ Approve, support, sanction, help, aid, abet,
encourage, patronize, befriend, assist, favor.

ANT. _Oppose, confront, discourage, browbeat, face, compare, disparage._

=Counter.= Contrary, opposed, opposite, against.

ANT. _Accordant with, coincident, consonant._

=Counteract.= Oppose, foil, baffle, thwart, hinder, rival, resist,
defeat, cross, frustrate, neutralize.

ANT. _Aid, coöperate, subserve, promote, advance, assist._

=Counterfeit=, _n._ Forgery, fraudulent copy, cheat, artifice, pretense,
sham, fabrication.

ANT. _Exposure, detection; verity, fact, truth, reality._

=Countermand.= Abrogate, annul, revoke, rescind, recall, make void.

ANT. _Order, command, bid, charge, enjoin, direct, instruct._

=Counterpart.= Duplicate, copy; correlative, complement, supplement,
obverse; match, mate, tally, twin.

ANT. _Antithesis, contradiction, contrast._

=Countervail.= Balance, compensate, make up, counterbalance, offset.

ANT. _Overthrow, unbalance, weigh down._

=Countryman.= Rustic, agriculturist, farmer, swain, yeoman, laborer,
peasant, husbandman; clown, boor.

ANT. _Citizen, townsman; alien._

=Couple=, _v._ Link, unite, connect, join, clasp, tie, yoke, buckle,
pair, splice, button; marry, wed.

ANT. _Loose, part, separate, detach, isolate, unclasp; divorce._

=Courage.= Bravery, valor, fearlessness, spirit, heroism, fortitude,
hardihood, boldness, daring, mettle, pluck, resolution, intrepidity.

ANT. _Cowardice, timidity, fear, dread, terror, dismay, consternation._

=Course.= Route, way, road, track, race; direction, bearing, progress,
process; career; succession, order, regularity; deportment, conduct;
series, system.

ANT. _Deviation; disorder, discursion; hindrance, error._

=Court=, _v._ Woo, flatter, seek, invite, solicit.

ANT. _Avoid, shun, repudiate, repel, antagonize._

=Courtesy.= Politeness, affability, urbanity, civility, complaisance.

ANT. _Rudeness, incivility, churlishness, ungraciousness._

=Courtly.= Polished, elegant, polite, ceremonious, formal, respectful.

ANT. _Undignified, unrefined, coarse, awkward, boorish, plebeian._

=Covenant.= Agreement, stipulation, bond, compact, contract, bargain,
arrangement, concordant, pact, treaty.

ANT. _Promise, understanding, assurance, parole._

=Cover=, _v._ Hide, conceal, overspread, overlay, secrete, cloak, veil,
screen, mask, shroud, disguise; invest, clothe, wrap; protect, shelter,
shield, guard, defend; comprehend, comprise, embrace; balance,
compensate, countervail.

ANT. _Expose, reveal, produce, exhibit; betray, divulge; omit, exclude._

=Covet.= Desire, long for, wish for, aim after, aspire to.

ANT. _Dislike, despise; undervalue._

=Covetous.= Eager, avaricious, desirous, greedy, grasping, acquisitive,
rapacious.

ANT. _Liberal, unselfish, generous, bountiful._

=Coward.= Craven, recreant, dastard.

ANT. _Hero, champion; daredevil, desperado._

=Coy.= Bashful, shy, modest, reserved, retreating, shrinking.

ANT. _Bold, forward, impertinent, pert, brazen, flippant._

=Crack.= Split, break, chop, rend, cleave, snap; craze, madden.

ANT. _Mend, unite, repair; restore, heal._

=Craft.= Skill, ability, power, talent, dexterity, aptitude, tact;
artifice, shrewdness, guile, deception, cunning, deceit; art, trade,
employment, vocation, calling; vessel.

ANT. _Inaptitude, tactlessness; fairness, openness, candor, sincerity,
frankness, ingenuousness, straightforwardness._

=Cramp.= Restrain, hinder, check, confine, hamper, clog, fetter,
cripple.

ANT. _Free, liberate, loose, expand, ease, relieve, extricate._

=Crash.= Jar, uproar, clash, rending, noise, clang, resonance.

ANT. _Murmur, whisper; silence._

=Crassitude.= Grossness, thickness, density, corpulence, obesity.

ANT. _Tenuity, agility, activity; spareness, slightness._

=Crave.= Intreat, beg, beseech, implore, supplicate, desire, long for,
hunger for, yearn.

ANT. _Demand, insist, require._

=Crazy.= Shattered, broken, tottering; distracted, mad, lunatic, insane,
delirious, cracked, demented, deranged.

ANT. _Sound, robust, vigorous, sane, whole._

=Create.= Form, produce, make, originate, cause, occasion, appoint,
constitute; beget, engender, generate; imagine, compose, fashion,
design.

ANT. _Destroy, demolish, annihilate._

=Creature.= Created being, being, animal, man, person; dependent,
vassal, parasite; wretch, miscreant.

ANT. _Chimera, ghost, hallucination, fantasy, phantom, conceit,
crotchet._

=Credence.= Belief, trust, faith, acceptance, confidence, reliance.

ANT. _Denial, distrust, disbelief, doubt, skepticism._

=Credentials.= Diploma, missive, title, warrant, vouchers, certificates,
testimonials.

=Credible.= Probable, possible, reliable, trustworthy, likely.

ANT. _Improbable, unlikely, incredible, unreliable, untrustworthy._

=Credit.= Trust, belief, faith, confidence, credence, reliance;
reputation, influence, power; esteem, regard; loan, securities.

ANT. _Insecurity; distrust; shame, disgrace, censure._

=Credulity.= Gullibility, credulousness, simplicity.

ANT. _Skepticism, suspiciousness, incredulity, shrewdness._

=Creed.= Belief, catechism, confession, articles of faith, tenets,
dogmas, doctrines.

ANT. _Protest, abjuration, disbelief, recantation, retraction._

=Crestfallen.= Downcast, dispirited, dejected, disheartened, depressed,
desponding, low-spirited, down-hearted.

ANT. _Exuberant, elated, confident, inspirited._

=Crew.= Gang, set, band, horde, crowd, mob, throng.

ANT. _Supercargo; bevy, galaxy, cream, élite._

=Crime.= Offense, misdeed, wrong, felony, sin, iniquity, misdemeanor,
enormity, transgression, wickedness, delinquency.

ANT. _Good deed, well-doing, exploit, achievement, duty, service,
benefit, benefaction, heroism._

=Criminal=, _a._ Immoral, iniquitous, sinful, unlawful, wicked, wrong,
vile, nefarious, culpable, abominable, illegal, vicious.

ANT. _Virtuous, moral, innocent, just, honorable, praiseworthy, lawful,
legal, right, meritorious._

=Criminate.= Charge, accuse, arraign, impeach.

ANT. _Acquit, absolve, extricate._

=Cripple=, _v._ Weaken, disable, impair, break down, cramp, curtail.

ANT. _Renovate, strengthen, augment, liberate, ease, expedite._

=Criterion.= Standard, test, rule, touchstone, measure, canon, proof.

ANT. _Eye, glance; intention, conjecture._

=Critic.= Judge, censor, reviewer, connoisseur; caviller, carper;
arbiter, savant.

ANT. _Artist, author, writer, performer, maker, poet, composer._

=Critical.= Accurate, nice, exact; decisive, crucial, determining,
important; dangerous, hazardous, imminent, momentous, dubious,
precarious.

ANT. _Inexact, loose, undiscriminating; unimportant, inconclusive; safe,
sure, settled, decided, retrieved, redressed._

=Criticism.= Censure, stricture, animadversion, review, critique.

ANT. _Approbation, praise, approval._

=Criticize.= Examine, estimate, judge, discuss, analyze, anatomize,
scan, animadvert.

ANT. _Survey, overlook, slur, skim, slight, neglect._

=Crooked.= Bent, curved, bowed; distorted, twisted, wry, askew,
deformed, disfigured; perverse, contumacious, capricious; dishonest,
unfair, unscrupulous, knavish, deceitful, tricky.

ANT. _Straight, linear, upright, direct, honest, straightforward._

=Cross.= Fretful, petulant, peevish, snappish, touchy, morose,
ill-natured, sullen, snarling, cynical, sour, out of humor, captious,
crabbed, sulky.

ANT. _Amiable, genial, good-tempered, good-natured, blithesome,
charming, winsome, attractive, benign._

=Crowd.= Throng, multitude, concourse, press, horde, herd, host, rabble,
mob, populace.

ANT. _Cream, élite, bevy, constellation, galaxy; solitude,
solitariness._

=Crown=, _n._ Diadem, coronet, garland, chaplet, wreath, laurel, bays;
reward, honor, distinction, dignity; summit, crest, top, head, brow,
apex.

ANT. _Base, bottom, floor, foot, pedestal, foundation, sole; infamy,
shame._

=Crown=, _v._ Complete, consummate, conclude, seal, achieve, accomplish.

ANT. _Mar, spoil, frustrate, fail._

=Crucial.= Severe, trying, searching, decisive, critical, momentous,
strategic.

ANT. _Superficial, indifferent, mild, lenient, lax, unimportant._

=Crude.= Raw, immature, unripe; coarse, unrefined; undigested,
unconsidered, unpolished, uncouth, awkward.

ANT. _Mature; refined, sensitive; well-considered, finished, classical,
highly wrought, elaborate._

=Cruel.= Inhuman, merciless, unfeeling, dire, ruthless, pitiless,
relentless, savage, brutal, ferocious, blood-thirsty, sanguinary;
severe, sharp, bitter, hard.

ANT. _Gentle, mild, merciful, humane, forbearing, generous._

=Crush.= Pound, crumble, demolish, overpower, squeeze, compress, bruise,
shatter, raze, pulverize.

ANT. _Consolidate, compact, amalgamate, solidify, stabilitate._

=Culmination.= Zenith, success, consummation, acme, completion, apex.

ANT. _Failure, downfall, defeat, descent, decline._

=Culpable.= Blameworthy, blamable, censurable, reprehensible, faulty,
wrong.

ANT. _Innocent, blameless, laudable, praiseworthy._

=Culprit.= Criminal, delinquent, felon, malefactor, offender.

ANT. _Hero, example, pattern, model, saint, upright man._

=Cultivate.= Till; fertilize; improve, refine, train, discipline,
develop; study, pursue, investigate; nourish, foster, cherish, promote.

ANT. _Neglect, blight, blast; uproot, eradicate, extirpate; stifle,
abandon, prevent, discourage._

=Cunning.= Craft, artifice, deceit, intrigue, subtlety, chicane.

ANT. _Candor, guilelessness, sincerity._

=Cupidity.= Longing, greed, lust; covetousness, avarice,
acquisitiveness, stinginess.

ANT. _Prodigality, liberality, generosity, extravagance._

=Curb.= Restrain, check, control, repress, bridle.

ANT. _Indulge, emancipate, loose, release, free, liberate._

=Cure=, _n._ Remedy, antidote, restorative, corrective, help, specific;
healing, restoration, convalescence, alleviation, renovation.

ANT. _Complaint, contagion, disease, ailment; aggravation, confirmation;
inoculation._

=Curiosity.= Inquisitiveness, wonder, marvel, rarity, celebrity;
inquiry, investigation, scrutiny, research.

ANT. _Indifference, heedlessness, disregard, abstraction; apathy._

=Curious.= Prying, meddling, inquisitive, searching, scrutinizing; rare,
singular, strange; elegant, finished.

ANT. _Indifferent, uninterested; trite, common, usual._

=Current.= Common, general, prevalent, present, floating, popular,
ordinary, vulgar.

ANT. _Obsolete, rejected, exploded; private, secret; confined._

=Curse=, _n._ Execration, malediction, anathema, denunciation; scourge,
plague, torment, affliction, trouble; imprecation, ban, oath.

ANT. _Blessing, benediction, joy, crown; prosperity, welfare, luck,
success._

=Cursory.= Hasty, superficial, desultory, careless, slight, rapid.

ANT. _Elaborate, searching, minute, profound._

=Custody.= Care, keeping, protection; confinement, duress, imprisonment.

ANT. _Neglect, betrayal, exposure, desertion; liberation discharge._

=Custom.= Usage, habit, fashion, practice, rule; form, formality,
observance; patronage; duty, tax.

ANT. _Law, regulation, command; disuse, non-observance, desuetude._

=Cutting.= Sharp, keen; sarcastic, severe, satirical, wounding,
piercing, trenchant, stinging, sardonic, cruel.

ANT. _Mild, soothing, flattering, indulgent, consoling, gratifying._

=Cynical.= Censorious, churlish, carping, cross, peevish; derisive,
contemptuous, scornful, pessimistic, misanthropic.

ANT. _Genial, lenient; optimistic, philanthropic._




                                   D


=Dainty.= Exquisite, choice, rare, refined; savory, palatable,
delicious, toothsome, tasty, epicurean; fastidious, luxurious.

ANT. _Common, dirty, vulgar, coarse, defiled, nasty, foul, filthy._

=Damage.= Hurt, injury, detriment, loss, mischief, impairment.

ANT. _Benefit, compensation, advantage, blessing, reparation._

=Danger.= Peril, risk, hazard, venture, insecurity, liability, jeopardy.

ANT. _Safety, security, precaution, defense._

=Daring.= Adventurous, fearless, risky, brave, courageous, dauntless,
intrepid, valorous.

ANT. _Cautious, timid, wary, fearful._

=Dark.= Black, swarthy, opaque, obscure, shadowy, lurid, sunless, murky,
cloudy, overcast, ebon, pitchy, secret; mysterious, enigmatical,
unintelligible, occult, abstruse; gloomy, disheartening, cheerless,
dismal; ignorant, rude, untaught, benighted; wicked, foul, horrible,
damnable, vile, atrocious, infernal; joyless, mournful, sad, sorrowful.

ANT. _White, fair, light, radiant, bright, clear, buoyant, plain,
brilliant, glaring, crystalline, transparent, dazzling, luminous,
illumed; happy, joyful, festive._

=Darling.= Sweetheart, love, pet, favorite, idol, dear.

=Dash.= Strike, hurl, cast, throw, drive, send, speed, dart; alloy,
adulterate; suffuse, overspread, color; disappoint, ruin, frustrate;
surprise, abash.

ANT. _Raise, erect, reinstate; creep, crawl; fulfil, realize, effect._

=Dastard.= Coward, craven, recreant.

ANT. _Hero, champion; daredevil._

=Data.= Facts, basis, grounds, postulates, premises, given conditions.

ANT. _Conjectures, assumptions, inferences, deductions._

=Date.= Time, era, epoch, period, age.

ANT. _Non-duration; eternity._

=Daub.= Smear, plaster, sully, begrime, soil, deface, defile.

ANT. _Embellish, decorate; cleanse, whiten._

=Daunt.= Terrify, alarm, intimidate, appal, frighten off, tame.

ANT. _Rally, inspirit, encourage._

=Dauntless.= Valiant, fearless, intrepid, bold, indomitable,
unconquerable, valorous, chivalrous, heroic, brave, daring.

ANT. _Cowardly, timid, cautious, fearful, afraid, faint-hearted,
shrinking._

=Dawn.= Appear, begin, open; break, grow light, rise.

ANT. _Wane, set, sink, close._

=Dazzle.= Daze, blind; astonish, surprise, overpower, bewilder, confuse.

ANT. _Enlighten, illumine, illuminate; make clear, instruct._

=Dead.= Lifeless, breathless, inanimate, deceased, defunct, departed;
dull, cold, frigid, inert, indifferent; tasteless, insipid, flat;
insensible, heavy, unconscious, spiritless, still, torpid.

ANT. _Quick, live, living, animate, alive, stirring, vivacious._

=Deadly.= Mortal, fatal, destructive, noxious, murderous, malignant,
pernicious, baneful, venomous.

ANT. _Vital, wholesome, life-giving._

=Deaf.= Hard of hearing; dull, insensible, heedless; inexorable, averse,
disinclined; inaudible.

ANT. _Acute, listening, attentive, willing, susceptible._

=Deal.= Bargain, chaffer, trade, traffic, do business; distribute,
allot, divide, share, mete out.

ANT. _Close, stop, fail; collect, gather, glean, muster._

=Dear.= Costly, high-priced, expensive, precious; beloved, valued.

ANT. _Cheap, common, inexpensive; hated, abhorred._

=Dearth.= Lack, want, scarcity, poverty.

ANT. _Plenty, abundance, luxury._

=Death.= Decease, dying, dissolution, departure, exit, expiration.

ANT. _Life, birth, rise, vitality, growth, activity._

=Debar.= Exclude, bar out, stop, prevent, prohibit, restrain, hinder.

ANT. _Admit, enclose, embrace; allow, indulge, permit, entitle._

=Debase.= Degrade, deprave, corrupt, alloy, deteriorate, lower, impair.

ANT. _Raise, enhance, exalt, honor, purify, improve, ameliorate._

=Debate=, _n._ Discussion, dispute, controversy, contention,
altercation, contest.

ANT. Compliance, surrender, withdrawal of opposition.

=Debatable.= Dubious, doubtful, uncertain, disputable, problematical.

ANT. _Sure, certain, incontestable, self-evident._

=Debauch.= Seduce, corrupt, vitiate, defile.

ANT. _Purify, elevate._

=Debility.= Infirmity, weakness, languor, exhaustion, feebleness.

ANT. _Vigor, strength, nerve, energy, tone, vitality._

=Debt.= Liability, obligation, default, claim, score.

ANT. _Liquidation, assets, accommodation, credit._

=Debtor.= Borrower, mortgagor.

ANT. _Creditor, lender, mortgagee._

=Decay=, _v._ Corrupt, putrefy, decompose, rot, spoil, molder, wither,
perish.

ANT. _Flourish, luxuriate, expand, vegetate, grow, increase._

=Deceit.= Fraud, deception, cheating, artifice, imposition, guile.

ANT. _Honesty, openness, fair dealing, frankness, truth, verity._

=Deceive.= Cheat, dupe, delude, beguile, fool, trick, impose upon,
disappoint, mislead, circumvent, entrap.

ANT. _Enlighten, guide, disabuse, deliver._

=Deception.= Craft, cunning, lying, fraud, hypocrisy, trickery,
delusion, duplicity, deceitfulness, falsehood, prevarication.

ANT. _Candor, honesty, sincerity, truth, veracity, guilelessness,
frankness, simplicity._

=Decide.= Determine, settle, conclude, close, terminate, end, resolve.

ANT. _Waver, hesitate, vacillate, fluctuate, be irresolute._

=Decipher.= Reveal, explain, unravel, unfold.

ANT. _Puzzle, mystify._

=Decision.= Determination, sentence, conclusion, judgment; firmness,
resolution.

ANT. _Vacillation, vagueness, uncertainty._

=Decisive.= Conclusive, positive, final, definitive, indisputable.

ANT. _Vague, hypothetical, indeterminate, dubious, problematical._

=Deck.= Adorn, dress, ornament.

ANT. _Strip, despoil; deform, deface._

=Declaim.= Recite, speak, debate, harangue.

ANT. _Study, compose, elaborate._

=Declamation.= Harangue, effusion, debate, oratory, elocution.

ANT. _Hesitation, stammering._

=Declaration.= Assertion, affirmation, avowal; publication,
proclamation, official announcement.

ANT. _Denial; concealment; recantation, disavowal, retraction._

=Declare.= Announce, publish, advertise, reveal, proclaim.

ANT. _Suppress, withhold, conceal._

=Decline.= Fall, decay, decadence, degeneration; refusal, rejection,
repudiation.

ANT. _Rise, advancement, improvement; acceptance._

=Declivity.= Fall, slope, descent.

ANT. _Ascent, rise._

=Decoction.= Concoction, mixture, mess.

ANT. _Rawness. crudity._

=Decompose.= Analyze, dissolve, resolve; decay, putrefy, become corrupt.

ANT. _Compound, mix, organize, compose._

=Decorate.= Adorn, embellish, improve.

ANT. _Spoil, mar, denude, deface._

=Decorum.= Dignity, order, propriety, seemliness.

ANT. _Disorder, disturbance, unseemliness._

=Decrease.= Lessen, diminish, subside, want, dwindle, curtail, retrench,
reduce, lower.

ANT. _Increase, grow, augment, expand._

=Decree.= Decision, determination, law, edict, mandate, manifesto.

ANT. _Suggestion, request, hint._

=Decrepit.= Weak, infirm, tottering, aged.

ANT. _Strong, youthful._

=Decry.= Disparage, detract, depreciate, denounce, abase, traduce.

ANT. _Extol, praise, eulogize, laud._

=Dedicate.= Devote, hallow, sanctify, consecrate; address, inscribe;
assign, apply, set apart.

ANT. _Desecrate, misuse, alienate._

=Deduce.= Infer, draw, derive, conclude.

ANT. _Induce, state, conjecture, guess, anticipate, foresee._

=Deed.= Performance, act, action, exploit; reality, fact, truth;
document, instrument.

ANT. _Omission, failure, invalidation, reversal, recall; undoing._

=Deep.= Profound; difficult, mysterious, hard, intricate; penetrating,
sagacious, astute, intelligent, discerning, shrewd; heartfelt, intense,
thorough.

ANT. _Shallow; superficial, artless, undesigning; indifferent._

=Default.= Neglect, failure, omission; want, destitution, lack; lapse,
forfeit, delinquency, absence.

ANT. _Satisfaction; appearance, plea; maintenance, supply; presence._

=Defeat.= Overthrow, frustration, discomfiture.

ANT. _Success, triumph, victory._

=Defect.= Fault, flaw, imperfection; omission, want, shortcoming.

ANT. _Emendation, perfection; supply, sufficiency._

=Defense.= Apology, justification, vindication; shelter, shield,
protection, guard, resistance, rampart, fortress, safeguard, bulwark.

ANT. _Surrender, betrayal, exposure, hazard; challenge._

=Defer.= Delay, postpone, procrastinate, adjourn, put off; yield to,
respect.

ANT. _Hasten, hurry, expedite, quicken, overdrive; slight, disregard._

=Deference.= Respect, consideration, esteem, veneration, homage.

ANT. _Disrespect, contumely, impudence, defiance, disobedience._

=Defile.= Contaminate, spoil, pollute, vitiate, infect, taint, befoul.

ANT. _Purify, cleanse, disinfect, wash, hallow, sanctify._

=Definition.= Description, exposition, comment, explanation,
interpretation, rendering, translation.

ANT. _Misstatement._

=Deformity.= Ugliness, malformation, distortion, disfigurement,
abnormity, hideousness.

ANT. _Grace, beauty, regularity, symmetry._

=Defrayment.= Payment, settlement, liquidation, discharge.

ANT. _Failure, insolvency, repudiation, embezzlement, nonpayment._

=Defy.= Challenge, dare, provoke, scorn, brave.

ANT. _Dread, cower, shrink, shun._

=Degeneracy.= Degradation, deterioration, growing worse, decay, decline;
inferiority, meanness.

ANT. _Improvement, advancement._

=Degree.= Grade, rank, step, station, stage, quality, standing; measure,
interval, space.

ANT. _Mass, magnitude, size, numbers._

=Dejected.= Disheartened, discouraged, depressed, downcast, despondent,
gloomy, melancholy, low-spirited.

ANT. _Cheerful, elated, gay, blithe, inspirited, joyous, jovial, merry._

=Delay.= Postponement, procrastination; hindrance, impediment.

ANT. _Hurry, despatch, quickening, urgency; assistance, furtherance._

=Delegate=, _n._ Substitute, proxy, representative, legate, deputy.

=Delegate=, _v._ Depute, commission, appoint, empower, constitute,
ordain.

ANT. _Relegate, recall, supersede, remove._

=Deleterious.= Destructive, noxious, deadly, poisonous; hurtful,
harmful, injurious, pernicious, unwholesome.

ANT. _Wholesome, healthy, beneficial, sanitary, salubrious, nutritious._

=Deliberate=, _v._ Meditate, ponder, debate, confer, consider, reflect,
consult, weigh, cogitate.

ANT. _Shelve, dismiss, discard, put aside; hazard, chance, risk._

=Deliberate=, _a._ Cautious, careful, wary; well-advised, purposed,
studied; slow, leisurely; intentional, earnest, unbiased.

ANT. _Facetious, playful; irresolute, hesitant, faltering, vacillating;
impulsive, rash, hasty; prejudiced._

=Delicacy.= Dainty, morsel, tidbit, relish; refinement, luxury, nicety,
elegance; frailty, weakness; fastidiousness, scrupulousness; purity,
sensibility.

ANT. _Necessaries, commons, fare; coarseness, roughness, rudeness;
vigor, strength; grossness._

=Delicious.= Dainty, savory, delightful, luscious, exquisite.

ANT. _Nauseous, repulsive, bitter, loathsome, unpalatable, acrid._

=Delight.= Joy, gladness, charm, rapture, transport, satisfaction,
pleasure, ecstasy, happiness, enjoyment, bliss.

ANT. _Pain, suffering, sorrow, misery, discomfort, dejection,
melancholy, discontent, trouble, distress, depression._

=Delightful.= Agreeable, congenial, grateful, pleasant, refreshing,
welcome, satisfying, delicious, acceptable, pleasurable.

ANT. _Miserable, depressing, disappointing, horrible, melancholy,
painful, woful, wretched, mournful, saddening._

=Delineate.= Describe, figure, represent, sketch, draw, portray, depict,
paint.

ANT. _Caricature, misrepresent, exaggerate._

=Delinquent.= Offender, culprit, criminal, miscreant, malefactor.

ANT. _Worthy, model, paragon, pattern, beau ideal._

=Deliver.= Free, liberate, release; save, rescue; give, hand over,
transfer; yield, grant, resign, surrender; pronounce, declare, speak;
discharge, deal.

ANT. _Confine, capture; suppress, retain; withdraw, betray;
appropriate._

=Deluge.= Inundation, flood, overflow, rush, cataclysm.

ANT. _Drought, dearth, aridity; mist, moisture; subsidence, ebb,
abatement._

=Delusion.= Error, fallacy, illusion, hallucination, trick, snare,
fraud, deception, imposture.

ANT. _Fact, certainty, verity, actuality, truth, reality._

=Demand.= Require, ask, call for, insist, exact, challenge.

ANT. _Request, petition, supplicate; disclaim, forego, waive._

=Demarcation.= Outline, sketch, limit, boundary, division, enclosure,
separation, distinction.

ANT. _Openness, space, expanse, extent._

=Demean.= Behave, comport, act, conduct one’s self.

ANT. _Misbehave._

=Demerit.= Fault, delinquency, misdeed, failure.

ANT. _Credit, merit, worth, excellence, desert._

=Democratic.= Popular, representative, republican, radical.

ANT. _Imperial, aristocratic, regal, oligarchical, autocratic, despotic,
tyrannical, constitutional, conservative._

=Demolish.= Overthrow, destroy, overturn, raze, ruin.

ANT. _Restore, repair; build, construct, make._

=Demonstration.= Exhibition, exemplification; manifestation,
illustration; evidence, proof, certainty, conclusion, consequence,
induction, inference, deduction.

ANT. _Concealment, secrecy; theory, supposition._

=Demoralize.= Corrupt, deprave, vitiate, undermine, subvert.

ANT. _Stimulate, impel, promote, incite, reassure, animate, uplift._

=Demure.= Sedate, staid, modest, prudish, discreet.

ANT. _Lively, vivacious, facetious, wanton, wild._

=Denial.= Refusal; contradiction, negation, disavowal.

ANT. _Affirmation, avowal, admission, concession._

=Denizen.= Citizen, subject, inhabitant, dweller, sojourner.

ANT. _Foreigner, alien, traveler, stranger, transient._

=Denomination.= Name, designation, description, appellation, class,
sect, school.

ANT. _Misnomer._

=Denounce.= Brand, defame, stigmatize, decry; accuse; menace, threaten;
proscribe, vituperate.

ANT. _Eulogize, applaud, uphold, vindicate._

=Dense.= Thick, slow, compact, solid, close, thickset.

ANT. _Sparse, thin, scattered; quick, intelligent, clever, alert,
ready._

=Denunciation.= Censure, arraignment; threat, menace; exposure.

ANT. _Vindication, defense, apology, plea, excuse._

=Deny.= Refuse, withhold; contradict, gainsay; renounce, abjure, disown.

ANT. _Affirm, grant, accept, concede; indulge, yield, admit._

=Depart.= Leave, go, start, sally, retire, disappear, vanish, bid
farewell; die, decease.

ANT. _Arrive, alight; stay, remain, cling._

=Department.= Division, section, portion; function, office, duty,
station; province, branch, line.

ANT. _Organization, whole, body._

=Dependent.= Hanging, resting, contingent, conditioned, relying,
subject, relative.

ANT. _Independent, free, absolute, irrespective._

=Depict.= Portray, draw, paint, delineate.

ANT. _Caricature, parody._

=Deplorable.= Lamentable, pitiable, sad, mournful, disastrous,
calamitous, grievous, distressing, melancholy.

ANT. _Acceptable, felicitous, happy, welcome, glad, joyous, beneficent,
pleasing._

=Deportment.= Conduct, carriage, behavior, demeanor, character.

ANT. _Misbehavior, misconduct._

=Depose.= Dethrone, debase, degrade, dismiss, oust, displace.

ANT. _Enthrone, install, initiate, elevate, exalt, invest with power._

=Deprecate.= Regret, disapprove, lament; intercede, expostulate.

ANT. _Rejoice in, approve; invoke, imprecate, curse._

=Depreciate.= Disparage, decry, undervalue, detract, underestimate.

ANT. _Appreciate, value, esteem._

=Depredation.= Robbery, pillage, plunder, spoliation, theft, invasion,
trespass, havoc, encroachment.

ANT. _Restitution, compensation, restoration, amends, reparation._

=Depression.= Lowering, degradation, abasement, perversion,
depreciation, dejection, discouragement; hollow, valley, decline.

ANT. _Elevation, raising, exaltation, promotion, amelioration,
preferment, prominence, eminence._

=Deprive.= Bereave, rob, divest, strip, despoil, dispossess, depose;
prevent, hinder.

ANT. _Endow, enrich, invest, compensate, present, indemnify._

=Deputy.= Lieutenant, agent, representative, envoy, legate, substitute,
vicegerent, proxy, delegate.

ANT. _Master, principal, governor, chief, sovereign, ruler._

=Derangement.= Disorder, confusion, disarrangement; disturbance,
discomposure; madness, lunacy, insanity, mania, delirium, alienation,
aberration.

ANT. _Order, arrangement, regulation; calmness; sanity, poise,
rationality._

=Derision.= Scorn, contempt, ridicule, mockery, contumely, scoffing.

ANT. _Admiration, respect, reverence, regard, esteem, veneration._

=Derivation.= Source, origin, genesis, fountain, descent, root,
etymology.

ANT. _Result, issue, termination, effect, application, use._

=Derogate.= Detract, depreciate, disparage, compromise, lessen.

ANT. _Esteem, value, overestimate, enhance, extol._

=Descendant.= Offspring, posterity, progeny, stock, family, lineage,
scion, branch, issue.

ANT. _Ancestry, progenitor, origin, root, source, founder, parent._

=Describe.= Trace, draw, portray, mark out, represent, depict, recount,
narrate, illustrate, define, explain, characterize.

ANT. _Caricature, misrepresent, distort; mystify, perplex, confuse._

=Descry.= Perceive, discern, recognize, discover, espy, see, behold,
detect, find out.

ANT. _Overlook, miss, neglect._

=Desecrate.= Profane, pollute, pervert, abuse, secularize, prostitute.

ANT. _Hallow, sanctify, respect, esteem, dedicate, devote._

=Desert.= Solitude, wild, wilderness, waste.

ANT. _Oasis, pasture, meadow._

=Deserter.= Renegade, turncoat, recanter, backslider, abjurer, traitor,
apostate.

ANT. _Adherent, devotee, supporter, bigot, disciple, ally._

=Deserve.= Merit, earn, win, be entitled to.

ANT. _Forfeit, lose, miss, fail of._

=Desideratum.= Very desirable thing, requisite, want, essential.

ANT. _Superfluity, surplus, perquisite._

=Design=, _n._ Intention, purpose, aim, end, scheme, proposal, project,
object, plan, device, purport, meaning, drift, scope, mark; delineation,
sketch, artifice, drawing, draft; invention, contrivance; cunning,
guile.

ANT. _Execution, performance, structure, construction, issue, result;
candor, openness, sincerity; chance, accident._

=Design=, _v._ Intend, plan, prepare, project, contrive, scheme,
purpose, mean, propose; draw, delineate, sketch; contemplate, outline,
plot.

ANT. _Risk, guess, conjecture, chance; misconceive, misinterpret,
misrepresent._

=Designate.= Specify, particularize; describe, define, denominate, name,
call, style, christen, dub; appoint, allot.

ANT. _Misname, miscall; generalize; misrepresent._

=Desirable.= Eligible, expedient, advantageous, beneficial, advisable,
valuable, profitable, enviable, proper, judicious.

ANT. _Inexpedient, disadvantageous, harmful, inadvisable, evil._

=Desire.= Appetite, inclination, longing, proclivity, craving, impulse,
hankering, coveting, propensity, wish; aspiration, will.

ANT. _Loathing, disgust, aversion, hate, repugnance, horror._

=Desolate=, _a._ Bereaved, comfortless, forlorn, cheerless, lonely,
solitary; uninhabited, forsaken, unfrequented, waste, dreary, wild.

ANT. _Peopled, colonized, developed, cultivated; populous, crowded,
frequented._

=Despair.= Desperation, discouragement, hopelessness, despondency.

ANT. _Courage, hope, expectation, anticipation, assurance, confidence,
elation, cheer, trust, hopefulness, encouragement._

=Despatch=, _v._ Expedite, speed, accelerate, quicken, hasten; kill,
slay.

ANT. _Delay, retard, impede, obstruct; preserve, save, spare._

=Desperate.= Wild, reckless, despondent, hopeless, wretched, forlorn,
lost; heroic, extreme, defiant; precipitate, headlong, frantic.

ANT. _Cautious, timid, shy; hopeful, promising, propitious._

=Despise.= Contemn, scorn, slight, disdain, spurn.

ANT. _Respect, esteem, venerate, regard, revere._

=Despoil.= Strip, denude, ravage; rob, plunder, pillage, devastate.

ANT. _Adorn, enrich, rehabilitate._

=Despotic.= Tyrannical, absolute, imperious, autocratic, arrogant.

ANT. _Conciliatory, humane, merciful; constitutional, democratic,
representative._

=Destination.= Aim, end, object, purpose, design; goal, harbor.

ANT. _Action, movement; initiation, project, effort._

=Destiny.= Fate, lot, doom, star, fortune, necessity, end,
predestination.

ANT. _Choice, will, freedom, volition, free will._

=Destructive.= Ruinous, injurious, pernicious, deleterious, baneful,
detrimental, hurtful, noxious.

ANT. _Constructive, restorative, beneficial, wholesome, preservative._

=Desuetude.= Disuse, non-observance, obsolescence.

ANT. _Use, custom, practice, exercise, operation._

=Desultory.= Rambling, irregular, capricious, wandering, roving,
discursive, cursory, erratic, spasmodic, unsystematic.

ANT. _Methodical, continuous, periodical, diligent, exact, untiring,
persevering, earnest, serious, settled, consecutive._

=Detail.= Account, narrative, recital; detachment; individual,
particular, item, specialty, element, point, component.

ANT. _Totality, whole, generality, aggregation, mass, bulk._

=Detention.= Hindrance, retaining, restraint, stopping.

ANT. _Relinquishment, abandonment, letting go, release, liberation._

=Deter.= Hinder, discourage, prevent, restrain, withhold, terrify,
scare, dishearten, dissuade.

ANT. _Incite, provoke, allure, tempt, seduce, prompt, persuade._

=Deteriorate.= Impair, degrade, debase; decline, degenerate.

ANT. _Ameliorate, promote, advance, rectify._

=Determine.= Settle, adjust, decide; ascertain, verify; influence, lead,
incline; resolve.

ANT. _Vacillate, waver, unsettle, doubt._

=Detest.= Abominate, abhor, execrate, loathe, shrink from.

ANT. _Like, approve, appreciate, praise, love._

=Dethrone.= Depose, uncrown, drive out of power, cause to abdicate.

ANT. _Crown, enthrone, exalt._

=Detract.= Depreciate, disparage, lessen, derogate, calumniate, slander,
defame, decry, vilify.

ANT. _Enhance, augment, increase, flatter, compliment._

=Detriment.= Loss, damage, injury, harm, evil, prejudice, disadvantage,
impairment, inconvenience.

ANT. _Enhancement, remedy, augmentation, improvement, repair,
reinstatement._

=Develop.= Evolve, unfold, educe, disclose, unravel, exhibit, expand,
enlarge; open, grow, mature.

ANT. _Envelop, wrap, conceal, contract, compress; stunt, dwarf, hinder,
prevent._

=Deviate.= Digress, wander, deflect, veer, diverge; depart, err, stray,
swerve; differ, vary.

ANT. _Cohere, coincide; accompany, continue, remain; advance; converge;
agree, assimilate._

=Device.= Contrivance, invention, design, project, plan, scheme,
expedient, resource; wile, artifice, stratagem, evasion, fraud; emblem,
symbol, type.

ANT. _Fortune, luck, hazard, hit; openness, frankness, candor._

=Devious.= Erratic, wandering, deviating, crooked, circuitous,
misleading, treacherous, roundabout.

ANT. _Direct, plain, straightforward, frequented._

=Devise.= Plan, design, contrive, imagine, scheme, project, concoct;
bequeath, leave.

ANT. _Mismanage, miscontrive; inherit._

=Devoid.= Void, wanting, empty, destitute, vacant, unprovided for.

ANT. _Full, supplied, provided, replete, furnished, abundant, plentiful,
sufficient._

=Devolve.= Transfer, consign, convey, demise, devise, deliver; impose,
place, attach, commission, charge, depute; fall, pass, be transferred.

ANT. _Deprive, withhold, recall, cancel, alienate, skip, pass, miss._

=Devotion.= Dedication, consecration, piety, religion, sanctity,
holiness, worship, adoration; attachment, affection, love; ardor,
earnestness, zeal, eagerness, self-sacrifice.

ANT. _Impiety, profanity, sacrilege, irreverence; aversion, alienation,
antipathy, indifference, apathy._

=Devour.= Consume, gorge, eat ravenously, swallow; destroy, annihilate,
waste, swallow up, expend.

ANT. _Disgorge, vomit; save, conserve._

=Dexterity.= Aptitude, skill, expertness, readiness, adroitness.

ANT. _Ineptitude, inability, weakness, awkwardness, clumsiness._

=Diadem.= Crown, chaplet, fillet, wreath, tiara, circlet.

=Diagnosis.= Investigation, determination, analysis.

ANT. _Misjudgment, error._

=Diagnostic.= Symptom, feature, sign, cue, indication, mark, index.

ANT. _Development, consummation, crisis, head, formation._

=Dialect.= Language, phraseology, tongue, speech, provincialism, idiom,
accent.

=Dialogue.= Conversation between two people, colloquy, discourse,
tête-à-tête.

ANT. _Monologue, soliloquy, apostrophe, oration._

=Dictate.= Direct, ordain, command, prescribe, order, bid, require,
decree; utter; prompt, suggest, enjoin, instruct.

ANT. _Follow, repeat, obey, answer; accept._

=Dictation.= Injunction, precept, command, rule, maxim, direction,
utterance.

ANT. _Consultation, conference, council; advice, recommendation._

=Dictatorial.= Imperious, imperative, domineering, arbitrary, absolute,
unlimited, authoritative, unrestricted, overbearing.

ANT. _Condescending, supplicatory, affable, suppliant, unassuming,
persuasive._

=Diction.= Expression, language, phrase, phraseology, style, verbiage,
vocabulary, wording.

ANT. _Provincialism, barbarism, solecism._

=Dictionary.= Lexicon, word-book, glossary, vocabulary.

=Didactic.= Instructive, perceptive, moral, directive, educative.

ANT. _Unsound, misleading, erroneous, uninstructive, pernicious._

=Die.= Expire, decease, depart; wither, perish, decay, decline, fade;
cease, vanish, disappear; sink, faint, fall; subside.

ANT. _Live, recover, be born; survive, exist; originate, develop, grow,
strengthen, flourish, luxuriate, vegetate._

=Diet.= Food, victuals, nourishment, aliment, nutriment, provision,
viands, rations, fare, subsistence; assembly, parliament, congress.

ANT. _Starvation, fasting, abstinence, fast; gluttony, omnivorousness._

=Difference.= Contrast, diversity, variation, variety, discrepancy,
disagreement, disparity, distinction, divergence, unlikeness.

ANT. _Agreement, uniformity, unity, consonance, identity, likeness,
resemblance, harmony, sameness, similarity._

=Differentiate.= Discriminate, individualize, distinguish,
particularize, specify, segregate, identify.

ANT. _Generalize, classify, confuse, amalgamate._

=Difficult.= Arduous, exhausting, severe, onerous, trying, toilsome,
hard, laborious; intricate, involved, obscure, enigmatical;
unmanageable, reserved, opposed, unamenable.

ANT. _Easy, facile, trifling, slight, trivial, pleasant, light; simple,
plain, clear, manifest; approachable, amenable, pliant._

=Diffident.= Modest, doubtful, reluctant, hesitating; bashful, timid,
shy, self-distrustful.

ANT. _Bold, aggressive, forward, arrogant, self-conceited._

=Diffuse=, _a._ Prolix, loose, copious, rambling, verbose, longwinded,
diluted.

ANT. _Epigrammatic, laconic, terse, condensed._

=Digest.= Methodize, systematize, arrange, classify, codify; study,
ponder, consider, contemplate, meditate, con; master, assimilate.

ANT. _Confound, complicate, disorder, derange, disturb; reject, refuse._

=Dignified.= Stately, noble, grand, majestic, self-respecting, imposing,
decorous, august, lofty, exalted, pompous.

ANT. _Stunted, low, mean, unimposing, depressed, ordinary,
self-accusing._

=Dignify.= Advance, promote, exalt, ennoble, prefer; grace, honor,
adorn; elevate, aggrandize.

ANT. _Humiliate, debase, degrade._

=Digress.= Deviate, ramble, wander; differ.

ANT. _Proceed, advance; harmonize, agree._

=Dilapidation.= Ruin, decay, disintegration, downfall, demolition.

ANT. _Construction, reparation; soundness, solidity; fabrication,
building._

=Dilate.= Stretch wide, expand, enlarge, widen, distend.

ANT. _Compress, compact, restrict, narrow, condense, concentrate._

=Dilatory.= Slow, loitering, tardy, procrastinating, dawdling, lagging,
lingering, sluggish.

ANT. _Prompt, vigilant, alert, eager, earnest._

=Diligence.= Industry, assiduity, activity, perseverance, application,
attention, care, heed.

ANT. _Neglect, carelessness, idleness, inertness, inattention,
desultoriness._

=Dim.= Obscure, dark, covered, hidden, dusky, indistinct, uncertain.

ANT. _Bright, clear, manifest, light._

=Dimension.= Measurement, bulk, mass, extent; (pl.) size, capacity,
amplitude, massiveness, greatness.

ANT. _Segment, section, portion, part._

=Diminish.= Lessen, reduce, decrease, abate, subside, shorten, dwarf,
retrench.

ANT. _Augment, amplify, increase, magnify, expand._

=Din.= Racket, clamor, noise, uproar.

ANT. _Crash, explosion; silence._

=Dingy.= Dirty, dull, soiled, tarnished, dim, obscure, somber.

ANT. _Bright, burnished, radiant, glittering, gleaming, luminous._

=Dip.= Immerse, plunge, inundate, soak, steep, drown, submerge.

ANT. _Dry, drain, parch; air, ventilate, evaporate, vaporize._

=Diplomacy.= Negotiation, indirection, tact, artful management,
contrivance, circumvention; embassage, ministry, ambassadorship.

ANT. _Dismissal, congé, recall; candor, naïveté, ingenuousness;
mismanagement, maladministration; self-defeat._

=Diplomatic.= Prudent, wise, tactful, astute, politic, sagacious,
judicious, discreet.

ANT. _Blundering, tactless, injudicious._

=Direct=, _a._ Unswerving, straight, rectilinear, undeviating.

ANT. _Meandering, crooked, roundabout, circuitous._

=Direction.= Course, tendency, aim, bearing; oversight, management,
control, superintendence, conduct; order, command; address,
superscription.

ANT. _Deviation, aberration; miscontrol._

=Directly.= Straightly, immediately, forthwith, soon, speedily,
instantly, promptly, presently, quickly, straightway, at once.

ANT. _Secondarily, by-and-by; remotely, obliquely, circuitously._

=Dirge.= Requiem, elegy, lament, wake, threnody, coronach.

ANT. _Anthem, Te Deum, jubilate, pæan, jubilee, halleluiah._

=Dirt.= Filth, uncleanness, dung, foulness, meanness, filthiness,
defilement.

ANT. _Cleanness, purity, ablution; innocence, spotlessness._

=Dis-.= The prefix _dis-_ has usually a negative, sometimes an
intensive, force. Therefore, for words beginning with it look under the
antonyms of the root words. When its force is intensive, however, they
will be found under the synonyms of the root words. Only a few of
derived significance are here given.

=Disability.= Unfitness, inability, incompetence, incapacity,
disqualification.

ANT. _Merit, fitness, recommendation, qualification, capability._

=Disabuse.= Undeceive, set right, correct, enlighten, inform, rectify.

ANT. _Deceive, delude, hoodwink._

=Disappoint.= Frustrate, foil, defeat, baffle, disconcert, mortify, vex,
betray, tantalize.

ANT. _Fulfil, realize, satisfy, gratify, encourage, verify, support._

=Disaster.= Misfortune, mishap, reverse, calamity, catastrophe.

ANT. _Blessing, benefit, good fortune, profit, gain, boon._

=Disburse.= Spend, expend, consume, waste, use, lay out, pay.

ANT. _Save, economize, hoard, husband._

=Discern.= Observe, discriminate, distinguish, perceive, see, descry,
behold, espy, discover, penetrate, differentiate.

ANT. _Overlook, neglect, miss._

=Discernible.= Discoverable, perceptible, visible, apparent,
conspicuous, palpable, plain, manifest, evident.

ANT. _Obscure, minute, invisible, microscopic, impalpable._

=Discernment.= Sagacity, perception, discrimination, brightness,
astuteness, insight, intelligence, perspicacity, penetration, acuteness,
judgment, ingenuity.

ANT. _Blindness, inattention, dulness, density._

=Discharge=, _v._ Unburden, unload; expel, eject; shoot, fire; release,
exonerate, acquit, liberate, free; dismiss, discard, cashier; remove,
destroy; perform, execute, observe.

ANT. _Confine, charge, load, burden, contain; detain, check, delay,
stop; preserve; ignore._

=Disciple.= Follower, student, believer, pupil, learner, scholar,
supporter, adherent, votary.

ANT. _Master, teacher, professor, leader, rabbi._

=Discipline.= Training, teaching, drill, exercise; control, regulation,
subjection, government; punishment, correction, coercion, chastisement.

ANT. _Laxity, latitude, negligence; reward, encouragement;
disorganization, mutiny, rebellion, confusion, disorder._

=Discomfit.= Defeat, overpower, conquer; foil, disconcert.

ANT. _Encourage, rally, aid, assist._

=Disconcert.= Frustrate, balk, defeat, thwart, baffle; discompose,
embarrass, disturb, upset, perplex, abash, confuse, bewilder.

ANT. _Assist, countenance, encourage, compose, calm, appease, pacify,
tranquilize._

=Disconsolate.= Inconsolable, sorrowful, heart-broken, comfortless,
melancholy, desolate, forlorn, sad.

ANT. _Joyous, cheerful, glad, merry, jovial, happy, blithe._

=Discordance.= Disagreement, discord, dissonance, conflict, opposition.

ANT. _Accordance, harmony, concord._

=Discover.= Find, detect, discern, ferret out, invent, expose,
ascertain, descry, disclose, betray, indicate, manifest.

ANT. _Hide, conceal, cover, secrete, bury, suppress, withhold._

=Discreet.= Discerning, wise, sagacious, prudent, cautious, judicious,
considerate, circumspect.

ANT. _Foolish, heedless, reckless, silly, imprudent, undiscerning,
unrestrained._

=Discrepancy.= Dissonance, discord, discordance, difference, variation,
disagreement.

ANT. _Agreement, harmony, correspondence._

=Discrimination.= Acuteness, penetration, sagacity, discernment,
shrewdness, insight.

ANT. _Dulness, shortsightedness._

=Discursive.= Reasoning, argumentative; roving, wandering, rambling,
desultory, inconsequent.

ANT. _Orderly, coherent, continuous; condensed, succinct, concise;
strategic._

=Discuss.= Debate, argue, reason, agitate, deliberate upon, consider.

ANT. _Confound, obscure; assert, dogmatize._

=Disdain=, _n._ Contempt, scorn, disregard, haughtiness, arrogance.

ANT. _Reverence, respect, esteem, considerateness, humility._

=Disease.= Infirmity, ailment, distemper, complaint, illness, sickness,
malady, indisposition, unsoundness, affection.

ANT. _Health, strength, robustness, soundness, sturdiness, vigor;
convalescence; sanity, salubrity._

=Disgust=, _n._ Distaste, loathing, dislike, repugnance, aversion,
abhorrence.

ANT. _Partiality, desire, liking, relish, fondness._

=Dismal.= Dark, gloomy, cheerless, dull, dreary, melancholy, lonesome,
somber, sad, doleful, funereal; horrible, terrible, frightful.

ANT. _Cheerful, bright, inviting, cordial, gay, propitious, promising._

=Dismay.= Affright, terrify, appal, alarm, intimidate, daunt.

ANT. _Rally, inspirit, assure, encourage, hearten._

=Dismember.= Disintegrate, mutilate, separate, rend asunder, sever.

ANT. _Integrate, incorporate; constitute, construct._

=Dismiss.= Banish, discard, discharge, remove.

ANT. _Recall, welcome._

=Disparage.= Depreciate, decry, undervalue, underrate; defame, reproach.

ANT. _Appreciate, overestimate, extol, praise, exaggerate._

=Dispel.= Drive away, disperse, dissipate, banish, scatter.

ANT. _Collect, summon, accumulate._

=Dispensation.= Apportionment, allotment, distribution; administration;
exemption; system, scheme, plan, régime.

ANT. _Retention, restriction, reservation, injunction, prohibition;
enforcement._

=Disperse.= Dispel, scatter, separate; diffuse, spread, disseminate.

ANT. _Gather, collect, concentrate; recall, summon._

=Display.= Expand, unfold, extend, uncover, open, spread; exhibit, show,
parade.

ANT. _Conceal, hide, wrap, dissemble, suppress._

=Disposition.= Arrangement, location, placing, grouping; management,
control, regulation, direction; tendency, inclination, propensity;
temper, character, nature, humor; willingness; distribution.

ANT. _Confusion, inversion, disorder; mismanagement, laxity; antipathy,
repulsion; obstinacy; mood; agglomeration, collection._

=Disputant.= Litigant, debater, arguer, controversialist, competitor,
claimant.

ANT. _Advocate, auxiliary, partner._

=Dispute=, _v._ Quarrel, wrangle; debate, argue, discuss, agitate,
ventilate; impugn, deny, contradict, oppose, contest.

ANT. _Allow, concede, grant, forego, relinquish._

=Disquisition.= Treatise, dissertation, discourse, essay, discussion.

ANT. _Effusion, tirade, diatribe, rhodomontade._

=Dissect.= Anatomize, scrutinize, analyze, explore, investigate,
examine, sift.

ANT. _Integrate, organize, compound, grasp; comprehend, discern,
diagnose._

=Dissemble.= Conceal, disguise, cloak, hide, restrain, smother.

ANT. _Reveal, confess, manifest, expose, vaunt, profess._

=Dissent.= Differ, disagree, decline.

ANT. _Assent, consent, agree._

=Dissertation.= Disquisition, discussion, treatise.

=Dissipate.= Scatter, vanish, disperse, disappear, waste, squander.

ANT. _Hoard, save, gather, conserve._

=Dissociate.= Separate, sever, disjoin, divide, part, sunder,
disconnect.

ANT. _Associate, join, affiliate._

=Dissolute.= Abandoned, corrupt, loose, profligate, reprobate,
dissipated.

ANT. _Upright, honest, conscientious, self-controlled._

=Distance.= Remoteness, space, interval; absence, separation; reserve,
coldness, stiffness.

ANT. _Proximity, contiguity, nearness, presence, neighborhood, contact._

=Distend.= Dilate, extend, spread, stretch.

ANT. _Contract, narrow, constrict, condense._

=Distil.= Drop, extract, separate; percolate, emanate, drip.

ANT. _Condense, retain; suck; hold._

=Distinct.= Separate, definite, different, clear, plain, unmistakable.

ANT. _Blurred, dim, indefinite, confused, conjoined, obscure._

=Distinguish.= Discern, perceive, tell, discriminate; differentiate;
characterize, mark; separate, divide; signalize, make famous or
celebrated.

ANT. _Confound, miss, confuse._

=Distinguished.= Illustrious, famous, celebrated, noted, eminent,
marked, conspicuous, supreme, extraordinary, consummate.

ANT. _Obscure, inconspicuous, hidden; infamous, notorious._

=Distortion.= Deformity, twist, perversion, falsification,
misrepresentation, sophistry, corruption.

ANT. _Regularity, shapeliness, symmetry; right, truth, verification,
rectification._

=Distract.= Divert, perplex, confuse, disconcert, bewilder, confound,
derange, craze.

ANT. _Unite, fix, compose, concentrate, collect._

=Distraction.= Confusion, perplexity, abstraction, disturbance,
perturbation, agitation; inattention; absence, frenzy, madness;
alienation, aberration; delirium, mania, derangement, lunacy.

ANT. _Attention, composure, self-possession, tranquillity._

=Distress=, _n._ Affliction, calamity, adversity, misery, perplexity,
misfortune; agony, suffering, anguish; privation, destitution, poverty,
indigence.

ANT. _Consolation, relief, assuagement, alleviation; boon, blessing,
pleasure._

=Distribute.= Dispense, scatter, allot, apportion, grant, appoint.

ANT. _Restrict, retain, collect, gather, hold, reserve, keep._

=District.= Region, tract, territory, province, circuit, quarter.

=Disturb.= Agitate, shake, stir, disorder, confuse, derange; molest,
annoy, plague, trouble, vex, worry; interrupt, hinder.

ANT. _Soothe, quiet, assist, compose, pacify; arrange, order._

=Diversion.= Detour, deviation, divergence; recreation, amusement,
enjoyment, pastime.

ANT. _Directness, business, procedure, continuity, task, labor._

=Diversify.= Vary, change, alter, modify; variegate, streak, spot.

ANT. _Settle, fix, stereotype, arrest._

=Diversity.= Difference, dissimilitude, variation, unlikeness,
divergence, dissonance, heterogeneousness, multiformity.

ANT. _Identity, similarity, uniformity, consonance, homogeneousness,
coincidence._

=Divest.= Dismantle, strip, unclothe, undress, unrobe, deprive.

ANT. _Clothe, invest, shroud, indue, encumber._

=Divide.= Sever, part, separate, disunite, sunder; alienate, estrange;
distribute, allot, apportion, assign, share, dispense.

ANT. _Unite, commingle, collocate, congregate, convene._

=Divination.= Magic, foretelling, augury, prophecy, presage, prediction.

ANT. _Investigation, study; information; analysis._

=Divorce=, _v._ Separate, part, sunder, alienate, disunite.

ANT. _Marry, wed, betroth, consort._

=Do.= Accomplish, achieve, bring to pass, complete, effect, realize,
discharge, perpetuate, perform, commit, consummate, actualize; execute,
finish, fulfil; work out, transact.

ANT. _Neglect, ruin, spoil, defeat, destroy, mar, miscarry, fail,
frustrate, baffle, omit, come short._

=Docile.= Manageable, amenable, compliant, gentle, tame, submissive,
yielding, tractable, pliable, obedient.

ANT. _Obstinate, firm, inflexible, stubborn, self-willed, wilful,
determined, dogged, resolute, opinionated._

=Doctrine.= Tenet, dogma, opinion, belief, precept, principle, teaching,
creed.

ANT. _Duty, practice, action, conduct, operation, application._

=Dogmatic.= Arrogant, authoritative, imperious, domineering, positive,
self-opinionated, doctrinal, magisterial, dictatorial.

ANT. _Practical, active, modest, diffident, vacillating, considerate._

=Domestic.= Private, family, familiar, homelike.

ANT. _Public, foreign, alien, strange._

=Domicile.= Home, abode, house, residence, mansion, dwelling.

ANT. _World, wilderness; estrangement, migration, travel, exile._

=Dominance=, =Domination=. Superiority, lordship, mastery, sway,
supremacy, command, ascendancy, government.

ANT. _Servility, subjection, inferiority, weakness, minority,
subordination._

=Domineer.= Lord, tyrannize, dictate, bully, swagger.

ANT. _Submit, yield, bow, defer, patronize, succumb; resist, contend._

=Dominion.= Government, domination, supremacy, sway, dominance, control,
authority, domain, territory, sovereignty.

ANT. _Submission, subjugation, servitude._

=Doom=, _n._ Condemnation, fate, sentence, judgment, destiny, verdict.

ANT. _Liberation, respite, escape, acquittal, discharge._

=Dormant.= Sleeping, latent, inert, quiescent.

ANT. _Active, operative, vigilant, awake, alert._

=Doubt=, _n._ Distrust, skepticism, disbelief, suspicion, suspense,
hesitation, incredulity, irresolution, misgiving, unbelief, perplexity,
uncertainty.

ANT. _Conviction, certainty, assurance; belief, confidence;
determination, resolution, resolve._

=Downwards.= Below, beneath, down.

ANT. _Upwards, above, aloft._

=Drag.= Draw, pull, haul, bring.

ANT. _Carry, push, propel, raise._

=Drain.= Empty, exhaust, draw, strain, dry.

ANT. _Fill, supply, replenish, moisten, drench._

=Draw.= Haul, lead, pull, drag, lure, entice, attract, incline, induce.

ANT. _Repel, repulse, rebuff, alienate, estrange, reject._

=Dread=, _n._ Fear, terror, awe, apprehension, horror, alarm.

ANT. _Confidence, courage; familiarity._

=Dream.= Reverie, fancy, vision, delusion, conceit, hallucination,
romance, trance, vagary.

ANT. _Fact, reality, realization, verity, certainty, substance._

=Dreary.= Dismal, gloomy, dark, lonesome, solitary, cheerless.

ANT. _Cheerful, bright, promising, inviting._

=Dress.= Clothing, garments, apparel, garb, array, uniform, attire,
costume, raiment, habiliments, vesture, robes, habit, vestments.

ANT. _Nakedness, disarray, nudity, bareness, deshabille, exposure,
undress._

=Drift=, _n._ Direction, bearing, course; aim, purpose, intention,
scope, tendency, design; rush, impulse, current; heap, mass.

ANT. _Aimlessness, vagueness, aberrancy, indefiniteness._

=Drink.= Swallow, imbibe, quaff, drain, absorb, suck in.

ANT. _Pour, exude, disgorge, water, moisten._

=Drive.= Impel, propel, compel, push, thrust, urge; repulse, repel,
resist; ride.

ANT. _Draw, attract, invite, summon._

=Droll.= Whimsical, comical, ludicrous, funny, ridiculous, odd, queer,
facetious.

ANT. _Sober, solemn, tragic, funereal._

=Droop.= Languish, sink, decline, flag, pine, wither, fade, wilt.

ANT. _Prosper, revive, rally, flourish, raise, luxuriate._

=Drown.= Sink, immerse, swamp, overwhelm, overflow, inundate, deluge,
flood, overcome, overpower.

ANT. _Dry, drain, air, ventilate, expose._

=Dry.= Arid, parched; thirsty, craving drink; barren, meager, dull,
dreary, tedious, plain; severe, sarcastic, sharp, keen.

ANT. _Moist, fresh, juicy; lively, entertaining; fulsome, florid._

=Due.= Proper, fitting, suitable, appropriate, becoming; owing,
obligatory.

ANT. _Improper, unsuitable, independent; unfair, extravagant,
deficient._

=Dull.= Heavy, stupid, unintelligent, apathetic, insensible, callous,
dead; inert, lifeless, inactive, slow, torpid; blunt, obtuse; gloomy,
sad, dismal; dim, obscure; wearisome, dreary, tedious.

ANT. _Bright, light, sparkling, brilliant, quick, interesting, lively,
keen, witty, cheery, inviting, entertaining._

=Dumb.= Speechless, mute, silent, still, inarticulate.

ANT. _Talkative, chatty, loquacious._

=Duplicate.= Copy, counterpart, facsimile, imitation, likeness, replica,
reproduction, double, transcript.

ANT. _Original, pattern, prototype, archetype, model._

=Duplicity.= Deceit, deception, circumvention, guile, artifice,
hypocrisy, fraud, dishonesty.

ANT. _Candor, straightforwardness, frankness, sincerity, honesty._

=Duration.= Continuance, term, period, protraction, prolongation (_in
time_).

ANT. _Brevity, momentariness; infinity, eternity._

=Duty.= Office, responsibility, obligation, function, business,
accountability, right, righteousness.

ANT. _Immunity, freedom, license, exemption, dispensation._

=Dwell.= Live, reside, rest, stop, stay, abide, lodge, sojourn.

ANT. _Visit, migrate, hasten, flit, roam, depart, travel._




                                   E


=Eager.= Impatient, anxious, desirous, longing, yearning, ardent,
enthusiastic, earnest, animated, fervent, impetuous, vehement.

ANT. _Torpid, sluggish, slow, backward, belated, late, tardy._

=Earn.= Acquire, merit, win, get, gain, procure, deserve, achieve,
obtain, realize.

ANT. _Waste, lose, spend, forfeit, squander._

=Earnest.= Eager, zealous, fervent; steady, intent, fixed; sincere,
serious, true; important, momentous.

ANT. _Indifferent, irresolute, sportive, jesting, flippant._

=Ease.= Facility, knack, readiness, expertness, easiness, satisfaction,
contentment, comfort, repose, refreshment, relief.

ANT. _Perplexity, irritation, annoyance, constraint, disquiet, trouble,
vexation, difficulty, uneasiness, awkwardness, worry._

=Easy.= Quiet, comfortable, tranquil, compliant, facile, complacent,
submissive; unaffected, natural, smooth; moderate, affluent.

ANT. _Disturbed, uncomfortable, hard, difficult, anxious, exacting._

=Ebb.= Retire, recede, abate, decrease, subside, wane, sink.

ANT. _Flow, swell, increase, flood, inundate, deluge._

=Eccentric.= Irregular, abnormal, uncommon, peculiar, singular, wayward,
strange, aberrant, erratic, whimsical.

ANT. _Normal, conventional, common, usual, regular, customary._

=Echo.= Resonance, repetition, reverberation, imitation, answer.

ANT. _Sound, voice, original, tone, noise, speech._

=Eclipse=, _n._ Obscuration, dimming, obscurity, hiding, shrouding,
concealment, vanishing, extinction, obliteration, annihilation,
destruction.

ANT. _Illumination, enlightenment, revelation; perpetuation; radiation;
unveiling, discovery._

=Economics.= Science of wealth, public _or_ political economy; household
management, household economy, housewifery.

=Economize.= Save, husband, retrench, manage frugally, be frugal _or_
prudent, practice economy, avoid waste; develop resources, utilize.

ANT. _Waste, misuse, sacrifice, be lavish, profuse_, or _extravagant;
squander, dissipate_.

=Economy.= Thrift, thriftiness, frugality, providence, good husbandry;
management, arrangement, regulation, administration; plan, system,
established order, dispensation.

ANT. _Prodigality, wastefulness, extravagance, lavishness._

=Ecstasy.= Transport, rapture, inspiration, fervor, frenzy, emotion,
delight, enthusiasm, happiness.

ANT. _Coolness, dulness, ennui, weariness, tedium, indifference._

=Edge.= Border, margin, brink, rim, brim, verge; sharpness, keenness,
intensity, animation, zest.

ANT. _Center, interior; dulness, bluntness, flatness; inertness,
inactivity._

=Edible.= Eatable, esculent, wholesome, culinary.

ANT. _Poisonous, deleterious, harmful, dangerous, noxious, uneatable._

=Edict.= Decree, command, order, proclamation, mandate, ordinance.

ANT. _Hoax, canard; request, wish._

=Edifice.= Building, tenement, fabric, structure.

ANT. _Ruin, heap, demolition, destruction._

=Edify.= Build up, enlighten, improve, stimulate, strengthen, nurture.

ANT. _Defile, debase, mislead, misguide, pervert, corrupt._

=Edit.= Revise, correct, prepare for the press, annotate, emend; bring
out; conduct, manage.

ANT. _Distort, pervert, falsify, garble, mutilate._

=Educate.= Discipline, teach, instruct, train, nurture, breed, develop.

ANT. _Dwarf, stunt, hinder; pervert, corrupt._

=Education.= Training, teaching, tuition, instruction, schooling,
discipline, cultivation, breeding, development, nurture, information,
knowledge, learning, reading, study.

ANT. _Ignorance, illiteracy, nescience, blindness, darkness._

=Educe.= Draw out, extract, elicit, evolve, produce.

ANT. _Adduce, cite, allege, quote, advance, name, mention; apply,
insert, deposit, bestow._

=Efface.= Obliterate, erase, blot out, destroy, cancel, eradicate,
expunge.

ANT. _Restore, revive, delineate, imprint, portray, replace, reinstate,
renew._

=Effect=, _n._ Result, consequence, event, issue; force, efficiency,
validity, weight, power; purport, drift, tenor, meaning; fact, reality,
truth; impression, appearance, _ensemble_; (_pl._) chattels, goods,
commodities, property, movables.

ANT. _Cause, motive, source, incentive; origin._

=Effect=, _v._ Cause, produce, accomplish, change, achieve, create,
execute, perform, realize, compass, effectuate, consummate, fulfil.

ANT. _Obviate, frustrate, prevent, mar, hinder; deter, deflect._

=Effective.= Adequate, competent, effectual, sufficient; potent, cogent,
efficacious, forcible, energetic, powerful; active, efficient,
operative; conducive; serviceable, able, talented.

ANT. _Weak, futile, nugatory, inconducive, inoperative, inadequate,
impotent, incompetent, powerless._

=Effectuate.= Accomplish, effect, execute, achieve, secure, fulfil.

ANT. _Prevent, hinder, abolish, defeat, nullify, stifle, blight._

=Effeminate.= Feminine, womanly, delicate; womanish, feeble, unmanly,
timorous, enervated, soft, weak, emasculated.

ANT. _Strong, manly, masculine, virile, manlike, vigorous, hardy,
robust._

=Effervesce.= Boil, bubble, froth, foam, ferment, sparkle; _express
irrepressible emotion_.

ANT. _Subside; acquiesce, refrain, bear, brook, digest._

=Effete.= Barren, unfruitful; decayed, spent, exhausted, worn, wasted,
decrepit.

ANT. _Vigorous, fertile, prolific, productive, exuberant, luxuriant,
rank._

=Efficacious.= Effectual, effective, active, operative, powerful,
adequate, cogent.

ANT. _Insufficient, inadequate, ineffectual._

=Efficacy.= Power, potency, force, competency, strength, effectiveness,
vigor, energy, usefulness.

ANT. _Inefficacy, incompetency._

=Efficiency.= Power, strength, capability, virtue, energy, usefulness,
productiveness, effectiveness; attentiveness, aptitude, skill,
ingenuity, competence, inventiveness, readiness, ingeniousness, faculty,
cleverness, genius, acuteness.

ANT. _Weakness, inability, incompetence, unproductivity; inattention,
awkwardness, absence of mind, thoughtlessness, preoccupation,
distraction, laziness, stupidity._

=Efficient.= Operative, active, potent, efficacious, effective,
effectual; able, skilled, ready, energetic, proficient, competent.

ANT. _Inactive, impotent, ineffective, abortive; dull, inert, indolent,
sluggish, senseless, stupid._

=Effigy.= Image, representation, figure, statue, likeness; dummy.

ANT. _Caricature, misrepresentation, distortion; bust, portrait._

=Efflorescence.= Flowering, blooming, blossoming, budding; outburst;
bloom, luxuriance.

ANT. _Deflorescence, fading, waning, blasting, withering; nudity,
bareness, denudation; absorption, desiccation._

=Effluence.= Emanation, flow, effusion, efflux; issue, outpouring;
emission, discharge; abundance, overflow.

ANT. _Influx, infusion, refluence, ebb; exhaustion; absorption,
retention._

=Effluvium.= Exhalation, emanation, malaria, miasma, stink, noxious
vapor.

ANT. _Ventilation, scent, disinfectant; zephyr, aroma, balm._

=Effort.= Endeavor, attempt, trial, exertion, struggle, essay, strain,
striving, stretch.

ANT. _Failure, frustration, futility, weakness, deficiency,
misadventure; ease, inactivity, spontaneity, facility._

=Effrontery.= Assurance, impudence, audacity, shamelessness,
presumption, hardihood, boldness, brass; insolence, sauciness.

ANT. _Modesty, coyness, shyness, diffidence, sensitiveness, shrinking,
timidity, bashfulness._

=Effulgence.= Brilliancy, splendor, luster, brightness, radiance,
refulgence, glory, flame, luminosity, resplendence.

ANT. _Darkness, tenebrosity, obscuration, gloom, opaqueness, shade._

=Effuse=, _a._ Profuse, poured forth freely, lavish, prodigal, copious,
abundant, effluent.

ANT. _Dry, scanty, sparing, meager, thin._

=Effusion.= Outpouring, effluence, discharge, emission; abundance;
speech, address, oration; waste, shedding, spilling.

ANT. _Infusion, absorption; essay, reading, document, instrument;
influx; retention._

=Effusive.= Lavish, generous, profuse, prodigal, gushing; spread widely,
diffused.

ANT. _Sparing; taciturn, laconic, curt, brief._

=Egoism.= Selfishness, self-assurance, self-conceit, self-consciousness,
self-confidence, self-esteem, conceit, vanity, self-assertion,
self-praise, self-admiration, self-love, self-exaltation.

ANT. _Self-abnegation, deference, self-forgetfulness, diffidence,
bashfulness, humility, modesty, self-distrust, shyness, unobtrusiveness,
considerateness, unostentatiousness._

=Egregious.= Surpassing, extraordinary, remarkable, enormous, monstrous,
outrageous, tremendous, prodigious, peculiar; flagrant, gross.

ANT. _Ordinary, usual, commonplace, mediocre, everyday._

=Egress.= Exit, way out, departure, going out, outlet; sally.

ANT. _Entrance, avenue, approach, inlet; inroad, incursion, invasion._

=Either.= One _or_ the other of two; each, both.

ANT. _Neither, not any one of two._

=Ejaculation.= Exclamation, cry, utterance; expletive.

ANT. _Silence, speechlessness, dumfounderment; drawl; oration, speech._

=Eject.= Cast out, emit, vomit, void, evacuate; expel, dismiss,
discharge, oust; reject, banish, throw aside, cast away.

ANT. _Retain, absorb; accept, receive, house, store, admit, accommodate,
welcome; introduce, inject._

=Eke out.= Add to, supply, increase, stretch, raise, augment, help.

ANT. _Stint, drain, withhold, diminish, exhaust._

=Elaborate.= Improve, refine, develop, mature, execute, forge, prepare,
concoct, work upon, labor over.

ANT. _Slight, neglect, disregard, overlook; miscontrive, mismanage;
chance, hit, guess, conjecture, extemporize._

=Elapse.= Pass, slip, glide away, lapse; intervene.

ANT. _Wait, abide, halt, hold; continue, endure; grasp, seize._

=Elastic.= Flexible, springy, resilient, extensile, ductile, buoyant;
alterable, modifiable; rebounding, recoiling.

ANT. _Rigid, tough, inflexible; crystallized, unchangeable; dull,
inert._

=Elated.= Cheered, excited, exhilarated, animated, flushed, inspirited,
inflated.

ANT. _Depressed, dejected, discouraged, dispirited, humiliated, abashed,
confounded._

=Elder.= Senior, older, more ancient, earlier born; superior; precedent.

ANT. _Younger, junior, juvenile._

=Elect=, _a._ Picked, selected, chosen, choice; appointed, delegated;
redeemed, saved; élite, accepted.

ANT. _Rejected, doomed, reprobate; abandoned, depraved._

=Election.= Selection, preference, choice; appointment by vote;
alternative, free will, freedom, power to choose; discrimination,
discernment, distinction; predestination.

ANT. _Postponement; rejection, reprobation, abandonment._

=Electric.= Charged with electricity, relating to electricity;
inspiring, inspiriting, stimulating; lightninglike, swift, flashing,
thrilling, stirring, exciting.

=Electrify.= Charge with electricity, render electric; rouse, excite,
thrill, stir, astonish, astound, amaze, appal.

ANT. “_Kill_” (of something charged, from which the electricity is
suddenly removed); _disconnect, sever_ (of apparatus for carrying
electricity); _stupefy, soothe, deaden, calm, mesmerize_.

=Elegance.= Grace, beauty, propriety, symmetry; polish, politeness,
refinement, gentility, gracefulness, taste.

ANT. _Deformity, awkwardness, coarseness, rudeness, disproportion._

=Elegant.= Graceful, well-formed, symmetrical, lovely, handsome, comely,
refined, tasteful, ornamental, accomplished, polished.

ANT. _Awkward, deformed, ill-proportioned, misshapen, ungraceful,
hideous, coarse, rude._

=Elegy.= Dirge, threnody, lament, jeremiad, requiem, coronach, funeral
song; serious _or_ melancholy poem.

ANT. _Pæan, jubilee, halleluiah, anthem._

=Element.= Constituent, component, ingredient, part, principle, atom;
(_pl._) rudiments, outlines, essential parts.

ANT. _Whole, mass, aggregate, total, totality, gross, sum, amount._

=Elementary.= Simple, uncompounded, rudimentary, primary; physical,
material, natural; ultimate, component, constituent.

ANT. _Compounded, collective, aggregate, developed, organized;
immaterial, incorporeal, impalpable._

=Elevate.= Raise, lift up, exalt, promote, advance, aggrandize; improve,
dignify, ennoble, refine, inspire, greaten; animate, elate, cheer,
excite, exhilarate.

ANT. _Lower, degrade, debase, depress, demean, humble, humiliate._

=Elevation.= Raising, elevating; promotion, aggrandizement, exaltation;
dignity, refinement, improvement; amelioration; hill, height, altitude,
superiority, eminence, loftiness, tallness.

ANT. _Degradation, debasement, depression, decline, fall, depth;
deterioration, inferiority; shortness, stuntedness._

=Elicit.= Draw out, evoke, educe, call forth, bring out, deduce, bring
to light; express, extract, evolve, worm out, extort.

ANT. _Insert, implant, introduce, inoculate, inject, infuse, instill,
incorporate, insinuate; suggest._

=Eligible.= Desirable, preferable, worthy of choice, qualified, capable,
suitable, prime, choice.

ANT. _Worthless, ordinary, indifferent, unprofitable, undesirable._

=Elimination.= Expulsion, exclusion, discharge, removal, rejection,
eradication, erasure, riddance, obliteration.

ANT. _Inclusion, retention; approval; preservation, conservation._

=Elision.= Omission, ejection, ellipsis, abridgment, excerption.

ANT. _Insertion, inoculation, introduction, implantation; inclusion;
augmentation._

=Elliptical.= Contracted, abbreviated; suggestive, latent, allusive;
significant, pregnant; defective, incomplete.

ANT. _Explanatory, categorical, full; expository, declaratory,
enunciative._

=Elocution.= Speech, power of expression, utterance, delivery,
declamatory art; eloquence, oratory.

ANT. _Reading, lection._

=Elongation.= Protraction, extension, production, drawing out,
continuation; withdrawal, distance.

ANT. _Apocope, elision, curtailment, abridgment, contraction._

=Eloquence.= Oratory, graceful utterance, appropriate expression,
impassioned speech.

ANT. _Verbosity, wordiness, prolixity, tediousness; grandiloquence,
bombast, fustian._

=Elucidate.= Explain, illustrate, clear, make manifest, unfold, make
plain, expound.

ANT. _Confuse, mystify, obscure, puzzle, bewilder, befog._

=Elucidation.= Explanation, exposition, illustration, demonstration;
comment, annotation, commentary, gloss, scholium.

ANT. _Mystification, confusion; obscurity, ambiguity._

=Elude.= Escape, avoid, shun, slip away; baffle, foil, thwart,
disappoint, disconcert, balk, frustrate, evade, mock.

ANT. _Meet, encounter, confront; dare, defy; court, invite, challenge._

=Elusive, Elusory.= Evasive, delusive, equivocating, deceptive,
fraudulent, fallacious, deceitful, illusory; shuffling, shifting,
slippery, fugitive; shadowy, unsubstantial, intangible.

ANT. _Persistent, staple, certain, solid; true, sure, unequivocal._

=Em-=, or =en-=. A prefix meaning _in_ or _into_, sometimes
interchangeable with _in-_. The form _em-_ is used before words
beginning with _p_, _b_, or _m_. The prefix has also a causal force.
Words beginning with this prefix, whose original meaning is simply the
meaning of the root word plus that of the prefix, are omitted here, for
their synonyms and antonyms may be readily formed from those of the root
word.

=Emaciation.= Leanness, lankness, thinness, tenuity, attenuation,
wasting, gauntness, skinniness, meagerness.

ANT. _Obesity, fatness, corpulence._

=Emanate.= Flow forth continuously, issue, arise, spring, proceed,
emerge.

ANT. _End, terminate, culminate, eventuate, cease; dry up._

=Emancipate.= Free, enfranchise, liberate, rescue, release, manumit,
unfetter, unchain, disenthrall, set free.

ANT. _Subjugate, enslave, enthrall, bind; disqualify, incapacitate._

=Embalm.= Preserve, cherish, enshrine, keep; scent, perfume, make
fragrant; treasure, store, consecrate.

ANT. _Abandon, desecrate, expose, vulgarize, violate, profane._

=Embargo.= Prohibition, ban, restraint, hindrance, restriction;
detention, stoppage.

ANT. _Permit, permission, release, discharge, congé, liberation,
dismissal._

=Embark.= Ship; engage, enlist, put in, invest; launch, enter, start.

ANT. _Land, arrive, anchor, disembark, go ashore._

=Embarrass.= Entangle, perplex, make intricate _or_ difficult; distress,
trouble, harass, hamper, confuse, disconcert, clog, puzzle, abash,
confound, encumber.

ANT. _Extricate, relieve, disentangle, liberate, deliver; expedite,
facilitate, accelerate, assist; calm, compose, tranquilize._

=Embellish.= Adorn, decorate, ornament, deck, beautify.

ANT. _Detract, diminish, derogate from, strip, destroy, denude._

=Embezzle.= Appropriate, steal, purloin, peculate; falsify, forge,
counterfeit.

ANT. _Square, clear, balance; restore, refund, retrieve._

=Embitter.= Make bitter, aggravate, exacerbate, exasperate, enrage,
anger, madden; molest, provoke, excite.

ANT. _Alleviate, soothe; compose, quiet, pacify; sweeten; delight,
please, comfort._

=Emblem.= Figure, image, sign, symbol, token, type, attribute; device,
cognizance, representation; badge, mark, signal.

ANT. _Disguise, decoy, incognito, ruse, blind, domino, mask._

=Embody.= Incorporate, make corporeal, concentrate, compact, integrate,
combine, collect; systematize, codify; comprehend, include, embrace,
comprise, contain.

ANT. _Analyze, dismember, disband, disintegrate, dissipate._

=Embolden.= Encourage, animate, reassure, inspirit, incite, urge,
stimulate.

ANT. _Intimidate, frighten, alarm, deter, overwhelm, discourage._

=Embosomed.= Concealed, enveloped, surrounded, encircled, enfolded.

ANT. _Exposed, open, unconcealed, revealed._

=Embrace.= Clasp, hug, press; seize, welcome, accept; comprehend,
include, cover, contain, embody, take in.

ANT. _Cast off, reject; exclude, except._

=Embroider.= Embellish, enrich, emboss, adorn with needlework.

ANT. _Darn, botch, patch, repair._

=Embroil.= Implicate, entangle, ensnarl, involve; disturb, perplex,
confuse, distract, trouble.

ANT. _Extricate, separate, remove; compose, pacify, arrange, calm._

=Embryo.= Germ, rudiment, nucleus, origin.

ANT. _Development, completion, maturity, fulfilment._

=Emendation.= Amendment, correction, rectification, reformation,
improvement.

ANT. _Error, defect, fault, incorrectness, inaccuracy._

=Emerge.= Rise, issue, emanate, escape; appear, become visible.

ANT. _Disappear, sink; retreat, abscond, recede; enter; depart._

=Emergency.= Exigency, urgency, necessity, crisis, difficulty,
extremity, strait; juncture, turn of events; unforeseen occasion;
embarrassment, difficulty, casualty.

ANT. _Rescue, deliverance, solution, provision, arrangement,
anticipation, foresight, climax._

=Emigration.= Removal, exodus, migration from, colonization; departure.

ANT. _Immigration, migration to_ or _into; settlement, sojourn, abode,
stay; domiciliation, domestication_.

=Eminence.= Prominence, projection, elevation, protuberance, hill, high
point; distinction, celebrity, reputation, renown, repute, fame,
preferment; note, conspicuousness; superiority.

ANT. _Debasement, degradation, lowliness, decline; infamy, disgrace,
shame, obloquy, opprobrium, scandal._

=Eminent.= High, lofty, elevated; celebrated, distinguished, prominent,
illustrious, remarkable, renowned, conspicuous, famous, reputed.

ANT. _Mediocre, worthless; infamous, notorious; egregious, outrageous._

=Emission.= Ejection, expulsion, issue; issuance, putting into
circulation.

ANT. _Injection, admission, entrance._

=Emit.= Eject, expel, throw out; issue, decree, discharge; put into
circulation.

ANT. _Inject; retain, withhold._

=Emollient.= Softening, laxative, balsamic, soothing, palliative.

ANT. _Irritant, astringent, irritating, galling._

=Emolument.= Gain, pay, profit, remuneration, wages, salary, income,
hire, stipend, lucre, compensation; advantage, benefit; gratuity,
perquisite.

ANT. _Loss, damage, waste; disadvantage._

=Emotion.= Feeling, passion, excitement, agitation, sensibility,
perturbation, tremor, trepidation.

ANT. _Indifference, insensibility, impassiveness, stoicism,
imperturbability._

=Emphasis.= Stress, force, ictus; weight, significance, impressiveness.

ANT. _Elision, monotony, uniformity._

=Emphatic.= Significant, expressive, strong, forcible, positive,
energetic, decided, distinct, unequivocal, earnest, important, special.

ANT. _Mild, ordinary, usual, unimportant, commonplace, unnoticeable,
cool, unimpassioned, undemonstrative._

=Empire.= Dominion, supremacy, sovereignty, authority, government,
command, control, sway, rule, kingdom.

ANT. _Independence, insurrection, anarchy, mutiny, sedition, uprising._

=Empiric, Empirical.= Tentative, experimental, provisional, hypothetic,
experiential; quackish.

ANT. _Regular, scientific, uniform, constant, inductive, categorical._

=Employ.= Engage, call, hire, use, engross, busy, exercise; apply,
enlist, entrust, occupy, economize.

ANT. _Discard, dismiss, misuse._

=Employment.= Business, vocation, pursuit, calling, profession, craft,
trade, occupation; service, agency, office, employ; application,
engrossment.

ANT. _Leisure, laziness, indolence; recreation, vacation._

=Empower.= Commission, authorize, warrant, qualify; enable, encourage;
delegate, sanction, direct.

ANT. _Hinder, prevent, discourage, disqualify, disable; recall, revoke,
withdraw._

=Empty=, _a._ Void, without contents, vacant, unoccupied; destitute,
devoid; unsupplied, unfurnished, unfilled; unsatisfactory, vain, hollow,
unsubstantial; desolate, waste, deserted, uninhabited; senseless, weak,
frivolous; clear, unencumbered, unobstructed, vacuous, untenanted,
evacuated; silly, idle, deficient.

ANT. _Full, occupied, inhabited, colonized, obstructed, encumbered;
cultivated, informed, well-instructed, sensible, experienced;
significant, important, forcible, substantial._

=Emulation.= Rivalry, desire to excel, exceed, _or_ surpass,
competition; jealousy, envy, contention; vying, aspiration, contest.

ANT. _Stagnation, inactivity, dulness; contempt, disregard, disdain,
disaffection; abandonment, resignation, discouragement._

=Enable.= Empower, strengthen, qualify, make capable, capacitate,
invigorate.

ANT. _Weaken, disqualify, incapacitate, disable, hinder._

=Enact.= Decree, establish by law, ordain; play, personate, represent,
act, feign, dissimulate; pass.

ANT. _Abolish, abrogate, annul, cancel, repeal, rescind, expunge._

=Enamor.= Charm, captivate, fascinate, inflame with love, enslave,
endear, bewitch, enchain.

ANT. _Disenthrall, repel, estrange, disgust, disenchant, horrify._

=Encamp.= Bivouac, pitch, settle, quarter, camp.

ANT. _March, decamp, retire, retreat, advance, charge._

=Enchain.= Bind with chains, fetter, manacle, enslave.

ANT. _Loose, liberate, manumit, extricate, free._

=Enchant.= Charm, fascinate, bewitch, enamor, captivate, win, catch,
lead captive; enrapture, ravish, transport, beatify, delight.

ANT. _Repel, estrange, disgust, horrify, shock, alienate._

=Enchantment.= Incantation, fascination, charm, conjuration, necromancy,
magic, witchery, sorcery, spell; delight, rapture, ravishment,
transport, bliss.

ANT. _Disillusionment, repulsion, shock, alienation._

=Encircle.= Surround, encompass, environ, gird, enclose; embrace, fold,
clasp; hem in, beset, circumscribe.

=Enclose.= Encompass, encircle, shut, include, environ, envelop, wrap,
circumscribe.

=Enclosure.= Space enclosed, compass, circle; yard, compound; fence,
ring, limit, park, field, boundary, precinct.

ANT. _Space, waste, desert, wild, open, prairie, wilderness, stretch,
void, clearing._

=Encomium.= Eulogy, praise, eulogium, panegyric, commendation,
laudation, pæan, compliment, good word.

ANT. _Invective, taunt, vituperation, obloquy, vilification, slander._

=Encompass.= Encircle, enclose, gird, hem in, surround, circumscribe.

=Encounter.= Meet, confront, face, withstand; assault, combat, engage,
fight, attack, contend, compete with; fall upon.

ANT. _Elude, avoid, escape, shun, miss, flee, frustrate._

=Encourage.= Inspirit, animate, embolden, hearten, incite, stimulate;
cheer, comfort, console; support, countenance, reassure; advance,
further; foster, abet, aid, help, patronize; prompt, urge.

ANT. _Deter, discourage, dishearten, dissuade; depress, deject; provoke,
incite, exasperate; retard, hinder, prevent._

=Encroach.= Intrude, trespass, infringe, invade; creep, advance
stealthily; transgress.

ANT. _Respect, recognize, observe; protect; refrain._

=Encumber.= Clog, load, impede, obstruct, hinder, burden, overload;
embarrass, perplex, involve, entangle, complicate.

ANT. _Free, liberate; assist, aid, help; relieve, straighten._

=Encumbrance.= Load, impediment, hindrance; debt, claim, liability.

ANT. _Aid, assistance; relief; cancelation._

=End=, _n._ Limit, outcome, period, extremity, extent, bound,
conclusion, boundary, completion, close, effect, expiration, finish,
finis, finale; issue, goal, intent, fulfilment, purpose, point, result,
termination, terminus; utmost, uttermost; accomplishment, achievement;
cessation, consummation, design, consequence; fragment, scrap, remnant.

ANT. _Commencement, origin, beginning, source, spring, start, fountain,
arising, inception, opening, initiation, outset, rise._

=End=, _v._ Cease, break off, close, complete, conclude, stop, quit,
desist, terminate, finish, expire, wind up; destroy, kill, put to death.

ANT. _Begin, commence, initiate, start, open; restore, revivify._

=Endanger.= Hazard, risk, peril; commit, compromise, expose to danger,
jeopardize.

ANT. _Protect, shield, save, defend, cover, screen, preserve._

=Endear.= Make dear, attach, secure the affection of, gain; conciliate.

ANT. _Estrange, alienate, embitter, antagonize._

=Endeavor=, _v._ Attempt, essay, try, strive, undertake, make effort,
labor, aim, exert one’s self.

ANT. _Neglect, omit, abandon, drop, dismiss, pass by, let go, give up,
throw away, up_, or _over, overlook_.

=Endless.= Interminable, boundless, limitless, infinite, immeasurable,
illimitable; everlasting, perpetual, eternal, unending, without end;
incessant, ceaseless, uninterrupted, continual, continuous; immortal,
deathless, undying, imperishable.

ANT. _Limited, brief, temporary, periodic, transient, fugitive, finite,
ephemeral, transitory, temporal._

=Endow.= Furnish with dowry, enrich, endue, put on, invest, present,
furnish, qualify, supply, clothe.

ANT. _Denude, deprive, divest, spoliate, strip, impoverish, despoil._

=Endowment.= Grant, gift, bequest, bounty, present, largess, boon;
property, fund, revenue; talent, faculty, power, quality, capability,
aptitude, parts, genius, qualification, ability; attainment, provision,
benefaction.

ANT. _Poverty, lack, incapacity, impoverishment, spoliation._

=Endure.= Suffer, submit, bear, tolerate, allow, sustain, support,
undergo, abide, afford, brook; experience; continue, remain, persist, be
permanent.

ANT. _Fail, sink, succumb, surrender, yield, break down, despair, droop,
faint, fall, falter, give out, give up._

=Enemy.= Adversary, competitor, foe, opponent, rival, antagonist.

ANT. _Abettor, ally, friend, accomplice, supporter, helper, accessory,
associate, companion, familiar, confidant, adherent._

=Energetic.= Vigorous, active, forcible, powerful, effective, potent,
efficacious, efficient, able, capable.

ANT. _Weak, languid, faint, drooping, pining, exhausted, feeble;
listless, spiritless, inactive._

=Energy.= Agility, activity, force, power, potency, strength, intensity,
vigor, might, efficacy, efficiency; spirit, animation, life, manliness,
animal spirits, zeal.

ANT. _Indolence, slowness, sloth, clumsiness, lassitude, inactivity,
sluggishness, heaviness, inertness, laziness._

=Enervate.= Unnerve, weaken, enfeeble, debilitate, effeminate; break,
paralyze; incapacitate.

ANT. _Invigorate, strengthen, harden, nerve, brace, empower._

=Enfeeble.= Enervate, weaken, debilitate, unnerve.

ANT. _Strengthen, nerve, invigorate, brace._

=Enfold.= Envelop, wrap, enclose, embrace, encircle, encompass.

ANT. _Disclose, unwrap, develop, reveal, expose._

=Enforce.= Urge, impress, compel, constrain, oblige, force, require,
exact, exert, strain.

ANT. _Relax, abandon, remit, waive, forego._

=Enforcement.= Inculcation, execution, sanction, constraint, compulsion.

ANT. _Relaxation, abandonment, remission._

=Enfranchise.= Endow with franchise or suffrage; free, emancipate,
release, qualify, manumit.

ANT. _Disenfranchise, disqualify._

=Engage.= Promise, bind, pledge, commit; plight, affiance, betroth;
enlist, induce to serve; attract, allure, gain, win, entertain; arrest,
fix, occupy, busy, employ, engross; encounter, attack, fight with,
battle with; contend, struggle, contest; involve; stipulate, agree;
adopt.

ANT. _Decline, refuse, withdraw, extricate, disengage, dismiss, discard;
retreat, retract._

=Engagement.= Promise, stipulation, contract, obligation, assurance,
pledge; betrothal, affiancing; employment, occupation, business,
vocation; combat, battle, contest, fight, encounter, action, conflict.

ANT. _Release, liberation; dismissal; excuse._

=Engaging.= Attractive, winning, charming, pleasing, interesting,
delightful.

ANT. _Repulsive, unattractive, disagreeable._

=Engender.= Beget, generate, create, breed, produce, cause, occasion,
propagate.

ANT. _Stifle, destroy, extinguish. blight, prevent, neutralize._

=Engrave.= Carve, cut, chisel, imprint, cut in, infix, grave, impress
deeply; sculpture, stereotype.

ANT. _Erase, obliterate, wear out, efface, destroy; carve in relief._

=Engross.= Absorb, engage, monopolize, engulf, occupy, forestall; copy.

ANT. _Distract, disperse, dissipate, scatter, vanish._

=Enhance.= Heighten, swell, raise the price of, advance; augment,
increase; aggrandize.

ANT. _Undervalue, depreciate, disparage, detract, underestimate._

=Enigmatic, Enigmatical.= Obscure, puzzling, hidden, mysterious,
perplexing, unintelligible, ambiguous, recondite, incomprehensible,
mystical, occult.

ANT. _Plain, clear, manifest, self-evident, lucid, explanatory, open,
intelligible._

=Enjoin.= Urge, admonish, advise, order, direct, command, bid, require;
prohibit, restrain; commission, ordain, oblige, prescribe.

ANT. _Dissuade; remit, absolve, exonerate; recall, dispense with,
disqualify._

=Enjoy.= Possess; delight in, like, be pleased with.

ANT. _Dislike, loathe, endure, tolerate, lose, disrelish._

=Enjoyment.= Pleasure, delight, happiness, gratification; fruition;
possession; satisfaction, gladness, felicity.

ANT. _Misery, wretchedness, grief, affliction, suffering, calamity._

=Enlarge.= Amplify, augment, increase, extend, expand, magnify; make
greater, ennoble; dilate, descant, expatiate; swell, grow.

ANT. _Contract, narrow, reduce, diminish, restrict, lessen, curtail._

=Enlighten.= Illuminate, light up; inform, teach, edify, make
intelligent, instruct.

ANT. _Darken, obscure; mystify, mislead, perplex, confound._

=Enlist.= Enroll, register, incorporate, enter, embody, record,
chronicle, muster.

ANT. _Erase, expunge, withdraw, dismiss, disband, muster out._

=Enliven.= Amuse, quicken, animate, rouse, invigorate, inspire,
inspirit, cheer, delight, gladden, exhilarate.

ANT. _Depress, dispirit, subdue, sober, moderate, oppress, weary,
paralyze, deaden, tire, stupefy._

=Enmity.= Hatred, hostility, malice, rancor, animosity, antagonism,
acrimony, bitterness, ill will, malevolence, spite, malignity,
maliciousness, opposition, asperity, aversion, hate, discord.

ANT. _Friendship, love, affection, esteem, cordiality, amity, alliance,
concord, agreement, regard, harmony, sympathy, kindliness, kindness._

=Ennoble.= Dignify, elevate, exalt, ameliorate, enlarge, make great.

ANT. _Debase, degrade, deteriorate, depress, deprave, corrupt, vitiate._

=Enormity.= Depravity, atrocity, wickedness, villainy, outrageousness,
heinousness, nefariousness, abomination, perpetration, sin.

ANT. _Innocence, righteousness, guilelessness, inoffensiveness._

=Enormous.= Huge, vast, immense, immoderate, inordinate, abnormal,
exceptional, monstrous, gigantic, colossal, prodigious, elephantine;
heinous, depraved, nefarious.

ANT. _Trivial, insignificant, ordinary, average, diminutive, moderate._

=Enough.= Sufficient, plenty, satisfactory, ample, abundant.

ANT. _Insufficient, short, inadequate, scant, ill-supplied, bare._

=Enrage.= Exasperate, provoke, irritate, madden, incite, incense,
inflame, infuriate, excite, aggravate, anger.

ANT. _Soothe, conciliate, allay, tame, quiet, mollify, appease, pacify,
tranquilize._

=Enrapture.= Enchant, entrance, enravish, delight, transport, beatify,
satisfy, please, gladden, fascinate, bewitch, captivate, charm, attract,
enamor, enslave.

ANT. _Disgust, nauseate, repel, torment, torture, horrify._

=Enrich.= Aggrandize, enhance, endow, augment, store, supply; adorn,
decorate, ornament, embellish; fertilize.

ANT. _Impoverish, rob, denude, fleece, reduce, beggar, despoil, strip._

=Enroll.= Enlist, register, record, chronicle, embody, list, catalogue.

ANT. _Erase, expunge, withdraw._

=Enrolment.= Registration; register, record.

ANT. _Omission; withdrawal; erasure._

=Enshrine.= Treasure, preserve, cherish, embalm, consecrate.

ANT. _Lose, misplace, expose, destroy, desecrate._

=Enslave.= Captivate, charm, enthral, subjugate, master, dominate,
bewitch, delight, fascinate.

ANT. _Repel, disgust, alienate; free._

=Ensue.= Follow, result, eventuate, succeed, befall, accrue, happen,
take place, supervene; issue, arise, spring, come.

ANT. _Precede, herald, introduce; forewarn, threaten, premonish,
caution._

=Entail.= Transfer, transmit, fix, devolve, involve, bequeath, demise,
leave, induce, necessitate.

ANT. _Prevent, obviate, nullify; neutralize; estrange, alienate,
supersede._

=Entangle.= Implicate, involve, compromise, entrap, knot, perplex,
embarrass, confuse, intertwist, interweave, intertwine.

ANT. _Straighten, extricate, disentangle, unravel, deliver._

=Enter.= Go or come into; pierce, penetrate; begin, commence; enroll,
inscribe, chronicle, note, register, record; engage in; embark, enlist,
join; invade.

ANT. _Depart, leave, issue, quit, vacate; go out; finish, end; withdraw
from, retire, resign._

=Enterprise.= Adventure, undertaking, effort, attempt, essay, endeavor,
trial, experiment; energy, activity, readiness, willingness; progress.

ANT. _Routine, monotony, humdrum, matter-of-fact, unprogressiveness;
caution, inactivity._

=Enterprising.= Venturesome, adventurous, daring, audacious, bold;
prompt, alert, active, energetic, efficient, spirited, strenuous, eager,
zealous, stirring; progressive, speculative.

ANT. _Timid, cautious, inactive, fearful, cowardly; conservative; wary,
prudent, discreet, anxious, careful, thoughtful; indolent,
unenterprising, inactive, unready, laggard._

=Entertain.= Amuse, interest, divert, cheer, delight, recreate, beguile,
please, occupy, gratify, enliven, disport; consider, ponder; lodge,
treat hospitably, cherish, harbor, hold, receive.

ANT. _Annoy, tire, bore, disturb, weary, distract, disquiet; refuse,
reject, deny, debar, exclude, eject._

=Entertainment.= Delight, diversion, amusement, cheer, enjoyment,
pastime, fun, merriment, pleasure, recreation, sport, hospitality,
frolic, reception, lodging.

ANT. _Weariness, work, toil, ennui, labor, fatigue, disturbance;
refusal, rejection._

=Enthrone.= Crown, instal, exalt, elevate, invest with power.

ANT. _Dethrone, depose, debase, degrade._

=Enthusiasm.= Ardor, earnestness, excitement, inspiration, frenzy,
vehemence, warmth, ecstasy, passion, zeal, rapture, eagerness, devotion,
fervency, fanaticism, fervor, intensity, transport.

ANT. _Indifference, caution, calmness, prudence, timidity, policy,
coldness, dulness, calculation, lukewarmness, deadness, callousness._

=Entice.= Lure, attract, seduce, coax, persuade, wheedle, cajole,
delude, entrap, decoy, inveigle, lead astray, induce.

ANT. _Warn, hinder, deter, repel, admonish, caution, make aware._

=Entire.= Whole, complete, perfect, unimpaired, unbroken, undiminished,
undivided; full, integral, thorough, solid, unalloyed, plenary; unmixed,
sheer, mere, unmitigated, pure; total, absolute.

ANT. _Partial, incomplete, broken, impaired, alloyed, limited, divided,
defective, mixed; relative._

=Entitle.= Name, designate, denominate, call, style, characterize;
christen; enable, fit, empower, qualify.

ANT. _Disable, disqualify._

=Entity.= Being, essence, existence.

ANT. _Nonentity, chimera, phantom, fantasy, hallucination._

=Entomb.= Bury, inter, inhume.

ANT. _Exhume, disinter._

=Entrance.= Approach, doorway, opening, door, entry, ingress, gate,
gateway, inlet, portal, access, admission, admittance, entrée,
introduction, penetration, avenue, adit; beginning, commencement,
initiation.

ANT. _Departure, egress, refusal, exit, withdrawal, ejection, exclusion,
expulsion, rejection._

=Entreat.= Beg, supplicate, solicit, beseech, implore, pray, appeal,
petition, adjure, crave, importune, enjoin, urge.

ANT. _Command, insist, bid, enjoin, charge, direct; grant, heed, hear,
answer, respond._

=Entry.= Entrance, ingress, access; avenue, passage, hall, inlet;
minute, note, record, register, memorandum; initiation, beginning.

ANT. _Egress, exit, departure; outlet, vent; misrecord, falsification,
blank, omission; conclusion, quittance, disposal._

=Entwine.= Interlace, weave, entwist, wreathe together or round.

ANT. _Disentwine, dissever, untwist._

=Enumerate.= Compute, reckon, numerate, number, tell, cite, estimate,
recount, specify, detail, calculate, rehearse, recapitulate.

ANT. _Mingle, jumble, confuse; miscount, misreckon, miscalculate._

=Enunciate.= Announce, proclaim, declare; pronounce, syllable; state,
propound, articulate, relate, utter, publish, promulgate.

ANT. _Mutter, babble, stammer._

=Envelop=, _v._ Wrap, surround, encircle, fold, encompass, cover, hide.

ANT. _Expose, unwrap, reveal, extract; develop._

=Envenom.= Poison, taint, vitiate, infect, pollute; embitter; enrage,
provoke, exasperate, irritate, madden, inflame.

ANT. _Purify, disinfect; delight, please, gratify._

=Envious.= Jealous, suspicious, grudging.

ANT. _Friendly, kindly, well-disposed, trustful, contented, satisfied._

=Environ.= Surround, encircle, encompass, gird, belt, enclose, envelop;
invest, besiege, hem in, beset.

=Envoy.= Messenger (_in diplomatic service_); ambassador, minister,
legate, plenipotentiary.

ANT. _Scout, spy, orderly_ (as messengers in military service).

=Envy.= Malice, ill will; jealousy, hate, spite, hatred, grudging;
chagrin, discontent, mortification.

ANT. _Admiration, good will, regard, esteem, benevolence; aspiration,
emulation._

=Ephemeral.= Transient, momentary, daily, diurnal, fleeting, fugitive,
brief, evanescent, transitory.

ANT. _Permanent, immortal, eternal, lasting, enduring, perpetual,
abiding, persistent, perennial._

=Epigrammatic.= Pointed, terse, laconic, concise, graphic.

ANT. _Diffuse, prolix, pointless, copious, circumlocutory, verbose,
periphrastic._

=Epitome.= Summary, compend, abstract, curtailment, reduction.

ANT. _Expansion, extension, amplification, dilation._

=Equable.= Even, uniform, steady, regular, proportionate, smooth, easy,
invariable.

ANT. _Variable, fitful, irregular, disjointed, desultory, uneasy._

=Equal.= Like, equivalent, identical, tantamount; uniform, regular,
even, steady; proportionate, commensurate; impartial, unbiased;
competent, fit, adequate, sufficient; fair, equitable, just.

ANT. _Dissimilar, unsteady, incommensurate, irregular, disproportionate;
incompetent, inadequate; unjust, unfair; variable, disparate._

=Equality.= Likeness, uniformity, identity, evenness, equableness,
sameness of rank.

ANT. _Dissimilarity, difference._

=Equanimity.= Composure, calmness, tranquillity, steadiness, serenity.

ANT. _Impatience, perturbation, restlessness, disquiet._

=Equip.= Accouter, arm, provide, furnish, fit out, supply, dress, array,
garnish, arrange, invest, clothe.

ANT. _Divest, denude, dismantle, despoil, derange._

=Equipage.= Carriage, retinue, vehicle, attendance, procession, suite,
train; equipment, furniture, baggage, effects.

=Equipment.= Accouterments, apparatus, furnishings, dress, rigging,
trappings, gear, outfit, provisions, equipage, arms, supplies.

=Equitable.= Upright, just, impartial, unbiased, unprejudiced,
reasonable, fair, right, proper, honest, even-handed, proportionate.

ANT. _Unfair, unjust, unreasonable, partial, prepossessed, prejudiced,
biased._

=Equity.= Justice, right, uprightness, rectitude, fairness,
impartiality, fair play, honesty, integrity.

ANT. _Injustice, corruption, dishonesty, partiality, unfairness,
prejudice._

=Equivalent.= Equal, equipollent, tantamount; synonymous,
interchangeable, equiponderant.

ANT. _Unequal, incommensurate, uneven, unbalanced._

=Equivocal.= Ambiguous, indefinite, enigmatical, dubious, uncertain,
doubtful, questionable, perplexing, indeterminate, indistinct,
suspicious.

ANT. _Evident, clear, plain, direct, manifest, obvious, indubitable,
unquestionable, perspicuous, unambiguous, lucid, distinct, certain,
indisputable._

=Eradicate.= Abolish, extinguish, exterminate, extirpate, uproot,
destroy, annihilate, excise.

ANT. _Cherish, encourage, instil, propagate, implant, inculcate,
inspire, foster._

=Erase.= Efface, expunge, cancel, obliterate, blot out, scratch out.

ANT. _Mark, delineate, write, inscribe, imprint, engrave._

=Erect=, _a._ Upright, standing, elevated; bold, undaunted, firm.

ANT. _Leaning, lying, supine; groveling, abject; mean, servile,
cowardly._

=Erect=, _v._ Raise, uplift, place _or_ set upright, build, construct;
exalt, elevate, magnify; establish, institute, form, found, plant.

ANT. _Lower, incline, slant; subvert, depress, remove, destroy,
demolish; debase, degrade._

=Err.= Deviate, wander, ramble, rove; mistake, misjudge, blunder; sin,
fall, lapse, trip, offend, trespass, misapprehend, stray, stumble, go
astray.

ANT. _Succeed, prosper; correct, rectify._

=Errand.= Message, mandate, commission, mission, charge, delegation.

ANT. _Misannouncement, misdelivery._

=Erratic.= Wandering, nomadic, roving, rambling; planetary, moving;
irregular, eccentric, abnormal; desultory, aberrant, flighty, changeful,
capricious.

ANT. _Static, stationary; undeviating, steady, regular, normal;
unalterable, methodical, calculable._

=Erring.= Sinful, fallible, liable to err, wandering, misguided, misled.

ANT. _Virtuous, good, upright._

=Error.= Blunder, mistake, misapprehension, oversight, inaccuracy; sin,
fault, offense, transgression, iniquity, trespass, delinquency, misdeed,
shortcoming, wrongdoing; deception, fallacy, untruth, falsity,
hallucination.

ANT. _Truth, correctness, accuracy; correction, soundness,
rectification; exactness, verification._

=Erudition.= Knowledge, learning, lore, scholarship, letters.

ANT. _Illiterateness, duncedom, sciolism, ignorance, stupidity._

=Eruption.= Explosion, outbreak, outburst; sally, sudden excursion;
discharge, eructation, exsufflation, ejection.

ANT. _Absorption, swallowing, engulfing, engrossment, irruption,
inburst; consumption, devouring._

=Escape.= Avoid, shun, evade, flee from, elude; pass unobserved;
abscond, fly, hide.

ANT. _Incur, encounter, meet, confront; suffer._

=Esoteric.= Private, secret, acroamatic, inner, inmost; abstruse,
profound; special, advanced.

ANT. _Exoteric, public, popular; rudimentary, primary, elementary._

=Essence.= Nature, quintessence, substance, vital part, element;
volatile part, extract; perfume; scent, odor; being, existence, entity,
life.

ANT. _Accident; property; garb, clothing, surroundings._

=Essential.= Vital, necessary, indispensable, requisite, important;
volatile, pure, diffusible, highly rectified; innate, inherent,
immanent, leading.

ANT. _Accidental, induced, imported, adventitious; quantitative,
qualitative; promotive, redundant, regulative, superfluous._

=Establish.= Fix, settle, make steadfast; decree, enact, ordain;
institute, originate, constitute, found, plant, organize, form; place,
secure, set up; confirm, sanction, ratify, approve; verify, prove,
substantiate; fulfil, carry out, make good; endow; demonstrate.

ANT. _Unsettle, supplant, disestablish, break up, subvert, upset;
misstate, refute, confute; guess, conjecture, presume, suppose,
surmise._

=Estate.= State, condition; rank, position; property, possessions,
fortune, effects; class, division, order; lands, demesne, domain,
freehold.

ANT. _State, country, chattels, community, waste, goods, effects._

=Esteem=, _n._ Estimate, favor, regard, respect, estimation; admiration.

ANT. _Aversion, hatred, dislike, contempt, abhorrence, antipathy,
repugnance, loathing._

=Esteem=, _v._ Estimate, hold, regard, prize, value, think, appreciate,
deem, calculate, consider; price; believe, affect; revere, honor,
respect, admire, venerate, love, like.

ANT. _Disregard, depreciate, undervalue, dislike, misprize, underrate,
decry._

=Estimable.= Appreciable, calculable, computable; worthy, excellent,
good, deserving, meritorious; amiable, lovable, delectable,
praiseworthy.

ANT. _Unworthy, bad, indelectable, unamiable; undeserving, unlovable._

=Eternal.= Immortal, perpetual, fadeless, perennial, unfailing,
imperishable, endless, everlasting, ever-living, interminable,
never-ending, never-fading, unceasing, timeless, undying, unending,
unfading; infinite.

ANT. _Ephemeral, transient, fleeting, mortal, temporal, transitory,
evanescent, sublunary._

=Etiquette.= Manners, breeding, fashion, conventionality.

ANT. _Misobservance, nonconformance, boorishness, rudeness,
singularity._

=Euphonious.= Euphonic, mellifluous, clear, musical, silvery,
sweet-toned, melodious, harmonious, mellow.

ANT. _Harsh, discordant, dissonant._

=Euphuism.= Purism, finical style, fastidious delicacy, affected
elegance, high-flown diction, pompous or extravagantly ornate diction;
affectation, factitiousness, pedantry, highflying (_used of language_).

ANT. _Simplicity, vernacular, mother tongue, bluntness, naturalness,
rusticity._

=Evacuate.= Empty; eject, expel, excrete, throw out, discharge, void;
quit, leave, forsake, desert, abandon, withdraw from, relinquish.

ANT. _Seize, occupy, hold, fill._

=Evaporate.= Vaporize, disperse in vapor; disappear, evanesce, vanish;
exhale, emit in vapor; turn to vapor; melt, colliquate, liquefy,
dissolve, distil.

ANT. _Consolidate, compact, solidify, crystallize, indurate._

=Evasion.= Prevarication, equivocation, quibbling, subterfuge,
shuffling, sophistry, tergiversation, disingenuousness; shift, quibble,
fencing.

ANT. _Answer, counter-argument, grappling; straightforwardness;
challenge._

=Even.= Smooth, level, flat, plane; equal, uniform, calm, steady,
unruffled; fair, just, equitable; plain, flush; well-balanced.

ANT. _Variable, uneven; abrupt, inclined, rugged._

=Event.= Circumstance, chance, incident, fortune, result, possibility,
sequel, outcome, fact, episode, end, contingency, case, issue,
consequence; occurrence, adventure, accident.

ANT. _Cause, antecedent, operation, inducement, contribution,
convergence, tendency, predisposition._

=Eventful.= Stirring, memorable, signal, momentous, important, critical,
remarkable, marked, noted, notable.

ANT. _Ordinary, unmarked, eventless, uninteresting, unimportant,
characterless, trivial._

=Ever.= At any time; always, perpetually, continually, evermore,
eternally, aye, for aye, forever, at all times; constantly, incessantly.

ANT. _Never._

=Everlasting.= Endless, unending, perpetual, incessant, ceaseless,
continual, uninterrupted, unceasing, interminable, eternal, constant,
never-ending, never-ceasing; imperishable, undying, never-dying,
deathless, immortal, ever-living; infinite.

ANT. _Ephemeral, transient, transitory._

=Every.= All, any, both, either, each.

ANT. _None, no one, not any one._

=Evict.= Dispossess, eject, throw out.

ANT. _Reinstate, admit; locate, lodge, settle._

=Evidence.= Testimony, ground of belief, proof; manifestation,
attraction, testimony, averment, deposition, declaration, appearance,
sign, token, indication, exemplification, illustration.

ANT. _Surmise, conjecture; counter-evidence; refutation, disproof;
concealment, misindication, suppression, fallacy._

=Evident.= Patent, clear, palpable, manifest, transparent, visible,
perceptible, obvious, open, conspicuous, apparent, distinct,
discernible, indubitable, overt, plain, unmistakable, tangible;
indisputable, incontrovertible.

ANT. _Doubtful, uncertain, questionable, dubious; hidden, concealed,
secret, undiscovered, obscure, latent, unseen, unimagined, unknown;
covert, dark, invisible; impenetrable, occult, impalpable,
imperceptible, unthought of._

=Evil=, _a._ Ill, noxious, deleterious, wrong, bad, hurtful,
mischievous, sinful, unhappy, adverse, unpropitious, harmful, wicked,
corrupt, unfair, notorious, miserable, sorrowful.

ANT. _Wholesome, right, virtuous, beneficial, holy, pure, felicitous,
happy, fortunate, joyous, welcome, grateful, worthy, good, honorable._

=Evince.= Prove, show, evidence, exhibit, manifest, demonstrate;
establish; indicate, display.

ANT. _Suppress, negative, disprove, conceal._

=Evoke.= Summon, call forth; excite, arouse, elicit, rouse, provoke,
educe, produce; eliminate, extract.

ANT. _Allay, stifle, stop, silence, prevent, seal._

=Exactly.= Precisely, accurately, strictly, nicely.

ANT. _Loosely, inaccurately, incorrectly, differently._

=Exaggerate.= Overstate, strain, overcharge, stretch, overcolor;
amplify, enlarge, magnify, overdraw, heighten, overpaint, overestimate.

ANT. _Disparage, attenuate, palliate, understate, underestimate,
minimize, mitigate, qualify, soften, modify._

=Examine.= Inspect, observe, investigate, scrutinize, consider, study;
canvass, test, inquire into, search into, look into; weigh, ponder,
criticize, prove, discuss, overhaul, explore.

ANT. _Conjecture, guess; discard, slur; misconsider, misinvestigate._

=Example.= Model, pattern, ideal, archetype, exemplar, standard, sample,
specimen, type, warning, ensample, exemplification, prototype; copy,
illustration, instance; issue, development.

ANT. _Stock, material, substance, law, rule, case, system, character,
principle, quality._

=Excavate.= Hollow, dig, scoop out, cut, trench; discover, disinter.

ANT. _Inter, inhume, bury; conceal; fill, level._

=Except=, _prep._ Excepting, without, saving, unless, exclusive of.

=Except=, _v._ Exclude, save, bar; segregate, negative.

ANT. _Include, reckon, count, state, classify, propound, admit, affirm._

=Exception.= Exclusion, omission, non-inclusion; objection; affront,
offense; unusual case, anomaly; qualification, separation.

ANT. _Rule, class; statement, proposition._

=Exceptionable.= Undesirable, objectionable.

ANT. _Unobjectionable, desirable, exemplary._

=Exceptional.= Irregular, rare, unusual, uncommon, unnatural, peculiar,
anomalous, abnormal, aberrant, exceptive.

ANT. _Common, usual, normal, ordinary, regular._

=Excess.= Surplus, waste, extravagance, wastefulness, superfluity,
lavishness, exorbitance, superabundance, dissipation, intemperance,
profusion, prodigality, redundance; increase, debauchery.

ANT. _Frugality, economy; dearth, deficiency, defect, want, shortcoming,
lack, need, poverty; failure, destitution, inadequacy, insufficiency,
scantiness; temperance, sobriety._

=Excessive.= Superabundant, disproportionate, undue, exuberant,
superfluous; immoderate, intemperate, extreme; violent, vehement;
enormous, exorbitant, overmuch, inordinate, unreasonable, extravagant.

ANT. _Insufficient, scant, inadequate, lacking, wanting, deficient._

=Excitability.= Sensibility, sensitiveness; irritability, irascibility,
passionateness.

ANT. _Immobility, hebetude, composure; insensitiveness,
imperturbability._

=Excommunicate.= Dismiss, expel, denounce, proscribe, anathematize,
exscind; exclude, banish, bar, eject, blackball.

ANT. _Admit, readmit, enroll, inaugurate._

=Excrescence.= Tumor, protuberance; superfluity, useless appendage;
redundancy.

ANT. _Eradication, extirpation, excision, levigation, exsection._

=Excruciate.= Torture, torment, rack, agonize.

ANT. _Soothe, please, tranquilize._

=Exculpate.= Absolve, exonerate, acquit, clear, set right, vindicate;
defend, release.

ANT. _Charge, implicate, inculpate._

=Excursion.= Trip, ramble, tour, jaunt, journey, expedition.

=Excusable.= Pardonable, venial.

ANT. _Inexcusable, unpardonable._

=Excuse=, _v._ Pardon, forgive, absolve, acquit, exonerate, exculpate;
extenuate, justify; free, exempt, release, let off; overlook, regard
indulgently, condone; remit, vindicate, defend, mitigate.

ANT. _Charge, condemn, inculpate, convict, sentence; exact, accuse._

=Execrable.= Detestable, cursed, loathsome, accursed, villainous,
hateful, abominable, damnable, diabolical, odious, abhorrent; offensive,
disgusting, nauseous, obnoxious, repulsive, revolting, vile.

ANT. _Desirable, respectable, laudable, eligible._

=Execration.= Curse, malediction, ban, anathema, imprecation of evil;
detestation, abhorrence, horror, loathing, abomination; denunciation.

ANT. _Benediction, blessing._

=Execute.= Administer, perform, enforce, carry out, do.

ANT. _Fail, be lacking, disappoint._

=Exemplary.= Laudable, praiseworthy, excellent, correct, estimable,
worthy, virtuous; patternlike, close, faithful, exact, scrupulous,
assiduous, punctilious, rigid, punctual, rigorous; worthy of imitation,
fit for a pattern.

ANT. _Detestable, objectionable, exceptionable._

=Exemplify.= Illustrate, show by example; manifest, embody, exhibit,
represent.

ANT. _Belie, betray, misrepresent, falsify._

=Exempt=, _v._ Relieve, set free, release, grant immunity to, excuse,
exonerate, except.

ANT. _Subject, render liable, bind, oblige; expose._

=Exempt=, _a._ Free, irresponsible, liberated, clear, absolved,
privileged, unamenable.

ANT. _Liable, subject, amenable, responsible._

=Exemption.= Immunity, privilege, exception, release, freedom from
liability; dispensation, license.

ANT. _Liability, amenableness, responsibility, subjection, obligation._

=Exercise=, _n._ Application, drill, employment, exertion; practice,
training; occupation, use; performance, operation, act, activity,
action.

ANT. _Inaction, idleness, relaxation, rest, inactivity; ease,
recreation._

=Exertion.= Use, exercise; effort, endeavor, struggle, trial, attempt,
stretch, strain; labor, toil.

ANT. _Relaxation, rest, recreation._

=Exhalation.= Evaporation; vapor, fume, steam, smoke, fog, reek; mist,
damp, effluvium.

ANT. _Inhalation, exsiccation, absorption._

=Exhale.= Emit, breathe out, give out, evaporate; vaporize.

ANT. _Inhale, breathe in, inspire._

=Exhaust.= Drain, empty, expend, spend, waste, consume, squander,
lavish, dissipate, destroy; prostrate, cripple, weaken, debilitate,
enervate, disable, wear out, weary.

ANT. _Fill, replenish, augment, refresh, invigorate._

=Exhibit.= Show, display; manifest, express, disclose, indicate, make
known, evince; offer, present, propose; betray; demonstrate, illustrate.

ANT. _Conceal, mask, hide, secrete, suppress._

=Exhibition.= Sight, representation, pageant, display, manifestation,
show.

=Exhilarate.= Cheer, enliven, inspire, inspirit, stimulate, animate,
elate, gladden; rejoice, delight, please.

ANT. _Depress, unnerve, unhinge, dispirit._

=Exhort.= Urge, stimulate, persuade, incite, encourage; advise, counsel,
enjoin.

ANT. _Dissuade, warn, deprecate, remonstrate._

=Exigency.= Demand, urgency, need, necessity, requirement, want;
pressure, crisis, emergency, juncture, quandary; conjuncture, pass,
pinch, strait.

ANT. _Provision, rule, supply, course, preparation._

=Exile=, _n._ Banishment, expulsion, ostracism, proscription,
expatriation; separation, isolation; banished person.

ANT. _Welcome, return; remaining; cherishing, fostering, retaining._

=Exile=, _v._ Banish, expatriate, ostracize, expel, proscribe, relegate.

ANT. _Welcome, reinstate, domesticate, domiciliate._

=Existence.= Being, subsistence; entity, essence, creature, thing; life,
animation; continuation, duration.

ANT. _Nonentity, non-existence, chimera._

=Expand.= Open, spread out; dilate, enlarge, stretch, distend; swell,
diffuse, extend, increase; develop, unfold, amplify.

ANT. _Contract, curtail, condense, restrict, attenuate._

=Expanse.= Extent, stretch, expansion; firmament, sky, canopy, vault,
welkin; vast, void, space, breadth.

ANT. _Limit, enclosure, confine, bound._

=Expatiate.= Rove, range; dilate, enlarge, descant, be copious, launch
out, amplify.

ANT. _Contract, summarize, condense, epitomize._

=Expect.= Await, look for; anticipate, rely upon, count upon, reckon or
calculate upon, look forward to; look for, forecast, forebode, foresee.

ANT. _Welcome, greet, hail, recognize; realize._

=Expectation.= Anticipation, expectance, prospect, expectancy; reliance,
confidence, assurance, presumption; trust, hope.

ANT. _Recollection, remembrance, retrospect; distrust, despair,
discouragement._

=Expediency.= Fitness, propriety, suitableness, desirableness,
advisability; advantage, utility, profit, usefulness; profitableness,
advantageousness; interest.

ANT. _Disadvantage, detriment, inutility, inexpediency._

=Expedition.= Haste, speed, celerity, despatch, alertness, promptness,
alacrity, quickness; enterprise, undertaking; march, voyage.

ANT. _Delay, tardiness, procrastination._

=Expend.= Disburse, spend, lay out; use, exert, consume, employ; waste,
exhaust, spread, scatter, dissipate.

ANT. _Save, economize, husband._

=Expense.= Expenditure, outgo, cost, outlay; price, charge, payment.

ANT. _Income, gain, proceeds, return, profit, product, receipts._

=Expensive.= Dear, costly, high-priced; lavish, wasteful, extravagant;
valuable, rich.

ANT. _Cheap, worthless, poor; economical._

=Experience=, _n._ Actual observation, feeling, or presentation;
practice, experimental knowledge; experiment, trial, proof, test,
knowledge, habit.

=Ant.= _Anticipation, expectation._

=Experience=, _v._ Feel, undergo, prove by trial, endure, suffer, be
subject to; try, encounter.

ANT. _Evade, escape, lose, miss._

=Experienced.= Practiced, versed, accomplished, able, qualified,
instructed, thoroughbred; familiar, skilled, accustomed, conversant.

ANT. _Inexperienced, strange, unpracticed._

=Experiment.= Trial, test, assay, examination, proof, touchstone,
ordeal; observation, investigation, experimentation; illustration,
exemplification.

ANT. _Hypothesis, conjecture, assumption._

=Explain.= Elucidate, expound, interpret, unfold, clear up, make plain;
account for, make intelligible, give the reasons for, solve, warrant,
trace to causes, justify; teach, decipher.

ANT. _Mystify, bewilder, obscure, darken, misinterpret._

=Explanation.= Elucidation, interpretation, exposition, illustration,
description, explication; solution, warrant, justification, account,
key; mutual understanding; sense.

ANT. _Confusion, misinterpretation, mystification, obscuration._

=Explicit.= Express, clear, plain, definite, positive, unambiguous,
unreserved, categorical, determinate; detailed, declaratory, unobscure,
stated.

ANT. _Ambiguous, doubtful, indefinite, uncertain, vague, implied,
implicit, indeterminate; hinted, suggestive, obscure._

=Exponent.= Index, indication, example, type, representative,
illustration, specimen; advocate, interpreter, propounder.

ANT. _System, creed, principle, opinion._

=Export=, _v._ Send out, carry out, send abroad, ship, produce.

ANT. _Import; consume._

=Exposed.= Unprotected, defenseless, unguarded, endangered.

ANT. _Guarded, defended, protected._

=Expostulate.= Object, dissuade, remonstrate.

ANT. _Abet, coincide, agree, confirm._

=Express=, _v._ Squeeze out; utter, declare, assert, speak; represent,
indicate, show, signify, exhibit, denote, intimate; send by express.

ANT. _Suppress, repress, conceal._

=Express=, _a._ Explicit, clear, definite, plain, determinate, positive,
categorical; exact, accurate, faithful, true, close, precise; special,
particular; swift, rapid, fast; specific, pointed, direct.

ANT. _General; vague; leisurely; inaccurate, inexact, approximate._

=Expression.= Squeezing out; assertion, statement, utterance,
declaration; phrase, mode of speech, term; general tone, pervading
effect, look, cast of countenance; lively representation; modulation,
feeling, execution; indication.

ANT. _Suppression, restraint, repression; face, features, lineament;
falsification, misstatement, solecism, enigma._

=Expunge.= Erase, efface, obliterate, cancel, blot out, delete.

ANT. _Mark, write, trace, delineate._

=Exquisite.= Nice, accurate, delicate, discriminating, exact, refined;
precious, valuable, select, choice, rare, excellent; perfect, complete,
matchless, consummate; keen, poignant, acute, intense; delicious.

ANT. _Common, coarse, ordinary; unrefined._

=Extemporaneous.= Improvised, unpremeditated, extempore, impromptu,
extemporary, offhand.

ANT. _Prepared, studied, premeditated, read, written, elaborated;
rehearsed, recited._

=Extend.= Stretch, reach; prolong, continue, lengthen, protract; expand,
dilate, enlarge, widen, augment, increase; diffuse; impart, give, offer,
yield; amplify, avail, apply.

ANT. _Contract, restrict, curtail, limit, narrow, reduce, condense;
miss, fail._

=Extent.= Expanse, amplitude, extension; volume, bulk, magnitude, size;
stretch, reach, compass, length; degree, distance, quantity.

ANT. _Limitation, diminution, restriction._

=Extenuate.= Lessen, diminish, reduce; palliate, mitigate, excuse,
qualify, apologize for.

ANT. _Enhance, aggravate, heighten._

=Exterior=, _a._ Outward, external, outer, outside, superficial;
foreign, extrinsic, from without.

ANT. _Inner, internal, domestic, inward._

=Exterminate.= Eradicate, overthrow, uproot, expel, extirpate,
annihilate, banish, destroy, remove, root out, wipe out.

ANT. _Augment, breed, cherish, develop, increase, populate, replenish,
settle, plant, foster, propagate, colonize, build up, beget._

=Extermination.= Extirpation, annihilation, eradication, abolition,
destruction, extinction, excision, elimination.

ANT. _Settlement, replenishment, augmentation, colonization, population,
propagation, increase._

=External.= Outward, outer, exterior, outside, superficial; foreign,
extrinsic; visible, apparent; manifest, palpable.

ANT. _Inner, internal, intestine, inmost, hidden, non-apparent._

=Extinction.= Destruction, annihilation, extirpation, extermination,
abolition; extinguishment; stifling, death, suffocation, cessation,
obsolescence.

ANT. _Inception, origination, birth, course, life, operation, action,
exercise, continuance, prosperity, survival._

=Extinguish.= Quench; destroy, suppress, put down; extirpate, abolish,
eradicate, kill, annihilate, put out.

ANT. _Replenish, replant, implant, cherish, propagate, promote,
invigorate, establish, confirm, secure._

=Extort.= Exact, wrest, wrench, wring out, force; despoil, express,
fleece, squeeze out, extract.

ANT. _Coax, cheat, wheedle, cajole._

=Extortionate.= Oppressive, exacting, severe, hard, harsh; exorbitant,
close-fisted, rigorous, monstrous, preposterous.

ANT. _Liberal, bountiful, indulgent, fair, moderate, reasonable._

=Extract=, _n._ Selection, excerpt, passage, citation, quotation.

=Extract=, _v._ Draw, pull, take out; derive, select, quote, cite;
determine, find; educe, elicit, gather, collect, extort.

ANT. _Insert, replace, incorporate, restore, reinsert, impose._

=Extraneous.= Foreign, extrinsic; non-pertinent, not germane,
unessential, superfluous; unconnected, alien, unrelated, adventitious,
ascititious.

ANT. _Intrinsic, vital, internal, connected, essential._

=Extraordinary.= Unusual, remarkable, uncommon, singular, signal,
egregious, rare, extra; unwonted, peculiar, wonderful, unprecedented,
marvelous, prodigious, monstrous, preposterous, strange.

ANT. _Common, usual, frequent, wonted, unremarkable, unimportant,
ordinary._

=Extravagance.= Excess, exorbitance, enormity, unreasonableness,
preposterousness; wildness, folly, absurdity, irregularity; prodigality,
lavish expenditure, profusion, waste.

ANT. _Carefulness, economy, frugality, saving, provision, prudence,
foresight._

=Extravagant.= Excessive, inordinate, unreasonable, preposterous,
exorbitant; wild, foolish, absurd, irregular; lavish, profuse, wasteful,
spendthrift, prodigal.

ANT. _Sound, sober, consistent, fair, rational, economical, frugal,
careful, regular, usual._

=Extreme.= Utmost, farthest, uttermost, outermost; greatest, highest;
last, final, ultimate; extravagant, immoderate, excessive, unreasonable;
remote, terminal, distant, most violent.

ANT. _Initial, primal, judicious, moderate._

=Extremity.= End, verge, termination, edge, border, extreme, utmost
point; close, conclusion.

ANT. _Beginning, commencement, opening, center, origin, bulk, body._

=Exudation.= Ooze, drip, percolation, excretion, secretion.

ANT. _Absorption, parching, aridity._

=Exultant.= Exulting, jubilant, triumphant, elated, joyous, transported.

ANT. _Mournful, dispirited, depressed._

=Exultation.= Elation, joy, triumph, delight, transport, ecstasy.

ANT. _Mourning, depression._




                                   F


=Fable.= Story, myth, legend, allegory, apologue; plot, action, series
of events; fiction, falsehood, lie, untruth, fabrication, forgery,
invention, figment; romance, parable, novel.

ANT. _History, fact, narrative._

=Fabric.= Building, structure, edifice, pile; texture, make,
workmanship, conformation; manufactured cloth, woven stuff; work,
construction, tissue, web.

ANT. _Destruction, dismantlement, demolition, fragment, wreck, tatters,
ruin, shreds, rags._

=Fabricate.= Build, frame, construct; make, manufacture; forge, invent,
coin, feign; form, falsify, produce, devise, misrepresent.

ANT. _Demolish, tear, spoil, dismember, destroy, narrate, lacerate,
copy, represent, repeat, portray._

=Fabulous.= Invented, fabricated, feigned, unreal, coined, fictitious;
incredible, pretended, imaginary, false, monstrous.

ANT. _Real, actual, historic, authentic, fair, true, reasonable._

=Facetious.= Witty, jocose, jocular, humorous, waggish, funny, comical,
pleasant, droll; gay, merry, sportive, lively, entertaining, sprightly;
playful.

ANT. _Matter-of-fact, heavy, dull, grave, serious, saturnine, somber,
lugubrious._

=Facile.= Docile, easy, mild, courteous, affable, complaisant,
approachable; pliant, pliable, ductile, flexible, yielding, tractable,
manageable, compliant; ready, dexterous; indulgent, weak, irresolute,
characterless.

ANT. _Resolute, sturdy, obstinate, determined, inflexible, crusty,
self-willed, self-reliant, independent._

=Facility.= Easiness, ease; readiness, dexterity, expertness, ability,
knack; condescension, urbanity, affability, civility, complaisance,
politeness; pliancy, flexibility, ductility; appliance, convenience,
means, advantage, resource; quickness, adroitness.

ANT. _Effort, awkwardness, labor, difficulty._

=Fact.= Occurrence, event, deed, incident, act, performance,
circumstance; reality, actuality, certainty, truth.

ANT. _Fiction, supposition, unreality, falsehood, chimera, lie,
delusion, invention, hallucination, romance._

=Factious.= Turbulent, refractory, seditious, rebellious, recalcitrant,
litigious, adversative, malcontent.

ANT. _Genial, complaisant, agreeable, loyal, harmonious,
public-spirited, sympathetic, cooperative, auxiliary._

=Factitious.= Artificial; euphuistic, affected, finical, cramped,
conventional, spurious.

ANT. _Natural, genial, unaffected, pure, genuine, truthful._

=Fade.= Vanish, evanesce, disappear, pass away; decline, languish,
droop, decay, wither; lose color, grow dim, blanch, bleach, fall, sink,
dwindle, pale, change, set, etiolate, fail.

ANT. _Rise, increase, bloom, grow, flourish, endure, abide, last,
stand._

=Fag.= Droop, sink, grow weary, flag; drudge, toil; do menial service,
tire, fatigue, jade, exhaust; work, slave.

ANT. _Idle, lounge, dawdle; strike; bask._

=Fail.= Fall short, be insufficient, be deficient; decline, sink, decay,
wane, fade, break, give out; cease, disappear, become extinct; miss,
miscarry, be unsuccessful, miss fire, be frustrated; omit, neglect;
break, become insolvent, suspend payment; trip, lose.

ANT. _Succeed, exceed, surpass, achieve, abound, yield, excel._

=Faint.= Weak, exhausted, worn, listless, languid, wearied, dim, feeble,
fatigued, faint-hearted, faded, faltering, half-hearted, irresolute,
purposeless, timid, ill-defined, indistinct; unenergetic; obscure,
inconspicuous.

ANT. _Prominent, marked, glaring; resolute, sturdy, vigorous, strong,
fresh, hearty, daring, energetic; clear, brilliant, bright,
conspicuous._

=Fair.= Spotless, unspotted, unblemished, unstained, untarnished; white,
light, blond; handsome, comely, beautiful; pleasant, clear, cloudless,
unclouded; favorable, prosperous; promising, hopeful; open, distinct,
plain, unobstructed, unencumbered; frank, honest, ingenuous, candid,
noble, honorable, upright, impartial; reasonable, proper, equitable,
just; passable, tolerable, above mediocrity; serene.

ANT. _Lowering, dull, foul, ugly, disfigured, fraudulent, unfair,
dishonorable._

=Faith.= Creed, doctrine, assurance, belief, confidence, assent,
credence, opinion, trust, credit, reliance.

ANT. _Distrust, disbelief, dissent, doubt, incredulity, infidelity,
misgiving, skepticism, unbelief, suspicion, rejection._

=Faithful.= Firm, loyal, devoted, stanch, sure, true, trustworthy,
trusty, unwavering, incorruptible; attached; accurate, close,
consistent, correspondent, exact, equivalent.

ANT. _Inaccurate, inexact; faithless, false, fickle, untrue, wavering,
untrustworthy, capricious._

=Fall.= Drop, descend, sink; lapse, droop, gravitate; fall down, be
prostrated; be lowered, be depressed; decrease, decline, be diminished,
die away, sin, err, transgress, trip, trespass; die, perish; empty, be
discharged, flow; happen, befall, come; become, get; pass, be
transferred; be dropped, be uttered carelessly.

ANT. _Rise, soar, mount, recover, climb, ascend._

=Fallacy.= Illusion, deception, deceit, delusion, mistake,
misapprehension, error, misconception; sophism, sophistry, paralogism,
deceitful argument.

ANT. _Truth, logic, proof, postulate, argument, verity, fact, axiom,
soundness._

=Fallible.= Erring, uncertain, ignorant, weak, frail, imperfect.

ANT. _Certain, infallible, unerring, omniscient._

=Fallow.= Pale red _or_ pale yellow; untilled, unsowed, neglected;
inert, inactive, dormant; quiescent, idle, uncultivated, unproductive.

ANT. _Cultivated, tilled, productive, worked, sown, prolific, operative,
fruitful._

=False.= Untrue, mendacious, unveracious, lying; dishonest, perfidious,
treacherous, faithless, disloyal, dishonorable, disingenuous,
double-tongued, false-hearted, double-faced, two-faced; untrustworthy,
untruthful, unreliable, truthless; spurious, counterfeit, forged, not
genuine, feigned, sham, hypocritical, make-believe; incorrect, improper,
erroneous, unfounded, wrong; fallacious, deceptive, deceiving,
deceitful, delusive, misleading, disappointing; sophistical, mock,
bogus, fabricated, unfaithful.

ANT. _True, sound, correct, authentic, real, genuine, candid,
conclusive, honorable, faithful._

=Falsehood.= Falsity, lie, fabrication, untruth, fiction, fib;
imposture, counterfeit, cheat; fallacy, error, sophistry, forgery,
deception.

ANT. _Truth, verity, correctness, fact, genuineness, honesty, honor,
reality, authenticity._

=Falsify.= Misrepresent, counterfeit, belie, misstate, garble; disprove,
show unsound; violate; mistake, misinterpret, betray.

ANT. _Verify, rectify, correct, check, certify, justify, expose,
declare, exhibit, publish._

=Falter.= Hesitate, stutter, stammer; fail, quiver, tremble, totter;
waver, be undecided, show weakness; halt, slip, dubitate, demur, flinch,
vacillate.

ANT. _Proceed, speed, flow, run, discourse, determine, persevere,
resolve._

=Fame.= Celebrity, honor, laurels, distinction, notoriety, renown,
reputation, repute, glory, eminence, credit; report, tidings, rumor,
bruit, news.

ANT. _Silence, suppression, hush; dishonor, discredit, humiliation,
infamy, shame, obscurity, contempt, contumely, disgrace, disrepute,
ignominy, oblivion._

=Familiar.= Conversant, well-acquainted, well-versed; intimate, close,
near, friendly, fraternal, cordial, amicable; social, accessible,
sociable, affable, kindly, courteous, civil, companionable, conversible;
unceremonious, unconstrained, free, easy, informal; well-known;
household, frank, everyday, accustomed.

ANT. _Uncommon, rare, extraordinary, strange, unaccustomed,
unacquainted, new, unfamiliar, inconversant._

=Famous.= Celebrated, renowned, distinguished, remarkable, far-famed,
eminent, noted, illustrious, glorious.

ANT. _Unknown, unsung, inglorious, obscure, forgotten._

=Fanatic.= Enthusiast, zealot, visionary, bigot.

ANT. _Skeptic, unbeliever, cynic._

=Fanaticism.= Intolerance, superstition, bigotry, credulity; enthusiasm,
frenzy.

ANT. _Skepticism, cynicism, indifference, freethinking,
latitudinarianism; disbelief, profanity; disregard, coldness._

=Fanciful.= Fantastic, grotesque, visionary, imaginative, chimerical;
unreal, eccentric, quaint, imaginary, freakish, erroneous, humorsome,
capricious, fitful, erratic, whimsical, absurd.

ANT. _Ordinary, usual, regular, commonplace, real, accurate, literal,
prosaic, reasonable, sensible, solid, sure, true, sound, calculable,
calculated; natural, sober, truthful, correct._

=Fancy.= Imagination, whim, vagary, caprice, belief, conceit,
conception, desire, humor, idea, image, inclination, mood, liking,
predilection, supposition; thought, notion.

ANT. _Certainty, fact, reality, truth, verity, actuality; object,
subject, thought, law, order; aversion, horror._

=Farcical.= Droll, absurd, ridiculous, ludicrous; comic, funny,
nonsensical, pantomimic.

ANT. _Grave, serious, tragic, solemn, dismal, ghastly, funereal._

=Fare.= Go, travel, journey, pass; prosper, be treated, prove, happen,
turn out, be situated; be entertained, feed; live, speed, do.

ANT. _Toil, fast, fail, droop, sink, faint, drop, falter, halt._

=Farewell.= Adieu, good-by, valedictory, leave-taking, congé, departure,
parting.

ANT. _Salutation, welcome, greeting._

=Fashion.= Form, shape, figure, cut, make, model, cast, mold, pattern,
appearance, configuration, conformation; way, manner, sort, method;
usage, custom, style, mode, conventionality; gentility; guise,
character, practice, ceremony.

ANT. _Person, work, speech, dress; derangement, formlessness,
shapelessness; outlandishness, strangeness, eccentricity._

=Fast=, _a._ Fixed, fastened, close, tight; firm, immovable; steadfast,
constant, stanch; fortified, strong, impregnable; profound, sound, deep;
swift, quick, fleet, rapid; wild, reckless, thriftless, dissipated,
thoughtless, extravagant; secure, stable, unyielding, unswerving;
accelerated; gay.

ANT. _Insecure, loose, slow, tardy, steady, sober, virtuous._

=Fasten.= Secure, bind, tie, attach; join, unite, connect, hold
together; hold compact, affix, annex, grapple, fix.

ANT. _Undo, loose, sever, relax, remove, unfasten, detach._

=Fastidious.= Dainty, squeamish, difficult, overnice, overdelicate,
queasy, critical; overrefined, censorious, particular, punctilious.

ANT. _Indulgent, uncritical, easy; coarse; omnivorous._

=Fat.= Unctuous, greasy, fatty, oily; plump, fleshy, obese, corpulent,
portly, pursy; coarse, heavy, dull, sluggish, stupid; rich, profitable,
lucrative; productive, fertile, fruitful; luxuriant, brawny; stout;
oleaginous.

ANT. _Lean, slender, attenuated, emaciated, barren, poor, scant;
marrowless; anatomical._

=Fatal.= Deadly, mortal, lethal; destructive, calamitous, baleful,
ruinous, mischievous, baneful, pernicious; fateful.

ANT. _Beneficial, wholesome, vitalizing, restorative, salubrious,
nutritious, slight, superficial, harmless._

=Fate.= Destiny, destination, inevitable necessity, fatality; lot, doom,
predetermined event; destruction, death; final event, ultimate
destruction; fortune, end.

ANT. _Will, choice, decision, independence, freedom._

=Fathom=, _v._ Sound; divine, penetrate, reach, comprehend, understand;
gage, pierce, measure, probe.

ANT. _Survey, glance, scan, miss, skin, graze, overlook._

=Fathomless.= Bottomless, profound, abysmal.

ANT. _Superficial, shallow, skin-deep._

=Fatigue=, _n._ Weariness, exhaustion, lassitude; labor, hardship, toil;
languor, enervation.

ANT. _Freshness, vigor, indefatigability, activity._

=Fatigue=, _v._ Harass, weary, tire, jade, exhaust, fag.

ANT. _Inspirit, refresh, enliven, animate._

=Fatuity.= Foolishness, imbecility, idiocy; folly, madness, absurdity,
infatuation.

ANT. _Wisdom, sense, soundness, sobriety, discernment._

=Fault.= Defect, blemish, imperfection, flaw, weakness, failing,
frailty; misdeed, misdemeanor, offense, trespass, wrong, transgression,
delinquency, indiscretion; slip, error, lapse; failure, omission, want,
drawback.

ANT. _Perfection, sufficiency, correctness, completeness._

=Faultless.= Without blemish, perfect; innocent, guileless, blameless,
sinless, spotless, immaculate, guiltless, stainless; complete, correct,
accurate.

ANT. _Incomplete, imperfect, incorrect, defective, inaccurate, corrupt,
faulty, erroneous._

=Faulty.= Bad, defective, imperfect; blamable, blameworthy, culpable,
reprehensible.

ANT. _Correct, complete, perfect, accurate; irreproachable, blameless,
unassailable._

=Favor=, _n._ Kindness, grace, countenance, friendliness, good will;
benefit, good deed, friendly turn; patronage, championship, support;
letter, communication, epistle; gift, present; decoration, knot,
rosette; permission, leave, pardon; advantage, preference, boon;
concession, predilection, civility, regard, condescension.

ANT. _Refusal, denial, prohibition, disfavor, withholding, withdrawal,
frown, disapproval, injury, discountenance._

=Favor=, _v._ Befriend, countenance, patronize, encourage; approve,
regard with favor; facilitate, be propitious to; support, help, aid,
assist; humor, indulge, extenuate, palliate, ease, spare; resemble, look
like.

ANT. _Refuse, deny, disapprove, withdraw, withhold, prohibit,
discountenance, injure, harm._

=Favorable.= Kind, friendly, propitious, willing, auspicious; conducive,
contributing; beneficial, advantageous, convenient, suitable, fit;
permissive, indulgent, concessive, partial, fond, liberal.

ANT. _Reluctant, unpropitious, unfavorable, impartial._

=Favorite.= Dear, beloved, pet, darling.

=Favoritism.= Partiality, invidiousness.

ANT. _Odium, prejudice; impartiality._

=Fawn upon.= Flatter, wheedle, cajole, cringe, palaver, slaver.

ANT. _Insult, deride, defy, censure, dare, satirize, rebuke, reprimand._

=Fealty.= Homage, loyalty, allegiance; fidelity, faithfulness, honor,
good faith, devotion.

ANT. _Disloyalty, treachery, infidelity, disaffection, shame, dishonor._

=Fear.= Dismay, alarm, horror, awe, apprehension, dread, terror, fright,
panic, tremor, timidity, trepidation, trembling, affright,
consternation, disquietude, misgiving, anxiety, solicitude, concern;
veneration, reverence.

ANT. _Courage, confidence, assurance, fearlessness; trust, boldness;
fortitude._

=Fearful.= Afraid, apprehensive; timid, nervous, timorous,
faint-hearted, cowardly; dreadful, terrible, frightful, dire; awful;
shocking, terrific, horrible; hesitating.

ANT. _Venturesome, audacious, bold, confident, consolatory, inspiriting,
assuring; attractive, alluring, hopeful, inviting._

=Feasible.= Manageable, possible, permissible, practicable, contrivable.

ANT. _Impossible, unallowable, impracticable._

=Feast.= Treat, banquet, regalement, entertainment, carousal; festival,
holiday; delight, enjoyment.

ANT. _Starvation, scarcity, want, lack, bareness, scantiness._

=Featly.= Neatly, cleverly, dexterously, adroitly.

ANT. _Clumsily, bunglingly, hardly._

=Feature.= Lineament, cast of the face; fashion, make, aspect,
appearance, conformation; prominent part, outline; characteristic,
trait, point, mark, item, component, element, indication, portion, sign.

ANT. _Whole, system, countenance; arrangement, case; misindication,
misinformation, falsification; blind, mask, disguise; excrescence._

=Federation.= Uniting, federating, confederation, union, league,
allying, alliance, coalition, federal compact, confederacy, combination.

ANT. _Secession, disunion, sedition, mutiny, disruption._

=Fee.= Pay, reward, recompense, compensation, remuneration; feud, fief,
fee-simple, unconditional tenure.

=Feeble.= Weak, not strong, enervated, debilitated, infirm, languid,
sickly, languishing, declining, frail, drooping; faint, imperfect, dim;
without vigor, lacking intensity; wretched, poor, dull, forceless, puny,
enfeebled, nerveless; incomplete, vain, fruitless; scanty, pitiable.

ANT. _Strong, robust, active, successful, effective; abundant; powerful,
muscular; forcible, cogent, telling; violent, vehement, ardent; lusty,
hale, vigorous, hearty._

=Feed.= Give food to, supply, contribute to, provide for; nourish,
cherish, sustain; eat, take food, take nourishment; sustain life,
subsist.

ANT. _Starve, refuse, deny, withhold, take away; impoverish, steal from;
diet, abstain, refrain._

=Feel.= Perceive, have feeling; be perceived; be moved, be excited, be
stirred, be wrought up, be impressed; touch, handle; experience, suffer,
_or_ enjoy; be affected by, be moved by; prove, sound, try, put to the
test.

ANT. _Be hard or callous, insensate, apathetic, dull, numb,
imperceivable, indifferent, unsusceptible, or stoical._

=Feeling.= Sense of touch; sensation, perception by touch; sensibility,
emotion, sentiment, affection, passion, impression; tenderness,
susceptibility; contact; pathos; consciousness, sensitiveness.

ANT. _Callousness, insensibility, imperturbability, inexcitability,
coldness, insensateness._

=Feign.= Invent, imagine, devise, forge, fabricate; counterfeit, affect,
assume, simulate, pretend to.

ANT. _Detect, test, unmask, refute, verify, substantiate._

=Felicitous.= Fit, appropriate, apt, pertinent, seasonable, opportune,
well-timed, happy, skilful, ingenious; prosperous, successful,
fortunate, lucky, auspicious, propitious; timely, joyous.

ANT. _Unhappy, unfortunate, inauspicious, untimely, inopportune,
disastrous, sad._

=Felicity.= Bliss, blessedness, happiness; aptness, aptitude, fitness,
propriety, felicitousness, suitableness; success, luck, fortune.

ANT. _Ill luck, bad fortune, sorrow, unhappiness, disaster, misfortune;
sadness, mourning, melancholy._

=Fell=, _a._ Inhuman, cruel, barbarous, relentless, ruthless,
implacable, unrelenting, pitiless, malignant, malicious, malign, savage,
ferocious, bloody, blood-thirsty; direful, merciless, remorseless,
fierce, truculent.

ANT. _Generous, chivalrous, lenient, humane, propitious._

=Fell=, _v._ Prostrate, level, bring to the ground, hurl down, knock
down; cut down, hew down, lay low; hem; demolish, subvert, waste, bare.

ANT. _Plant, erect, support; stock, upraise, rear, propagate._

=Fellow.= Associate, companion, comrade; equal, peer, compeer; mate,
match, counterpart; adherent, colleague, member; correlative, tally;
partner, friend.

ANT. _Foe, opponent, antagonist, stranger, mismatch, opposite._

=Fellowship.= Companionship, familiarity, intimacy, brotherhood,
acquaintance; participation, partnership, joint interest; converse,
intercourse, communion; sociability, affability, kindliness;
association, company; membership, society.

ANT. _Severance, disconnection, dismemberment; non-intercourse._

=Felonious.= Malignant, malign, malicious, nefarious, infamous, heinous,
atrocious, cruel, felon; perfidious, traitorous, disloyal, base.

ANT. _Legal, constitutional, rightful, regular; legitimate, legalized;
permissible, allowable; just, proper._

=Feminine.= Female, womanish, womanly, effeminate; delicate, tender,
modest, soft.

ANT. _Robust, manly; indelicate, unfeminine; rough, rude; masculine._

=Fen.= Marsh, swamp, bog, moor, morass, quagmire.

=Fence=, _v._ Enclose, guard, fortify, defend, circumscribe, protect;
elude, parry, stave.

ANT. _Open, disenclose; receive, catch, suffer._

=Ferment=, _n._ Yeast, leaven, fermentation; agitation, commotion,
tumult; fever, heat, glow.

=Ferment=, _v._ Set in fermentation; excite, agitate, heat; seethe,
concoct, brew; warm, chafe; effervesce, rankle, fester.

ANT. _Damp, cool; dissipate; subside, evaporate, disperse; heal._

=Fertile.= Prolific, fecund, breeding, bearing; fruitful, productive,
rich, plenteous, luxuriant, exuberant, teeming; causative, conducive;
pregnant; fraught, ingenious, inventive.

ANT. _Poor, sterile, barren, unproductive, ineffective, inconducive,
fruitless, inoperative, uninventive, unimaginative._

=Festive.= Convivial, jovial, joyous, gay, merry, mirthful, festival.

ANT. _Solitary, deserted, ascetic, gloomy._

=Fetid.= Stinking, offensive, rank, rancid, malodorous, mephitic,
noisome, foul, strong-smelling, corrupt.

ANT. _Inodorous, fresh, perfumed, scented, balmy._

=Fetter=, _n._ Chains, bondage, custody, durance, duress, manacles,
irons, shackles, imprisonment, handcuffs, gyves, bonds.

=Fetter=, _v._ Shackle, clog, hamper, trammel; chain, bind, tie,
confine, restrain, encumber; manacle, hinder, impede.

ANT. _Free, liberate, accelerate, expedite._

=Feud.= Contest, controversy, dispute, enmity, hostility, quarrel,
strife, dissension, affray, animosity, bitterness, broil, contention,
brawl, fray; antipathy.

ANT. _Friendliness, congeniality, sympathy, clanship, pacification,
reconciliation, sociality, neighborliness._

=Fever.= Heat, flush, excitement, agitation, ferment; ardor, fervor,
broil, passion.

ANT. _Coolness, iciness, frigidity; composure, indifference._

=Few.= Not many, small in number, hardly any, scarcely any; scant, rare,
lacking.

ANT. _Many, abundant, numerous._

=Fiber.= Strength, sinews, thews, toughness; thread, staple, pile,
filament.

ANT. _Laxity, debility, flabbiness._

=Fickle.= Wavering, unsteady, unstable, inconstant, variable,
vacillating, volatile, mercurial, fitful, changeable, irresolute,
unsettled, capricious, fanciful, unreliable, mutable; veering, restless,
shifting.

ANT. _Sober, orderly, reliable, calculable, well-regulated, uniform,
steady, trustworthy._

=Fiction.= Fable, falsehood, myth, invention, novel, romance, figment,
story, fabrication, legend, allegory, apologue; creation.

ANT. _History, fact, literalness, reality, truth, verity, certainty._

=Fictitious.= Feigned, imaginary, invented, unreal, purely ideal,
fanciful; false, counterfeit, spurious, supposititious.

ANT. _Real, true, historical, genuine, authentic, veritable._

=Fidelity.= Faithfulness, devotedness, devotion, truth, loyalty,
true-heartedness, fealty, adherence to duty; accuracy, closeness,
exactness, truthfulness, precision, attachment, honesty, allegiance,
integrity.

ANT. _Disloyalty, treachery, untruthfulness, disaffection, inaccuracy,
infidelity, inexactness._

=Field.= Tract of land; battle-field, scene of war; surface, expanse,
range, scope; province, department, region, realm, domain; ground,
arena; room, opportunity.

ANT. _Circumscription, constraint; interdiction, exclusion, debarment._

=Fierce.= Ravenous, infuriate, barbarous, fell; vehement, turbulent,
passionate, uncurbed, untamed, raging; furious, savage, ferocious,
fiery, violent, wild, impetuous; uncultivated, untrained.

ANT. _Gentle, harmless, kind, patient, submissive, sweet, tender,
docile, affectionate, mild, peaceful, tame; calm._

=Fiery.= Hot, ardent, heated, fervid, flaming, glowing; impetuous,
vehement, fierce, passionate, impassioned; irascible, choleric, excited,
enkindled, hot-blooded, irritable.

ANT. _Cold, icy, frigid, chilly; indifferent, phlegmatic, passionless,
unimpassioned, mild, tame; extinguished, quenched._

=Fight=, _n._ Combat, conflict, contest, battle, struggle, engagement,
encounter, action, affair, fray, affray, brush; broil, riot; spirit,
fighting temper; resistance, disposition to struggle, contention.

ANT. _Pacification, reconciliation._

=Figurative.= Typical, representative, emblematical; metaphorical,
tropical; flowery, florid, ornate; poetical, rhetorical, symbolical.

ANT. _Literal, prosaic, unpoetical, unmetaphorical._

=Figure=, _n._ Form, shape, configuration, conformation, outline; image,
likeness, representation, effigy; appearance; pattern, design; metaphor,
trope; diagram, drawing; price; symbol, type, emblem; digit, number,
numeral, character; aspect, delineation, condition, illustration.

ANT. _Misrepresentation, deformity, disfigurement._

=Figure=, _v._ Adorn, variegate, diversify; represent, signify, typify,
symbolize; imagine, image, conceive, picture, represent; calculate,
compute, cipher; appear, act, perform; show off, cut a dash.

ANT. _Disfigure, harm, destroy; miscalculate, mistake._

=File.= Rasp, smooth, finish; place on file; polish; perfect, refine,
improve.

ANT. _Roughen, jag, acuminate, denticulate, barb, notch, cusp._

=Fill.= Make full, fill up; pervade, occupy; dilate, expand, stretch,
distend; store, supply, furnish, replenish, stock; satisfy, content,
sate, satiate, cloy, pall; occupy, hold, fulfil, perform; become full,
be filled; gorge, appoint, glut; stuff; rise; swell, grow, increase.

ANT. _Exhaust, drain, dissatisfy, deprive, stint, vacate; misappoint;
subside, ebb, evaporate, shrink, diminish._

=Filter.= Strain, ooze, percolate, exude, transude; refine, distil,
leak; purify, cleanse, depurate, defecate, clarify.

ANT. _Muddle, disturb, befoul, thicken._

=Filthy.= Dirty, nasty, foul, defiled, unclean, squalid; impure,
corrupt, gross; dingy, unsanitary, unwholesome.

ANT. _Pure, sweet, healthy, clean, sanitary, wholesome._

=Final.= Latest, last, eventual, ultimate; decisive, conclusive,
definitive; terminal; definite, developed.

ANT. _Initiative, open, progressive, continuous, incipient, current,
unconcluded, inchoate, inaugural, nascent, rudimental._

=Find.= Discover, fall upon, light upon, meet; obtain, get, procure,
gain, arrive at, attain to; observe, remark, perceive, notice, discover;
detect, catch; supply, furnish, provide, contribute; determine
judicially, declare by verdict; confront, ascertain, experience, invent.

ANT. _Withdraw; miss, lose, elude, withhold, overlook, miscontrive._

=Fine=, _n._ Forfeit, penalty, forfeiture, mulct, amercement.

=Fine=, _a._ Minute, small, comminuted, little; slender, capillary,
delicate; thin, tenuous, subtile, attenuated; light, keen, sharp;
exquisite, nice, refined; excellent, superior, very good; brilliant,
accomplished; beautiful, handsome, splendid, elegant; clear, pure,
unadulterated; gay, showy, garish, flashy, filmy, artistic, choice,
finished, high, grand, noble, generous, honorable, pretentious, pretty,
ostentatious; presumptuous, casuistical.

ANT. _Rough, mean, petty, unfinished; illiberal, unimposing, paltry;
modest, unaffected, affable; plain-spoken, categorical; unanalytical,
unreflective; coarse, great, heavy, huge, immense, large, rude, stout,
thick, blunt, big, clumsy._

=Finery.= Gewgaws, trinkets, ornaments, trimmings, tawdriness,
decorations, trappings, bedizenment, tinsel, trash, dressiness.

ANT. _Ornament, dress, decoration, adornment; chasteness, sobriety,
simplicity._

=Finical.= Fastidious, dainty, overparticular, squeamish, overnice,
affected, elegant; dandyish, foppish, spruce.

ANT. _Effective, unaffected, practical, energetic, real, genuine,
natural; outspoken, blunt, coarse, rude._

=Finish=, _v._ Accomplish, execute, complete, perform, achieve, do, get
done; perfect, polish, elaborate; end, terminate, close, conclude, put
an end to; shape.

ANT. _Start, commence, begin; fail, undertake; miscontrive, botch, mar,
mismanage._

=Finished.= Perfect, artistic, refined, high.

ANT. _Inartistic, incomplete, poor, rude, coarse, unfinished._

=Finite.= Bounded, limited, conditioned, contracted, restricted,
terminated.

ANT. _Infinite, unlimited, unbounded._

=Fire.= Blaze, burning, conflagration, flame, combustion; discharge;
heat, ardor, fervor, violence, force, passion, impetuosity, fervency,
intensity, animation, vigor, spirit, enthusiasm; light, luster,
radiance, splendor; vivacity, inspiration, imagination; torture,
affliction, trouble, bitter trial, persecution.

=First.= Foremost, leading; chief, highest, principal, capital;
elementary, primary, rudimentary; earliest; primitive, primeval,
pristine; in the first place, at the outset, in the beginning, first and
foremost; original, onmost.

ANT. _Subsequent, secondary, subordinate, subservient, lowest,
unimportant, last, hindmost._

=Fit=, _a._ Competent, fitted, qualified; suitable, appropriate, apt,
apposite, meet, seemly, becoming, befitting, proper, good, decent,
convenient, fitting, decorous, adapted, congruous, peculiar, particular,
prepared, adequate, calculated, ripe, right, contrived, expedient.

ANT. _Awkward, misfitting, ungainly, ill-suited, inappropriate,
unseemly, unprepared, unsuitable, inadequate, miscalculated,
miscontrived, improper, unfit, inexpedient._

=Fitful.= Variable, irregular, impulsive, spasmodic, unstable, fickle,
whimsical, fanciful, capricious, fantastic, humorsome, odd; eventful,
checkered; restless, inconstant, mutable, desultory, unequal.

ANT. _Regular, equable, orderly, systematic, calculable._

=Fix.= Set, place, establish, plant, fasten, make firm; attach, tie,
connect; determine, define, appoint, limit, settle; rivet, direct
steadily, adjust; solidify, consolidate; link, locate, root, secure;
decide.

ANT. _Displace, unsettle, remove, disarrange, uproot, transplant,
transfer, weaken, shake, disestablish, reverse, disturb, change, unfix._

=Flaccid.= Limber, lax, drooping, flabby, soft, limp, yielding, relaxed,
inelastic, pendulous.

ANT. _Firm, braced, plump, muscular, chubby, brawny, vigorous, strong,
powerful._

=Flag=, _n._ Flagstone; streamer, banner, colors, standard, pennon,
pennant, ensign, gonfalon.

=Flag=, _v._ Hang loose, droop; languish, faint, decline, pine, sink,
succumb, grow weak, become dejected; pall, grow stale, lose interest,
weary, tire; give in.

ANT. _Freshen, flourish; persevere, hold, brace up, struggle, persist,
battle, recruit, recover._

=Flagitious.= Atrocious, heinous, flagrant, scandalous, villainous,
corrupt, abandoned, profligate; enormous, monstrous, disgraceful,
nefarious, aggravated.

ANT. _Creditable, honorable, noble, meritorious, justifiable,
distinguished, extenuated, excusable, pardonable._

=Flaring.= Flaming, glaring, conspicuous, bright, gaudy, overcolored,
flaunting, flashy, ostentatious, showy, tawdry.

ANT. _Subdued, toned, harmonized, dull, dim, dingy, neutral, dowdy,
colorless._

=Flat=, _a._ Level, horizontal; even, plane, smooth; low, prostrate,
laid low; dull, lifeless, spiritless, unanimated, frigid, tame, prosaic,
uninteresting; pointless; vapid, tasteless, insipid, stale, dead,
jejune; peremptory, absolute, positive; downright, mawkish.

ANT. _Animated, exciting, interesting, thrilling, sensational,
emotional, melodramatic._

=Flaunt.= Wave ostentatiously, insolently, brazenly, or boldly; display,
vaunt, flourish, toss, disport, boast; flout, flounce, flutter, parade,
figure.

ANT. _Conceal, suppress, retire, skulk, recede, hide, shrivel, collapse,
furl._

=Flavor.= Taste, savor, relish, zest, smack, gusto; aroma, essence,
subtle quality, spirit, soul; odor.

ANT. _Insipidity, tastelessness, inodorousness, mawkishness,
scentlessness, flatness._

=Flexible.= Pliable, pliant, limber, lithe, supple, crooked; affable,
tractable, compliant, docile, gentle; elastic; easy, indulgent, ductile,
flexile, yielding.

ANT. _Tough, rigid, inelastic, hard, inflexible, inexorable._

=Flicker.= Quiver, flutter, falter, waver, glimmer, bicker, shimmer,
scintillate.

ANT. _Stream, blase, beam, shine, gleam._

=Flight.= Flying, soaring, volitation, mounting, fleeing, departure;
flock; volley, shower; escape, evasion, disappearance; stampede, hegira,
exodus.

ANT. _Recurrence, return, reappearance; repose, perching, alighting._

=Flimsy.= Gauzy, poor, transparent, thin; trifling, trivial, inane,
puerile; weak, shallow, superficial, slight, unsubstantial; feeble,
frivolous, foolish, light, trashy.

ANT. _Solid, sound, irrefragable, cogent, substantial._

=Flinch.= Wince, swerve, recoil, blench, shrink, draw back.

ANT. _Dare, face, bare, meet, endure, challenge, defy._

=Fling.= Throw, cast, toss, hurl, dart, pitch, chuck; prostrate,
overthrow, throw down; wince, flounce; jeer, sneer, gibe, scoff, flaunt,
taunt; emit, ejaculate.

ANT. _Snatch, grasp, hold, keep, retain, arrest, catch._

=Flippant.= Fluent, voluble, glib, talkative, nimble of speech;
impertinent, pert, malapert, forward, bold; superficial, saucy,
thoughtless.

ANT. _Servile, considerate, obsequious, flattering, deferential;
accurate; complimentary, respectful._

=Float.= Waft, swim, be buoyed up; bear up, buoy up; spread, prevail.

ANT. _Sink, drown, die, vanish, founder._

=Flock=, _n._ Brood, bevy, herd, lot, group, pack, swarm, set, hatch,
drove, covey, litter; collection, company, congregation.

=Flock=, _v._ Herd, congregate, assemble, throng, crowd, troop.

ANT. _Disperse, scatter, separate, segregate, distribute, rout._

=Flood=, _n._ Deluge, abundance, inundation, overflow, freshet;
downrush, multitude.

ANT. _Drought, drain, ebb, scarcity, subsidence._

=Florid.= Flowery; flushed, rubicund; ornate, rhetorical, figurative,
embellished; overwrought, sanguine, meretricious.

ANT. _Pallid, exsanguine; bloodless, anemic, unadorned, bare, sober,
nude, chaste._

=Flounder.= Struggle, toss, wallow, tumble, flounce; roll, blunder,
bungle.

ANT. _Emerge, course, career, speed, rise, skim, flourish._

=Flourish.= Thrive, grow; prosper, succeed, be successful; vapor, boast,
brag, vaunt, bluster, show off; attain one’s prime, be in vigor;
brandish, wave; speed, triumph.

ANT. _Fail, decline, fade, arrest, founder, miscarry; sheath, ground._

=Flow.= Stream, run, pour, roll on, sweep along; melt, liquefy, be
molten; issue, emanate, proceed, come, grow, arise, follow, spring,
result; glide, wave, undulate, float, waver, abound, be full, flood,
deluge, overflow; career, progress, course.

ANT. _Halt, stick, stop, hesitate, fail, stickle, stint, beat, recoil,
ebb, regurgitate; stagnate._

=Flower=, _n._ Blossom, bloom; best part; prime, vigor; figure,
expression; perfection, acme, ornament, pride, gem, cream.

ANT. _Deformity, disappointment, blot, abortion; blight; scum; dregs._

=Flowing.= Running; fluent, copious, smooth; abundant, exuberant, easy,
eloquent.

ANT. _Dry, dribbling, meager, strained, labored, difficult, unready,
forced._

=Fluctuate.= Veer, waver, swerve, vacillate, vary, undulate, oscillate,
hesitate.

ANT. _Abide, adhere, persist, stand fast, stay, stick, hold fast._

=Fluctuation.= Oscillation, undulation, unsteadiness, variation, change,
shifting, rise and fall, inconstancy, hesitation, wavering, vacillation.

ANT. _Steadiness, firmness, steadfastness, constancy, stability,
fixedness, stolidity; persistence, perseverance, pertinacity, obstinacy,
tenacity._

=Fluency.= Smoothness, flowing quality, liquidness; copiousness,
affluence, command of language, readiness of speech.

ANT. _Solidity, density, compactness, hardness; difficulty, slowness;
paucity._

=Flurry=, _v._ Excite, agitate, disconcert, confuse, disturb, perturb,
hurry, ruffle, worry, fluster.

ANT. _Soothe, compose, quiet, calm, mesmerize._

=Flutter.= Hover, flap, flirt; palpitate, tremble; flaunt; fluctuate,
waver, oscillate, vacillate, be inconstant, be unsteady; flit, quiver,
flicker.

ANT. _Perch, roost, nestle, settle, subside, collapse, rest, repose,
pause, sink, lull._

=Flux.= Flow, flowing; mutation, change, shifting, transition; fusion,
melting; solvent; motion, progression, substitution, transmutation.

ANT. _Stagnation, stillness, identity, invariableness, immutability,
arrestation, crystallization._

=Focus.= Center; standpoint; convergence, rendezvous, nucleus.

ANT. _Circle, dispersion, divergence, dissipation._

=Foggy.= Misty, hazy; confused, dazed, bewildered, muddy, muddled;
absent, stupid, obscure.

ANT. _Alert, alive, awake; lucid, clear, bright; shrewd, sharp._

=Foible.= Frailty, weakness, failing, defect, imperfection, infirmity,
fault, weak point; peccadillo.

ANT. _Crime, atrocity, sin, enormity._

=Foil=, _n._ Contrast, background, set off; rapier; enhancement,
setting; elucidation.

ANT. _Eclipse, outshining, extinction, overshadowing._

=Foist.= Impose, thrust; falsify, counterfeit, palm, pass.

ANT. _Expose, detect, verify, authenticate._

=Fold=, _v._ Double, enfold, enwrap, envelop, wrap, embrace, enclose.

ANT. _Unfold, expose, disengage._

=Follow.= Attend, accompany, result, pursue, succeed, chase, go after,
come after, copy, ensue, heed, imitate, observe, obey, practice; shadow.

ANT. _Avoid, elude, precede, quit, disobey, cause, produce, shun,
abandon._

=Follower.= Pursuer; attendant, retainer, supporter, dependant,
companion, associate; adherent, disciple, pupil, partisan; imitator,
copier.

ANT. _Leader, teacher, rival, antagonist, opponent._

=Folly.= Foolishness, imbecility, fatuity, stupidity, shallowness,
dulness; absurdity, extravagance, infatuation, unwisdom, imprudence,
nonsense, indiscretion; slip, lapse, misstep; madness, misconduct,
silliness, weakness.

ANT. _Wisdom, sanity, sense, prudence, judgment, sobriety._

=Foment.= Bathe; excite, instigate, stimulate, brew, encourage, promote,
abet, stir up; fan, cherish, propagate.

ANT. _Allay, extinguish, extirpate, quench, discourage._

=Fond.= Foolish, silly, weak, absurd, empty, vain, senseless, baseless;
doting, affectionate, loving, attached, enamored, devoted.

ANT. _Averse, unloving, unaffectionate, strong-minded, rational,
austere, sensible, well-grounded, undemonstrative._

=Fondle.= Caress, coddle, blandish, pet; dandle; spoil, indulge.

ANT. _Worry, annoy, tease, chafe, irritate, ruffle._

=Fondness.= Delusion, folly, silliness, weakness, absurdity; tenderness,
doting; liking, preference, partiality, predilection, affection; relish,
appetite.

ANT. _Repulsion, aversion, dislike, antipathy; hatred, contempt;
harshness, brutality, loathing._

=Food.= Aliment, nourishment, nutriment, nutrition, viands, sustenance,
victuals, provender, regimen, pabulum, fodder, diet, forage, feed, fare;
bread, meat, provisions, cheer, commons, rations, subsistence.

=Fool.= Idiot, natural; dolt, witling, driveler, blockhead, simpleton,
dunce; buffoon, harlequin, droll, punch, antic, jester, clown.

ANT. _Wise man, adept, expert, scholar, master._

=Foolish.= Senseless, idiotic, silly, weak, daft, simple, irrational,
insensate, shallow, brainless, witless; unwise, unreasonable, absurd,
ridiculous, preposterous, indiscreet, imprudent; puerile, idle, trivial,
trifling, contemptible, vain, childish; injudicious, objectionable,
imbecile, nonsensical; crazed.

ANT. _Sensible, sane, clear-sighted, deep, strong-minded, sound,
sagacious, wise, prudent, judicious, eligible, calculating, advisable._

=Footing.= Foothold; foundation, basis, groundwork; standing, rank,
grade, status, state, condition; settlement, establishment; sum total.

ANT. _Dislodgment, ousting, unstableness._

=Foppish.= Dandyish, vain, coxcombical, dressy, dandified.

ANT. _Unassuming, modest, dowdy, unaffected, clownish, slovenly._

=Foray.= Inroad, irruption, raid, invasion, incursion; sally, escapade,
dragonnade.

ANT. _Flight, retreat, recall, stampede, decampment._

=Forbear.= Abstain, avoid, withhold, refrain, forego; stop, desist,
pause, cease, stay, hold, break off, give over; be tolerant, endure, be
patient; shun, decline; omit; spare, tolerate, put up with.

ANT. _Seek, indulge, gratify, yield, grant, bestow; continue, advance,
progress; rebel, resist._

=Forbidding.= Repulsive, repellent, unpleasant, odious, abhorrent,
disagreeable, offensive; deterrent, prohibitory.

ANT. _Attractive, seductive, permissive, alluring, encouraging._

=Force=, _n._ Strength, power, energy, might, vigor; efficacy,
efficiency, potency, validity, virtue, cogency, agency; compulsion,
violence, constraint, coercion, enforcement; army, troop, legion,
battalion, host, squadron, phalanx; instrumentality, dint, vehemence,
pressure.

ANT. _Weakness, feebleness, inefficiency, counteraction, neutralization,
debility, inconclusiveness, pointlessness._

=Fore=, _a._ Anterior, preceding, antecedent, prior, previous, former,
foregoing; front, face; advanced, leading, head, foremost, first.

ANT. _Posterior, subsequent, following; rear, back, hindmost, last._

=Forefather.= Progenitor, ancestor, father.

ANT. _Descendants, progeny._

=Forefend.= Avert, prevent, ward off, hinder, keep off, forbid; stave,
obviate.

ANT. _Remedy, rectify, cure, mend, redress._

=Forego.= Relinquish, resign, renounce, surrender, cede, yield, abandon,
give up, part with, let go; waive, drop, abjure.

ANT. _Claim, assume, seize, grasp, retain, vindicate._

=Foreign.= Alien, external, exterior, outward, strange, exotic, from
abroad; extraneous, extrinsic, adventitious, irrelevant; outlandish.

ANT. _Domestic, congenial, native, relative, germane._

=Forerunner.= Precursor, herald, harbinger, foregoer, avant-courier;
prelude; prognostic, sign, omen, premonition; predecessor.

ANT. _Successor, follower; postlude; fulfilment._

=Foresee.= Foreknow, forecast, have prescience of; predict, anticipate,
foretell, forebode, divine.

ANT. _Remember, recollect, recall, reflect._

=Foretell.= Prognosticate, foreshow, foreshadow, betoken, portend,
augur, bode, forebode, presage; predict, prophesy; pre-indicate,
forewarn.

ANT. _Recite, narrate, detail; recollect, remember._

=Forethought.= Foresight, anticipation, precaution, forecast, provision,
prudence.

ANT. _Delay, procrastination._

=Forever.= Always, perpetually, eternally, everlastingly, ever,
endlessly, evermore, aye.

ANT. _Never, at no time._

=Forfeit=, =Forfeiture=. Loss, fine, mulct, amercement, confiscation,
penalty; damages.

ANT. _Bribe, premium, douceur, compensation, gratuity, reward,
remuneration._

=Forge.= Beat, hammer out, fabricate, frame, form; devise, invent, coin;
falsify, counterfeit; work, produce, elaborate, feign, make falsely,
shape.

ANT. _Shatter, batter, shiver, blast, fuse, detect, expose; misconstrue,
misshape, misfabricate; verify._

=Forgery.= Counterfeit; falsification, fraudulent imitation.

ANT. _Attestation, verification, signature; genuineness._

=Forget.= Consign to oblivion, overlook; slight, neglect, cease to care
for; unlearn, pretermit, obliterate.

ANT. _Acquire, learn, recollect, remember, retain, treasure, mind._

=Forgetful.= Apt to forget; negligent, inattentive, careless, heedless,
neglectful, mindless.

ANT. _Attentive, retentive, careful, mindful._

=Forgetfulness.= Aptness to forget; failure of memory; negligence,
inattention, carelessness, heedlessness; oblivion.

ANT. _Retentiveness, recollection, recalling._

=Forgotten.= Unremembered, bygone, slighted, overlooked, obsolete,
neglected, disregarded.

ANT. _Remembered, present, treasured, cherished, guarded, regarded._

=Forlorn.= Deserted, forsaken, solitary, abandoned, lost, friendless;
wretched, miserable, pitiable, destitute, desolate; helpless,
comfortless, disconsolate, wobegone; hapless, luckless; lone, lonesome.

ANT. _Supported, cherished, attended, protected, befriended, cheered._

=Form=, _n._ Shape, figure, configuration, mold, fashion, cast, cut;
mode, method, formula, formulary, ritual; manner, system, sort, kind,
order; regularity, arrangement; shapeliness, ceremony, formality,
ceremonial; conventionality, etiquette; pattern, model; mere appearance,
empty show.

=Form=, _v._ Shape, mold, fashion, constitute, arrange, frame,
construct, contrive, conceive, make, produce, create, devise, invent,
compose, dispose, combine.

ANT. _Deform, dislocate, distort, derange, disintegrate, dismember,
dissipate, disorganize, analyze._

=Formal.= Express, explicit, positive, strict, official; regular, set,
methodical, fixed, rigid, stiff; ceremonious, precise, punctilious,
starched, prim, exact; essential, constitutive; external; complete,
shapely, sufficient, affected, correct, stately, dignified, pompous.

ANT. _Incomplete, irregular, informal, incorrect, inadequate, easy,
unassuming, unceremonious._

=Formalism.= Rigidity, parade, ceremoniousness, pomposity, externalism,
punctilio.

ANT. _Simplicity, unaffectedness, unostentatiousness,
unceremoniousness._

=Formality.= Custom, established mode; ceremony, etiquette,
conventionality, mere form; parade, affectation, punctiliousness,
stateliness.

ANT. _Informality; unceremoniousness, unconventionality; originality._

=Formation.= Creation, production; composition, constitution;
arrangement, disposal, combination, disposition; construction, shape,
structure.

=Former.= Anterior, antecedent, previous, prior, preceding, foregoing;
quondam, late, old-time; past, bygone, foregone, previous; first-named,
first-mentioned; earlier, ancient.

ANT. _Subsequent, succeeding, posterior, latter, modern, coming,
future._

=Formidable.= Terrible, redoubted, tremendous, dangerous; awful,
alarming, terrifying, discouraging, appalling, serious, horrible,
dreadful, fearful, shocking.

ANT. _Light, trivial; feeble, harmless, contemptible, powerless,
despicable, weak, helpless._

=Forthwith.= Instantly, directly, immediately, without delay,
instantaneously.

ANT. _Hereafter, soon, by-and-by, presently._

=Fortification.= Fort, stronghold, fortress, fastness, castle, citadel;
bulwark, fortified place.

=Fortify.= Protect, surround; reinforce, brace, stiffen, strengthen;
confirm, corroborate; garrison, intrench.

ANT. _Weaken, dismantle; invalidate._

=Fortitude.= Endurance, heroism, resolution, courage; firmness,
patience; bravery; calmness, resignation, hardihood, composure,
stoicism.

ANT. _Impatience, timidity, flinching, irritation, faintness, delicacy,
effeminacy, womanishness, childishness._

=Fortuitous.= Accidental, casual, contingent, chance, incidental,
undesigned.

ANT. _Purposed, planned, designed; anticipated, foreseen._

=Fortunate.= Favored, lucky, successful, prosperous, happy, felicitous,
propitious, auspicious, favorable, advantageous, providential.

ANT. _Miserable, unhappy, unlucky, ill-starred, unfortunate, wretched,
woful, fallen, infelicitous, broke, crushed._

=Fortune.= Chance, accident, luck, hap, casualty, fortuity; livelihood;
estate, substance, property, possessions; wealth, affluence, riches,
opulence; destiny, fate, destination, doom, star, lot; issue, result,
event; success.

ANT. _Design, purpose; misfortune, ill luck, poverty; inception, cause,
failure._

=Forward=, _a._ Onward, progressive, advancing; front, fore, anterior;
ready, prompt, eager, willing, zealous, earnest; presumptuous,
confident, bold, impertinent, pert, assuming, flippant; early,
premature; obtrusive, anxious, self-assertive.

ANT. _Tardy, reluctant, retiring, backward, slow, modest, indifferent._

=Forward=, _v._ Support, foster, advance, promote, further, encourage,
aid, favor, help; hasten, accelerate, quicken, speed, hurry, despatch,
expedite; transmit, send on, ship.

ANT. _Retard, delay, prevent, hinder, frustrate._

=Foul.= Impure, nasty, dirty, unclean, squalid, filthy, tarnished,
soiled, stained, polluted, sullied; disgusting, loathsome, offensive,
noisome; dishonorable, unfair, sinister, underhanded; base, scandalous,
infamous, vile, wicked, dark, abominable, detestable, disgraceful,
shameful; vulgar, coarse, low; abusive, insulting, scurrilous; thick,
turbid, muddy; stormy, cloudy, rainy; entangled, tangled.

ANT. _Pure, uncorrupt, unstained, undefiled, uncontaminated, unsullied,
stainless, fair, unspotted, spotless, unpolluted, holy._

=Found=, _v._ Base, set, fix, place, ground, rest; build, construct,
raise, erect; establish, institute, originate, plant, set up; cast,
mold; endow, root.

ANT. _Uproot, subvert, supplant, disestablish._

=Foundation.= Base, groundwork, basis, bottom, footing; establishment,
settlement; endowment; institution, origin, rudiments, ground,
substratum, underlying principle.

ANT. _Disestablishment; superstructure; demolition, ruin, overthrow._

=Founder.= Originator, institutor, establisher, planter; molder, caster;
author.

ANT. _Subverter, destroyer._

=Fountain.= Spring, well, jet; source, origin, original cause, first
principle.

=Fraction.= Part, portion, fragment, piece, bit, scrap, section.

ANT. _Whole, total, amount, sum, aggregate._

=Fractious.= Cross, captious, petulant, testy, peevish, fretful,
irritable, waspish, snappish; pettish.

ANT. _Good-humored, blithesome, agreeable, complaisant, genial._

=Fragile.= Brittle, easily broken, frangible; infirm, frail, weak,
feeble, delicate, slight.

ANT. _Tough, hardy, stout, strong._

=Fragment.= Remnant, fraction, scrap, chip, detached part, bit, piece,
morsel.

ANT. _Bulk, body, whole, mass._

=Fragrance=, =Fragrancy=. Redolence, perfume, aroma, balminess, incense,
grateful odor _or_ smell, pleasant scent.

=Fragrant.= Aromatic, redolent, spicy, balmy, odoriferous, perfumed,
sweet-scented, odorous, sweet-smelling.

ANT. _Inodorous, scentless, fetid._

=Frail.= Fragile, brittle, frangible; weak, feeble, infirm; irresolute,
erring, mutable.

ANT. _Resolute, lasting, virtuous; tough, hardy, strong, stout._

=Frame=, _n._ Framework, skeleton, carcass, framing; form, structure,
system, fabric, constitution, scheme; condition, state, temper, mood.

=Frame=, _v._ Construct, build, put together; form, compose, make,
constitute; invent, devise, plan, contrive; fabricate, forge.

=Franchise.= Right, privilege; exemption, immunity; freedom.

ANT. _Obligation, disability, disqualification, liability,
jurisdiction._

=Frank.= Open, ingenuous, free, sincere, candid, artless, frank-hearted,
without disguise, unreserved; familiar, honest, outspoken, easy, plain.

ANT. _Close, reserved; disingenuous._

=Frantic.= Furious, raving, raging, mad, wild, infuriate, frenzied,
distracted; maniacal.

ANT. _Sane, sober, calm, collected, cool, unruffled, composed._

=Fraternity.= Association, circle, society, company, brotherhood,
sodality, league, clan; brotherliness.

=Fraternize.= Harmonize, sympathize, consort, concur; associate with,
coöperate with; coalesce.

ANT. _Renounce, abjure, forswear; ostracize._

=Fraud.= Duplicity, deceit, deception, dishonesty, treason, artifice,
trick, cheat, imposture, swindle, treachery, imposition.

ANT. _Good faith, honesty, truth, uprightness, fairness, integrity._

=Fraught.= Filled, stored, laden, freighted, charged, abounding,
pregnant, big; loaded, teeming.

ANT. _Devoid, divested, exempt, empty, wanting, poor, scant._

=Freakish.= Whimsical, erratic, capricious, odd, fanciful, humorsome;
sportful, frisky, joking, mirthful.

ANT. _Sober, steady, demure, unwhimsical, unfanciful, reliable,
consistent, equable, uniform._

=Free=, _a._ Independent, at liberty, unrestrained; released,
emancipated, delivered, liberated; exempt, clear, allowed, permitted,
open; unobstructed, unimpeded, unrestricted; frank, ingenuous, candid,
artless, unreserved, sincere, frank-hearted; generous, liberal,
bountiful, hospitable, charitable, munificent, open-handed; prodigal,
lavish, immoderate; ready, eager, willing, prompt; gratuitous,
spontaneous; loose, lax; familiar, unconstrained, easy, informal;
detached, playing, operating, unoccupied, unhindered, unconditional,
untrammeled, careless, unconfined, bounteous.

ANT. _Bound, shackled, subservient, restricted, obstructed, clogged;
occupied; impeded, unlawful, compulsory, biased, subject, liable,
amenable; conditional, qualified; stingy, niggardly._

=Freedom.= Independence, liberty; scope, range, play, free swing;
franchise, immunity, privilege; license, laxity, looseness, familiarity.

ANT. _Slavery, serfdom, servitude; imprisonment, captivity._

=Frenzy.= Madness, rage, fury, insanity, raving, distraction, lunacy,
derangement, mania, delirium, aberration of mind; fanaticism, fire.

ANT. _Calm, composure, collectedness, coolness, sanity, sobriety,
equanimity._

=Frequent=, _a._ Oft-repeated; common, usual, everyday; many, repeated,
recurrent, general, numerous, continual.

ANT. _Few, solitary, scanty, rare, casual._

=Fresh.= New, recent, novel; renewed, revived; blooming, flourishing,
unfaded, unwilted, unwithered, well-preserved; unimpaired, undecayed;
rosy, ruddy, fair, delicate, fresh-colored; well, hearty, florid,
vigorous, healthy, hardy, strong; unworn, unwearied, unexhausted,
unfatigued; vivid, lively, keen, unabated; unsalted; pure, cool,
refreshing, sweet, health-giving, bracing; brisk, stiff, strong; raw,
uncultivated, unpracticed, untrained, unskilled, inexperienced; young,
untried, modern.

ANT. _Old, stale, weary, jaded; former; stagnant, impaired; original,
ordinary, tarnished, faded, decayed, pallid, sickly, putrid, moldy,
musty, fusty._

=Fretful.= Touchy, peevish, petulant, testy, snappish, waspish,
splenetic, spleeny, captious, irritable, ill-humored, ill-tempered;
fractious, impatient, discontented.

ANT. _Patient, contented, forbearing, meek, resigned, unmurmuring._

=Friction.= Attrition, abrasion, resistance, confrication, rubbing;
grating, contact.

ANT. _Lubrication, non-contact, detachment, isolation._

=Friend.= Confidant, intimate, associate, companion; ally, confrère,
fellow-adherent; favorer, encourager, well-wisher, advocate, patron,
adherent, defender, supporter; acquaintance, familiar, chum, messmate,
coadjutor.

ANT. _Opponent, foe, adversary, antagonist, enemy._

=Friendly.= Companionable, genial, neighborly, cordial, affectionate,
brotherly, fond, favorable, kind, kindly, loving, well-disposed, social,
tender, affable, accessible, sociable, amicable, complaisant, hearty,
sincere.

ANT. _Adverse, estranged, ill-disposed, unfriendly, antagonistic,
unkind, inimical, alienated, distant, disaffected, frigid, hostile,
cold, indifferent, contentious, belligerent, bellicose._

=Friendship.= Affection, good will, devotion, attachment, amity, comity,
consideration, favor, friendliness, love, regard, esteem, admiration.

ANT. _Hostility, hatred, enmity, feud; contempt, disdain; antipathy._

=Frighten.= Alarm, affright, intimidate, scare, terrify, daunt, appall,
browbeat, depress, dismay.

ANT. _Calm, soothe, comfort, ease; reassure, encourage._

=Frightful.= Terrible, fearful, terrific, dire, dread, dreadful, horrid,
horrible, awful, shocking, hideous, ghastly, grim, grisly, gruesome,
alarming; ugly, monstrous.

ANT. _Pleasing, fair, attractive, encouraging, lovely, beautiful._

=Frigid.= Cold, dull, cool, uninteresting, lifeless, unanimated, tame,
spiritless; formal, prim, stiff, forbidding, chilling, rigid, freezing,
repulsive, repellent; inanimate, passionless, distant.

ANT. _Warm, ardent, impassioned; vehement, zealous._

=Frisk.= Leap, skip, hop, frolic, jump, romp, gambol, wanton, dance,
sport, play.

ANT. _Lie, ruminate, roost, mope, sulk, rest, repose._

=Frisky.= Gay, lively, sportive, playful, coltish, wanton, frolicsome.

ANT. _Demure, sedate, pensive, meditative._

=Fritter.= Slice, break, shiver, shatter; dribble, waste, dissipate,
idle.

ANT. _Husband, economize, cultivate, provide, be frugal._

=Frivolous.= Trivial, worthless, light, trifling, silly, petty, idle,
flimsy, childish, puerile, foolish, trashy.

ANT. _Serious, earnest, important, grave._

=Frolic=, _n._ Gambol, lark, escapade, prank; fun, pleasantry, drollery;
merriment, merry-making; play, game, festivity, sport, entertainment,
gaiety, spree.

ANT. _Study, engagement, occupation, purpose, undertaking._

=Frolicsome.= Gay, lively, frisky, sportive, playful, frolic, merry,
joyous; wanton, festive.

ANT. _Grave, serious, laborious, earnest, studious._

=Froward.= Contrary, fractious, perverse, contumacious, refractory,
untoward, unyielding, ungovernable, wayward, disobedient, peevish,
cross, captious, petulant.

ANT. _Docile, amenable, favorable, agreeable, obedient, ductile._

=Frugal.= Provident, economical, careful, choice, saving, chary,
thrifty, unwasteful, sparing; parsimonious, abstinent, abstemious,
temperate.

ANT. _Profuse, lavish, luxurious, extravagant, prodigal, intemperate,
self-indulgent._

=Frugality.= Parsimony, thrift, providence, prudence, economy, sparing,
miserliness, parsimoniousness, scrimping.

ANT. _Liberality, luxury, opulence, waste, wealth, extravagance, bounty,
affluence, abundance, riches._

=Fruit.= Harvest, crop, product; production, result, effect,
consequence, outcome; offspring, issue, young; produce, reward,
outgrowth.

ANT. _Seed, cause, origin, operation, growth._

=Fruitful.= Productive; prolific, fertile, fecund; abundant, rich,
plentiful, plenteous; pregnant, fraught, causative, successful,
effectual, useful.

ANT. _Unproductive, sterile, barren, fruitless, useless, abortive,
ineffectual._

=Fruition.= Fulfilment, enjoyment; reaping, attainment, use, possession.

ANT. _Loss, disappointment, non-attainment._

=Fugacious.= Transitory, transient, evanescent, fugitive, ephemeral,
fleeting.

ANT. _Persistent, perennial, permanent, perpetual._

=Fulfil.= Accomplish, effectuate, effect, realize, execute, consummate,
complete, perfect; obey, observe, perform, do, discharge, keep, adhere
to, comply with; meet, satisfy, answer, fill, fill out; verify, achieve.

ANT. _Neglect, ignore; falsify, disappoint; render abortive; overlook,
disregard, slight._

=Fulminate.= Explode, detonate; utter denunciations, thunder, fulmine,
hurl threats; clamor, roar, denounce, vociferate.

ANT. _Laud, panegyrize, eulogize._

=Fulsome.= Gross, excessive, offensive, extravagant, nauseous,
disgusting, repulsive, coarse, ribald, questionable, loathsome,
sickening, fawning.

ANT. _Chaste, sober, delicate, nice, temperate, moderate._

=Fume=, _v._ Smoke, reek, emit vapor, exhale; rave, rage, chafe, storm,
bluster, fret, flare up, be in a rage.

ANT. _Acquiesce; smile; submit, accede, consent, concur._

=Function=, _n._ Exercise, performance, execution, discharge;
employment, office, duty, business, occupation, part, province;
character, capacity, operation, administration, power.

ANT. _Usurpation, misdemeanor, misconduct, maladministration._

=Functionary.= Office-holder, official, officer, servant, personage,
incumbent.

=Fund.= Stock, capital; supply, store; foundation, permanent fund;
money, means, resources; investment.

ANT. _Expenditure, outlay, disbursement._

=Fundamental.= Essential, radical, primary, organic, constitutional,
indispensable, principal, important.

ANT. _Secondary, unimportant, non-essential, ascititious, adventitious._

=Funereal.= Mournful, sad, lugubrious, woful, dark, plaintive, somber,
melancholy, funeral, gloomy, dismal, sepulchral, solemn, deathlike.

ANT. _Joyous, festive, funny, stirring, lively, ridiculous, farcical._

=Funny.= Ludicrous, droll, comical, farcical, sportive, humorous,
amusing, laughable, diverting, jocose, ridiculous.

ANT. _Tedious, dull, mournful, lugubrious, grave, serious, dismal, sad,
lamentable._

=Furbish.= Burnish, polish, rub, scour, brighten.

ANT. _Dull, tarnish, cloud._

=Furnish.= Provide, supply; fit, equip, fit up; afford, give, bestow,
contribute, present, purvey, yield.

ANT. _Withhold, withdraw; dismantle; retain, keep._

=Furtive.= Secret, sly, clandestine, stolen, stealthy, surreptitious,
secretive.

ANT. _Open, public, undisguised, unconcealed, unreserved._

=Fuse.= Melt, liquefy, smelt; intermix, amalgamate, blend, commingle,
intermingle; coalesce.

ANT. _Disunite, diffuse, disamalgamate, disincorporate._

=Fuss=, _n._ Hurry, worry, ado, fidget, bustle, flurry, stir, agitation,
excitement, tumult.

ANT. _Quiet, peace, sedateness, calm, composure, tranquillity._

=Futile.= Trifling, frivolous, trivial; worthless, valueless, vain,
idle, unprofitable, profitless, unavailing, fruitless, bootless,
ineffectual; weak, ineffective, useless, nugatory.

ANT. _Cogent, effective, potent, powerful, useful, substantial, solid._

=Future.= Forthcoming, coming, advenient.

_Ant._ _Past, gone, bygone._




                                   G


=Gabble=, _n._ Prate, jargon, stuff, jabber, rattle, twaddle, chatter,
gibber, gibberish, babble, gab, gossip, palaver, prattle, cackle.

ANT. _Speech, conversation, eloquence; reticence, taciturnity; mincing,
mouthiness, euphuism, grandiloquence._

=Gabble=, _v._ Prate, prattle, chatter, cackle, rattle, jabber, gossip,
palaver.

ANT. _Drone, drawl, murmur._

=Gag.= Silence, stifle, muzzle, muffle, hush.

ANT. _Evoke, provoke, inspire, animate._

=Gage=, _n._ Measure, standard; dimensions, estimate; security;
challenge, defiance.

=Gage=, _v._ Measure, estimate, fathom, probe.

ANT. _Survey, conjecture, observe, view, scan, guess, mismeasure._

=Gain=, _n._ Profits, earnings, increase, gainings; emolument, lucre,
money-making; blessing, profit, advantage, good, benefit.

ANT. _Loss, detriment, damage, privation, injury._

=Gain=, _v._ Get, acquire, win, earn, obtain, procure, secure, carry,
achieve; conciliate, enlist, persuade, prevail upon, win over, gain
over, bring over; reach, attain, arrive at; profit; benefit, realize,
reap.

ANT. _Lose, forfeit, suffer._

=Gainful.= Advantageous, profitable, beneficial; lucrative, paying,
productive, remunerative, winning.

ANT. _Unprofitable, disadvantageous, detrimental, injurious, losing,
gainless._

=Gallant=, _a._ Gay, fine, magnificent, well-dressed, showy, splendid;
courageous, brave, valiant, valorous, intrepid, chivalrous, fearless,
bold, daring, high-spirited; noble, lofty, honorable, magnanimous,
high-minded; attentive, polite, courteous; amorous; heroic.

ANT. _Cowardly, discourteous, churlish._

=Gambol.= Frisk, frolic, romp, caper, leap, hop, skip, jump, sport.

ANT. _Droop, tire, weary, flag._

=Game=, _n._ Sport, play, amusement, pastime; plan, scheme, stratagem,
strategy, adventure, enterprise, measure, undertaking; quarry, prey;
recreation, frolic, diversion.

ANT. _Toil, study, duty, labor; weariness, flagging; business._

=Garb.= Dress, clothes, habit, apparel, raiment, garments, vesture,
costume, attire, habiliment; uniform, vestments.

ANT. _Undress; rags, tatters, shreds; nudity, nakedness._

=Garble.= Mutilate, falsify, corrupt, misrepresent, misquote, pervert;
cook, dress, color, distort.

ANT. _Quote, cite, extract, recite, report verbatim._

=Garnish=. Adorn, embellish, decorate, deck, grace, beautify, ornament,
prank, set off, trick out; furnish, furbish.

ANT. _Strip, dismantle, denude, bare, deprive, divest._

=Garrulity.= Loquacity, babble, loquaciousness, babbling, talkativeness,
prattle, prate; verbosity, chatter.

ANT. _Reticence, taciturnity, laconism, reserve, silence._

=Garrulous.= Chattering, loquacious, verbose, talkative.

ANT. _Taciturn, speechless, laconic, reserved, reticent, silent._

=Gaud.= Trinket, finery, gewgaw, trumpery, whim, gimcrack, toy, bauble,
trifle.

ANT. _Ornament, gem, decoration, jewel, valuable._

=Gaudy.= Flaunting, garish, glittering, tawdry, tinsel, flashy, showy,
overdecorated, loud; bespangled, fine, gay, meretricious.

ANT. _Rich, simple, handsome, chaste._

=Gaunt.= Lean, lank, thin, meager, emaciated, slender, attenuated,
spare; grim, savage, hungry.

ANT. _Docile, tractable, well-fed, tame, sleek._

=Gawky.= Awkward, clownish, ungainly, clumsy, raw, boorish, rustic,
green, uncouth, loutish.

ANT. _Neat, handy, graceful, handsome._

=Gay.= Showy, bright, fine, brilliant, dashing; gaudy, flaunting,
flashy, garish, tawdry, glittering, tinsel; merry, lively, jovial,
cheerful, gleeful, blithe, sportive, airy, gladsome, frolicsome, jolly,
hilarious, light-hearted; sprightly, smart, festive, pleasuresome.

ANT. _Heavy, sad, grave, dull, dowdy, somber, melancholy._

=Gaze=, _v._ Stare, scan, behold, regard, contemplate, view, gloat,
glower.

ANT. _Wink, ignore, overlook, ogle, glance, disregard._

=General=, _a._ Ordinary, universal, common, commonplace, customary,
everyday, public, prevalent, familiar, normal, popular, habitual,
frequent, usual.

ANT. _Singular, uncommon, exceptional, rare, unknown, infrequent,
unusual; particular, special._

=Generality.= Universality; bulk, mass, body, majority.

ANT. _Section, minority, exception, individuality._

=Generate.= Beget, procreate, engender, breed, propagate; produce, form,
make, cause, bring about, originate.

ANT. _Stifle, extinguish, terminate, annihilate._

=Generation.= Procreation; production, formation; offspring, progeny,
succession of descendants; family, stock, race, breed; contemporaries;
period, epoch, age, era, lifetime; origination.

ANT. _Perpetuity, eternity, immortality; posterity._

=Generic.= General, common, collective, racial, comprehensive.

ANT. _Particular, personal, specific, individual._

=Generous.= Liberal, noble, magnanimous, bountiful, free, munificent,
open-handed, disinterested, open-hearted, chivalrous, honorable.

ANT. _Avaricious, covetous, greedy, parsimonious, penurious, petty,
rapacious, stingy, close, illiberal, ignoble, mean, miserly, niggardly,
churlish, selfish._

=Genial.= Fostering, cheering, enlivening, encouraging, inspiriting;
cordial, hearty; cheerful, pleasant, merry, mirthful, jovial, warm,
balmy, festive, joyous, revivifying, rejuvenating, restorative.

ANT. _Cold, cutting, harsh, deleterious, noxious, deadly, destructive,
blighting, lethal, ungenial._

=Genius.= Bent, turn, aptitude, aptness, faculty, capacity, endowment,
talent, gift; ingenuity, invention, sagacity, intellect, brains, parts,
wit, inspiration, creative _or_ inventive power; adept, proficient,
master, master hand; nature, character, disposition, constitution,
characteristic; spirit, tutelary deity, guardian angel; cleverness,
inventiveness, skill, creativeness, giftedness, ideality, talents.

ANT. _Stupidity, senselessness, folly, dulness, imbecility, obtuseness,
stolidity, inanity._

=Genteel.= Refined, polite, courteous, civil, polished, well-bred,
gentlemanly _or_ ladylike; fashionable, stylish, elegant; graceful,
refined, aristocratic, cultivated, cultured.

ANT. _Rude, clownish, uncultivated, ill-bred, boorish, uncultured,
plebeian, unfashionable, unpolished, inelegant._

=Gentle.= Mild, bland, moderate, kind, tender, compassionate, indulgent,
meek, soft, lenient, humane, clement, merciful, tender-hearted,
gentle-hearted; tame, docile, peaceable, calm, peaceful, tranquil,
tractable, pacific, quiet; light, zephyrlike; noble, high-born,
well-born; cultivated, refined, courteous, well-bred, polished; placid,
amiable.

ANT. _Rough, rude, coarse, fierce, savage; uneven, uncut; boisterous;
shaggy, ragged, disordered; harsh, uncivil, offensive; tempestuous,
stormy; inclement._

=Genuine.= Pure, uncorrupt, unalloyed, unadulterated, true, authentic,
real, veritable; native, unaffected, sincere; sound, natural.

ANT. _Spurious, adulterated; fictitious; apocryphal, counterfeit, false,
artificial._

=Germ.= Embryo, ovule, seed-bud; origin, source, first principle;
nucleus, seed, bud.

ANT. _Fruit, result, development, product, produce, issue, outgrowth._

=Germane.= Related, akin, cognate, allied; pertinent, relevant,
appropriate, apposite, fitting, suitable; kindred, homogeneous.

ANT. _Foreign, alien, irrelevant, unconnected._

=Germinate.= Bud, shoot, vegetate, sprout, push, burst forth, put forth,
spring up.

ANT. _Rot, decay, spoil, die, putrefy, corrupt._

=Get.= Attain, earn, achieve, acquire, obtain, procure, receive, win,
secure, gain.

ANT. _Abandon, lose, forfeit, surrender, forego._

=Ghastly.= Pale, wan, cadaverous, deathlike; grim, dismal, hideous,
terrible, horrible, frightful, shocking, grisly; spectral, pallid.

ANT. _Blooming, fresh, ruddy, comely, buxom, seemly._

=Ghost.= Spirit, soul; apparition, specter, sprite, phantom, shade,
departed spirit; vision.

ANT. _Body, organism, animal._

=Gibe.= Sneer, scoff, taunt, flout, jest, jeer, ridicule, deride, mock,
rail at.

ANT. _Salute, compliment._

=Giddy.= Dizzy, vertiginous; inconstant, fickle, changeable, unsteady,
mutable, unstable, vacillating, irresolute; careless, heedless, wild,
reckless, headlong, thoughtless, light-headed, flighty; whirling,
hare-brained, beetling, flighty.

ANT. _Slow, ponderous, stationary; earnest, thoughtful, steady; low,
wary, unelevated, circumspect._

=Gift.= Bequest, benefaction, donation, boon, grant, present, largess,
bribe, bounty, gratuity; endowment, talent, genius, faculty, power,
capacity, capability, ability, turn, _forte_; donation, _douceur_,
offering, alms, allowance, contribution, subscription, subsidy, dower,
legacy, demise.

ANT. _Reservation, refusal, purchase; inanity, stupidity, forfeit,
penalty, fine, surrender; earnings, wages, remuneration, compensation;
reward, guerdon._

=Gigantic.= Vast, huge, colossal, enormous, giant, prodigious,
Herculean, Cyclopean, immense, tremendous.

ANT. _Puny, feeble, dwarfish, petty, insignificant, pigmy._

=Girdle.= Gird, bind round; surround, encircle, encompass, enclose,
embrace, shut in; belt, hem, environ, engirdle, begird.

ANT. _Disclose, open, disencircle, expand, ungird, disengirdle._

=Girl.= Damsel, lass, lassie, miss, maiden, maid, virgin, young
unmarried woman.

=Gist.= Essence, pith, core, marrow, substance, kernel, main point,
force, ground, foundation.

ANT. _Surplusage, additament, redundancy, environment; accessories;
clothing, garb; excess, overplus._

=Give.= Deliver, bestow, supply, grant, cede, confer, communicate,
impart, furnish; produce, yield, surrender, concede, present, afford,
spare, accommodate with; pay, exchange; permit, allow, vouchsafe, deign;
utter, pronounce, render; occasion, cause; devote, apply, addict, give
up; sink, bend; retreat, give way, recede, retire.

ANT. _Withhold, withdraw, refuse, retain, grasp, fail, restrain, deny,
take back, remove, recall; take, receive, accept; hold, support._

=Glad.= Rejoiced, pleased, gratified, delighted, happy, well-contented;
cheerful, joyous, joyful, gladsome, elated, jocund, playful,
light-hearted, cheery, animated; exhilarating, pleasing, bright,
gratifying; blithesome, gleeful.

ANT. _Unhappy, sad, sorrowful, disastrous, sorry, dismal, disappointed,
discontented, uneasy._

=Gladden.= Delight, cheer, exhilarate, bless, rejoice, gratify, make
glad.

ANT. _Grieve, disappoint, depress, dispirit, trouble, wound, afflict,
sadden, displease._

=Glare.= Glitter, glisten, dazzle, flare, gleam, sparkle; glower, look
fierce; beam, shine, glow, ray, radiate.

ANT. _Shimmer, scintillate, waver, glimmer, smolder, burn fitfully,
flash, flicker, glister; obscure, darken._

=Glassy.= Vitreous; crystal, crystalline, transparent, gleaming, lucent,
brilliant, shining; smooth, polished, glacial, glabrous, brittle,
pellucid, limpid, glossy, silken.

ANT. _Rough, uneven, pliant, rugged, tough, opaque, turbid, muddy, dull,
dark._

=Glaze=, _v._ Set glass; calender, polish, burnish, gloss, furbish;
become glassy, grow dim; vitrify.

ANT. _Roughen, corrugate, rumple, crumple, wrinkle, furrow._

=Glimpse=, _n._ Glance, glimmering, sight, inkling, flash, survey,
trace, tinge.

ANT. _Observation, scrutiny, investigation, inspection, exposure,
analysis, examination._

=Gloom.= Obscurity, darkness, dimness, gloominess, cloud; dejection,
sadness, depression, despondency, melancholy; gloaming, twilight,
shadow, obscuration, dulness, cloudiness.

ANT. _Light, radiance, clearness, daylight, brightness._

=Glorify.= Extol, exalt, magnify, bless, honor, praise; brighten, make
illustrious, elevate, ennoble, adorn; laud, signalize, aggrandize,
panegyrize.

ANT. _Debase, depress, abuse, abase, defame, degrade, decry, censure,
blame, rebuke._

=Glorious.= Illustrious, renowned, celebrated, eminent, famed, famous,
distinguished, conspicuous; resplendent, splendid, radiant, bright,
brilliant; noble, lofty, exalted, supreme, high, excellent, consummate.

ANT. _Mean, debased, undistinguished, disgraced, unknown, dishonorable,
inglorious._

=Glory.= Honor, renown, celebrity, fame, praise; splendor, luster,
brightness, brilliancy, pride, effulgence; gloriousness, nobleness,
exaltation, grandeur; radiance, state, pomp, parade, magnificence.

ANT. _Obscurity, cloud, ignominy, dishonor, degradation, disgrace,
shame._

=Gloss=, _n._ Interpretation, comment, note, explanation, scholium,
commentary, annotation; pretext, pretense, specious plea; luster,
polish, shine, sheen; distortion, misinterpretation, perversion, twist,
plea, speciousness.

ANT. _Haze, nebulousness; truth, literalness, representation, reality,
verity, actuality, solution, exposition._

=Glowing.= Shining, hot, intense, ardent, excited, fiery, fervid,
fervent.

ANT. _Cool, languid, dispassionate, dull, apathetic, chilling._

=Glut=, _n._ Repletion, superabundance, surplus, overplus, redundancy,
overstock, superfluity.

ANT. _Scarcity, want, scantiness, dearth, failure, drainage,
exhaustion._

=Glut=, _v._ Cloy, sate, satiate, pall, surfeit; gorge, cram, stuff,
fill, overfeed, make replete.

ANT. _Empty, void, disgorge, eject, discharge, vomit._

=Gluttony.= Voracity, greed, gormandizement, deglutition.

ANT. _Abstinence, abstemiousness, temperance, frugality._

=Go.= Move, pass, proceed, advance, progress; walk, travel, journey,
fare; depart, set out, leave; reach, extend; contribute, concur, tend,
avail; eventuate, turn out; be esteemed, be reckoned; accept, approve,
endure, tolerate, swallow, bear; stir, budge.

ANT. _Stand, stay, come, remain, rest, endure, persist, lack, abide,
fail._

=Good=, _n._ Benefit, gain, advantage, utility, profit; welfare, weal,
prosperity, interest; virtue, righteousness, excellence; abundance,
riches; boon, blessing, mercy.

ANT. _Hurt, loss, detriment, injury, evil, disadvantage, ill, calamity,
affliction, infliction, curse._

=Good=, _a._ Advantageous, serviceable, profitable, useful, beneficial;
suitable, fit, convenient, proper, well-adapted; upright, virtuous,
worthy, pious, dutiful, righteous, religious; excellent, valuable,
precious, sterling, admirable, capital; kind, humane, benevolent,
friendly, favorable, gracious, merciful, obliging, well-disposed; fair,
unblemished, untarnished, unsullied, immaculate, honorable, unimpeached;
cheerful, lively, social, genial, companionable; able, skilful, expert,
ready, dexterous, well-qualified; competent; pleasant, gratifying,
agreeable; considerable; real, true, serious, unfeigned; right,
complete, sound, propitious, efficient, sufficient, valid, actual,
reputable, just.

ANT. _Bad, wrong, evil, ill, wicked, depraved, imperfect, unsound,
vicious, profane, niggardly, unpropitious, unserviceable, unsuitable,
inefficient, incompetent, inadequate, invalid, fictitious,
supposititious, inconsiderable, mean, disreputable, disgraceful;
baneful, mischievous, pernicious, injurious, hurtful; abandoned,
corrupt, immoral, unprincipled, dishonest, unfair, villainous;
unfortunate, unlucky, unhappy; unwelcome, sad, depressing, discouraging,
distressing; wretched, sorry, abominable; inferior, defective; severe,
serious, hard, heavy._

=Good-by.= Farewell, adieu.

ANT. _Salutation, welcome, hail, greeting._

=Good-humored.= Cheerful, buoyant, placid, amiable, good-natured,
good-tempered.

ANT. _Cross, ill-humored, ill-natured, unamiable, petulant, fretful,
peevish._

=Goodly.= Graceful, comely, beautiful, good-looking; pleasant, happy,
agreeable, desirable; excellent, fair, fine; considerable.

ANT. _Unpleasant, undesirable, inconsiderable, uncomely, ungainly,
clumsy, awkward._

=Gorgeous.= Showy, glittering, splendid, shining, magnificent,
resplendent, fine, rich, superb, dazzling; costly, grand, strong.

ANT. _Poor, naked, dingy, bare, threadbare, cheap; grimy, soiled; dull,
obscure, dim._

=Govern.= Manage, reign over, direct, command, control, rule, sway,
influence, mold, restrain, curb, moderate, guide, supervise, conduct;
regulate, steer, bridle.

ANT. _Be subject, obey, submit, comply, yield; misrule, misdirect,
misconduct._

=Grace.= Favor, kindness, condescension, love, benignity, good will;
piety, devotion, sanctity, devoutness, faith, holiness, religion; mercy,
pardon, forgiveness; elegance, polish, accomplishment, refinement;
beauty, symmetry, comeliness, gracefulness, ease; short prayer;
excellence, charm.

ANT. _Disfavor, deformity, pride, unkindness, gawkiness, awkwardness,
inelegance._

=Graceful.= Beautiful, comely, elegant, stately, easy, natural,
becoming, flowing, rounded, sinuous.

ANT. _Awkward, homely, uncouth, ugly, plain, gawky, ungraceful._

=Graceless.= Depraved, degenerate, corrupt, reprobate, dissolute,
profligate, lost, abandoned, hardened, obdurate, shameless,
incorrigible, wicked, irreclaimable; ungraceful, scampish, vicious,
worthless.

ANT. _Graceful, virtuous, upright, conscientious, worthy; gracious,
tender-hearted._

=Gracious.= Benevolent, benign, kind, favorable, benignant,
compassionate, friendly, merciful, tender, lenient, condescending, mild,
gentle; affable, familiar, civil, polite, easy, courteous, beneficent.

ANT. _Haughty, discourteous, ungracious, ill-disposed, churlish,
unfriendly, impolite._

=Gradation.= Progress, progression, succession; graduation, precedency,
arrangement, ordination, standing, rank, degree, stage, tier.

ANT. _Equality, uniformity, fraternity; abruptness, break, hiatus._

=Gradual.= Regular, progressive; slow, approximate; continuous,
unintermittent, step by step, gradational.

ANT. _Sudden, momentary, instantaneous, periodic, intermittent,
recurrent, broken, discontinuous, disconnected._

=Grand.= Stately, lordly, princely, august, exalted, majestic, elevated,
illustrious, eminent, dignified, great, high; magnificent, glorious,
superb, splendid, lofty, noble, sublime; principal, chief, main,
leading, supreme; large, imposing, important, eventful, pompous,
gorgeous.

ANT. _Little, undignified, unimposing, inferior, petty, paltry,
secondary, unimportant, insignificant, mean, common, beggarly,
contemptible, small._

=Grandeur.= Greatness, vastness, loftiness, elevation, immensity; state,
dignity, majesty, stateliness, pomp, augustness, splendor; magnificence,
display, ostentation.

ANT. _Meanness, paltriness; humiliation, shame, disgrace._

=Grandiloquence.= Bombast, fustian, turgidity; verbosity, pomposity,
mouthiness, grandiosity, antiloquence, stiltedness, euphuism.

ANT. _Simplicity, naïveté, unaffectedness; vernacular._

=Grant.= Yield, admit, concede, allow; give, bestow, confer, deign,
vouchsafe; convey, transfer; allot, accord, cede, impart.

ANT. _Withhold, withdraw, reserve, resume, deny, refuse._

=Graphic.= Vivid, lively, picturesque, well-drawn, striking, telling;
illustrative, pictorial, descriptive, forcible, feeling; described.

ANT. _Undescriptive, unillustrative, unpicturesque; hazy, obscure,
indefinite._

=Grasp.= Clasp, gripe, seize, grip, grapple, catch, clutch, clinch, lay
hold of; hold, retain, comprehend.

ANT. _Loose, lose, abandon, relinquish, surrender, release, miss,
misunderstand._

=Grateful.= Obliged, thankful, indebted, beholden; agreeable,
acceptable, pleasing, pleasant, delightful, gratifying, welcome,
charming, satisfying; delicious, savory, nice, cordial, luscious,
refreshing, invigorating; comforting, soothing, alleviating.

ANT. _Unpleasant, unacceptable, disobliged, ungrateful, disagreeable._

=Gratification.= Satisfaction, indulgence; enjoyment, delight, pleasure,
fruition; reward, recompense.

ANT. _Pain, dislike, disappointment, abstinence, stinting, discipline,
inurement, abnegation._

=Gratify.= Please, delight, gladden; indulge, satisfy, humor, fulfil.

ANT. _Displease, dissatisfy, stint, deprive, deny, discipline._

=Gratitude.= Thankfulness, obligation, gratefulness.

ANT. _Thanklessness, ingratitude, ungratefulness, unthankfulness,
resentment, oblivion, indignation._

=Gratuitous.= Free, voluntary, uncompensated, groundless, unwarranted,
unsought, unnecessary; spontaneous, baseless, unrecompensed.

ANT. _Compulsory, involuntary, obligatory, necessitated, warranted,
well-founded; unwilling, enforced, enjoined._

=Grave=, _a._ Important, weighty, serious, cogent, momentous; sober,
sedate, thoughtful, staid, solemn; plain, subdued, quiet, silent; sad,
pressing, demure, somber, aggravated, heavy.

ANT. _Joyous, merry, unimportant, facetious, ridiculous, trivial, light,
frivolous, futile, trifling, petty, slight._

=Great.= Large, big, vast, huge, bulky, ample, immense, gigantic,
enormous; much, excessive, high; numerous, countless; considerable,
important, weighty; distinguished, eminent, exalted, prominent,
excellent, elevated, celebrated, noted, famed, illustrious, famous,
renowned; august, grand, dignified, noble, sublime, majestic, lofty;
generous, magnanimous, chivalrous, high-minded; sumptuous, rich,
magnificent; difficult, onerous, hard, burdensome, grievous; chief,
principal, main, leading, grand; superior, preëminent; protracted,
noticeable.

ANT. _Little, narrow, scanty, puny, few, short, mean, ignoble, weak,
unimportant._

=Greediness.= Avidity, hunger, voracity, ravenousness, gluttony;
eagerness, longing, greed, intense desire; grasping, avarice, rapacity,
selfishness.

ANT. _Generosity, prodigality, benevolence._

=Greedy.= Voracious, ravenous, insatiable, gluttonous, insatiate,
rapacious; eager, desirous; selfish, grasping, avaricious; hungry.

ANT. _Abstemious, abstinent, contented, apathetic, indifferent;
generous, unselfish._

=Grief.= Bitterness, misery, agony, anguish, heartache, heartbreak;
trial, grievance; melancholy, sadness, sorrow, trouble, tribulation,
woe, mourning, affliction, distress, regret.

ANT. _Happiness, joy, elation, delight, hilarity, exultation, cheer,
mirth, gaiety._

=Grievance.= Hardship, wrong, injury, burden, oppression; affliction,
trial, sorrow, grief, distress, woe; complaint, trouble, injustice.

ANT. _Congratulation, boon, benefit, rejoicing, privilege, alleviation,
riddance, disburdenment._

=Grieve.= Afflict, pain, hurt, distress, sadden, agonize; sorrow, mourn,
lament, suffer, bewail; burden, annoy, wound, complain, deplore.

ANT. _Ease, soothe, console, please, rejoice, exult, alleviate, gratify,
content, satisfy._

=Grievous.= Sad, heavy, distressing, afflictive, painful, deplorable,
lamentable; hurtful, injurious, noxious, mischievous, detrimental,
calamitous; atrocious, heinous, outrageous, intolerable, dreadful,
flagrant, aggravated; sorrowful, baleful, burdensome, unhappy,
disastrous.

ANT. _Pleasant, joyous, delightful, glad, consolatory, acceptable,
welcome, grateful, light, trivial, trifling._

=Grim.= Fierce, ruthless, cruel, savage, ferocious; frightful, horrible,
hideous, dire, horrid, appalling, terrific, dreadful; ugly, ghastly,
sullen, stern.

ANT. _Mild, attractive, benign, placid, docile._

=Gross.= Great, large, big, bulky; dense, thick; coarse, rough, rude,
unrefined, unseemly, unbecoming; indelicate, sensual, impure, vulgar,
low, broad; enormous, flagrant, shameful, outrageous, grievous;
palpable, manifest, glaring; whole, total, entire, aggregate; vicious,
animal, bloated.

ANT. _Partial, component; net; refined, pure; elegant, delicate,
subtle._

=Grotesque.= Fantastic, whimsical, fanciful, droll, odd, unnatural,
strange, wild, bizarre, extravagant; ludicrous, absurd, ridiculous,
antic, burlesque; quaint, old, archaic, distorted, caricatured.

ANT. _Classic, chaste, graceful, fine, severe, regular, fashionable,
symmetrical, typical, formal, normal._

=Ground.= Basis, base, groundwork, support, foundation; sod, soil, clod,
earth, loam, turf; region, territory, country, land, domain; estate,
acres, field; motive, consideration, reason, cause, account, inducement;
premise, plea.

ANT. _Superstructure, statement, argument, inference, deduction;
product, development, result, effect; ocean, sea, deep, main, waters._

=Grounded.= Rooted, established, initiated, inaugurated, trained,
prepared, fixed, set; indoctrinated.

ANT. _Ungrounded, unprepared, uninitiated, baseless, unfounded,
groundless, unauthorized._

=Groundless.= Vain, supposititious, unfounded, false, baseless,
fanciful, chimerical, gratuitous.

ANT. _Well-founded, authoritative, substantial, actual, authentic._

=Group.= Cluster, collection, assemblage, order, bunch, knot, class,
clump, assembly, collocation.

ANT. _Individual, crowd, isolation, medley, confusion; dispersion,
distribution, scattering._

=Grovel.= Creep, crawl, sneak, be prone, fawn, cringe, lie, grub,
wallow.

ANT. _Soar, aspire, mount, rise, domineer, intimidate, dictate,
browbeat._

=Grow.= Enlarge, increase, swell, expand, extend, augment; vegetate,
shout, sprout, germinate; advance, wax, progress, improve; adhere;
raise, produce, cultivate; accrue, become, develop, amplify.

ANT. _Diminish, recede, contract, fail, stop, die, wane, decline,
subside, ebb, decay, depreciate, crumble, weaken._

=Grudge=, _n._ Hatred, pique, rancor, spite, malice, malevolence;
grievance, aversion, dissatisfaction, discontent, refusal.

ANT. _Welcome, satisfaction, approval, contentment, benefaction,
complacency, bestowal._

=Guardian.= Warden, keeper, protector, defender, preserver; custodian,
conservator.

ANT. _Pupil, ward; traitor, betrayer; charge, minor._

=Guess.= Conjecture, divine, surmise, mistrust, suspect; find out,
solve, penetrate, fathom; suppose, think, believe, fancy, imagine;
hazard, risk.

ANT. _Examine, prove, investigate, establish, demonstrate, deduce,
elaborate, illustrate._

=Guide=, _n._ Director, conductor, pilot; mentor, monitor, adviser,
instructor, counselor; clue, key; itinerary.

ANT. _Follower, disciple, imitator, pupil._

=Guide=, _v._ Lead, conduct, pilot; direct, rule, manage, regulate,
govern, control, steer; superintend, influence, train.

ANT. _Mislead, misconduct, misdirect, mismanage, misregulate, misguide,
miseducate, betray, deceive, impose upon, disappoint, cheat._

=Guile.= Cunning, craft, subtlety, artifice, artfulness, deceit,
duplicity, deception, fraud, wiles, trickery; treachery, insidiousness,
hypocrisy.

ANT. _Frankness, simplicity, honesty, candor, generosity, sincerity,
truth, veracity._

=Guilt.= Guiltiness, culpability, criminality; wrong, offensiveness,
wickedness, ill desert, iniquity, sin, offense.

ANT. _Sinlessness, innocence, purity, godliness, righteousness._

=Guise.= Aspect, appearance, garb, dress, form, shape, figure, manner,
mode, fashion; practice, habit, custom; semblance, plea, demeanor, mien.

ANT. _Character, person, individual, sentiment, disposition, opinion,
life, mind, soul, self._

=Gumption.= Shrewdness, discernment, sagacity, skill, cleverness,
ability, capacity, power, penetration, common sense.

=Gush=, _v._ Burst, stream, flow, rush, spout, pour out, flow out;
sentimentalize, be overeffusive.

ANT. _Drip, drop, filter, ooze, percolate, dribble, drain, strain,
trickle._

=Gust.= Taste, relish, zest, liking; pleasure, enjoyment, delight,
delectation, gratification; turn, fancy, favor; blast, squall; fit,
outburst, burst, paroxysm; puff, breeze, gale.

ANT. _Calm, tranquillity, subsidence, composure, restraint, zephyr;
insipidity, tastelessness._




                                   H


=Habiliment.= Dress, garments, clothes, apparel, vesture, raiment,
habit, costume, vestment, garb, robes, uniform, clothing.

ANT. _Undress, nudity, bareness, deshabille, divestment._

=Habit.= Condition, constitution, temperament; way, manner; dress, garb,
habiliment; habituation, familiarity, association, inurement; routine,
rule, custom, fashion, practice, system, habitude, use, usage, wont.

ANT. _Dishabituation, inexperience, inconversance, desuetude, disuse,
breach, infringement, disusage._

=Habitation.= Abode, dwelling, lodging, domicil, headquarters, quarters,
dwelling-place.

=Habitual.= Usual, customary, wonted, common, accustomed, regular,
ordinary, familiar, everyday, perpetual.

ANT. _Irregular, extraordinary, unusual, occasional, exceptional, rare._

=Haggard.= Wild, wayward, intractable, refractory, unruly, untamed;
gaunt, lean, spare, meager, worn, wasted, raw-boned; attenuated,
wrinkled, ghastly, hollow-eyed.

ANT. _Sleek, smug, plump, chubby, comely, sightly, pretty._

=Hail.= Accost, address, salute, greet, welcome, call, speak, signal.

ANT. _Ignore, avoid, pass, cut, disdain, insult, rebuff._

=Halcyon.= Calm, quiet, placid, still, peaceful, tranquil, undisturbed,
unruffled, palmy, serene, happy, golden, balmy.

ANT. _Stormy, tempestuous, troublous, boisterous, blustering, turbulent,
violent._

=Hale.= Healthy, sound, strong, robust, hearty, hardy, well.

ANT. _Feeble, sickly, weak._

=Half=, _n._ Bisection, dimidiation, moiety.

ANT. _Integrity, total, whole, entirety, sum, amount, aggregate,
quantity, number._

=Hallow.= Consecrate, dedicate, sanctify, devote, make holy; reverence,
venerate, honor, respect, pay homage to, enshrine.

ANT. _Desecrate, profane, execrate, blaspheme, abominate._

=Halt.= Stop, hold, stand, pull up; limp, hobble; rest, falter, hamper,
stammer, demur, dubitate, pause, stand still, hesitate.

ANT. _Advance, flow, speed; determine, decide, conclude, finish._

=Hamper.= Hinder, fetter, entangle, shackle, clog, encumber, restrain,
impede.

ANT. _Free, liberate, loose; expedite, hasten, speed, accelerate._

=Hand.= Palm and fingers; side, direction, part; skill, dexterity,
talent, ability, faculty; handiwork, workmanship; management, course;
agency, share, intervention, participation; laborer, workman, operative,
artificer, artisan, craftsman, employee; possession, power, control;
index, pointer, indicator; chirography, handwriting; influence; handful,
bunch.

ANT. _Employer._

=Handle.= Touch, feel, take; manage, use, wield; treat, discuss,
discourse; deal with; operate, manipulate.

ANT. _Drop, bungle, mismanage, botch, spoil, mar._

=Handsome.= Comely, stately, well-formed, fine-looking; easy, graceful,
becoming, appropriate; generous, liberal, noble, magnanimous,
disinterested; ample, sufficient, large, plentiful; beautiful, pretty,
lovely, elegant.

ANT. _Uncomely, ill-looking, ungenerous, illiberal, ugly, unsightly,
ghastly._

=Handy.= Dexterous, adroit, skilful, skilled, ready, clever, expert;
convenient, near, at hand.

ANT. _Remote, inconvenient, unwieldy, cumbrous, awkward, useless,
unhandy._

=Hang.= Rest, lean, depend, poise, suspend; attach, incline, drop,
decline, droop; execute; drape, adorn; dangle, be suspended, adhere,
rely, stick, cling; hover, float, play; attend.

ANT. _Stand, recline, lean, lie; prop, support, uphold._

=Happen.= Chance, occur, befall, bechance, betide, fall, come to pass,
fall out, take place, supervene.

ANT. _Miss, omit, fail, pass, spare, pass by, neglect, discard._

=Happiness.= Delight, joy, pleasure, satisfaction, comfort, bliss,
triumph, mirth, gaiety, ecstasy, gladness, rejoicing, rapture,
contentment, merriment, blessedness, felicity, cheer, enjoyment,
well-being, light-heartedness, cheerfulness, brightness; beatitude,
prosperity.

ANT. _Grief, sorrow, anguish, trouble, mourning, misfortune, affliction,
disaster, woe, agony, distress, torture, torment, melancholy._

=Happy.= Gay, glad, joyous, cheerful, blessed, delighted, joyful, jolly,
successful, rejoicing, blissful, lucky, merry, fortunate, rejoiced,
jocund, buoyant, felicitous, bright, blithesome, sunny, cheering,
cheery, sprightly, delightful, smiling, mirthful, pleased, prosperous,
rapturous; light-hearted, blest, gladdened, charmed; ready, expert, apt,
skilful, adroit, able, dexterous; seasonable, opportune, befitting,
pertinent, well-timed; auspicious, propitious, favorable.

ANT. _Unlucky, unfortunate, unsuccessful, infelicitous, sorrowful,
sorry, dull, lugubrious, disappointed, desponding, unhappy._

=Harangue.= Speech, public or formal address, oration; bombast,
declamation, tirade, screed; effusion, rant.

ANT. _Mumble, drawl, insinuation, suggestion, stammering, reasoning,
blandiloquence, stuttering._

=Harass.= Fatigue, tire, weary, annoy, exhaust; vex, plague, worry,
distress, trouble, molest, disturb, torment, harry; jade, tease,
irritate, chafe, harrow, pester, perplex.

ANT. _Relieve, refresh, comfort, solace, soothe, animate, inspirit._

=Harbinger.= Herald, forerunner, precursor, announcer.

ANT. _Reporter, narrator, follower, attendant, historian, relator._

=Harbor=, _n._ Asylum, refuge, shelter, cover, retreat, sanctuary,
resting-place; port, haven, destination, home, anchorage.

ANT. _Labor, toil, peril, exposure, roving, wandering, voyage, roaming,
pilgrimage._

=Harbor=, _v._ Shelter, lodge, protect; entertain, indulge, foster,
cherish; secrete; accommodate, encourage.

ANT. _Eject, expel, discard, discourage, stifle, exclude, banish,
dismiss._

=Hard.= Firm, solid, compact, impenetrable, rigid, unyielding;
difficult, embarrassing, knotty, puzzling, intricate, perplexing;
laborious, arduous, toilsome, wearying, fatiguing; unkind, insensible,
cruel, oppressive, rigorous, severe, exacting, inflexible, obdurate,
callous, unfeeling, unsympathetic; grievous, distressing, painful,
calamitous, unpleasant, disagreeable; inclement, stormy, cold, severe,
tempestuous; harsh, sour, acid, rough; coarse, unpalatable; unfavorable,
unprosperous, unpropitious; stiff, unnatural, forced, constrained,
ungraceful; excessive, intemperate; inexplicable, flinty, dense,
stubborn, hardy, hardened.

ANT. _Soft, fluid, liquid, elastic, brittle, easy, penetrable, mild,
lenient, tender, ductile, simple, uninvolved, intelligible,
perspicuous._

=Harden.= Indurate, make hard; habituate, inure, season, form, train,
accustom, discipline; fortify, strengthen, steel, nerve, brace; scar,
make callous, make obdurate; consolidate, compact.

ANT. _Disinure, relax, enervate, debilitate, soften, dishabituate, melt,
mollify, vaporize, colliquate._

=Hardihood.= Firmness, fortitude, resolution, mettle, pluck, manhood,
courage, bravery, boldness, intrepidity, audacity, decision,
determination; effrontery, assurance, brass.

ANT. _Weakness, effeminacy; timidity, fear; indecision; cowardice._

=Hardly.= Scarcely, barely, just; severely, rigorously, unkindly,
roughly, cruelly; merely, narrowly.

ANT. _Fully, amply, easily, abundantly, largely._

=Hardship.= Toil, fatigue, weariness; grievance, suffering, trial,
affliction, trouble, misfortune, calamity, burden, hardness; annoyance,
infliction, endurance.

ANT. _Pleasure, amusement, alleviation, recreation, gratification,
relief, assuagement, facilitation, treat, boon._

=Hardy.= Bold, intrepid, resolute, brave, daring, valiant, heroic,
manly, stout-hearted, courageous; strong, robust, firm, lusty, stout,
healthy, rigorous, hale, sound, hearty; inured, vigorous.

ANT. _Weak, uninured, irresolute, delicate, debilitated, tender,
fragile, frail, infirm._

=Harm.= Injury, hurt, detriment, mischief, damage, prejudice,
disadvantage; evil, criminality, wrong, wickedness; misfortune, ill,
mishap.

ANT. _Benefit, boon, amelioration, improvement, compensation,
reparation, remedy, healing._

=Harmless.= Innocuous, innocent, innoxious, gentle, inoffensive; unhurt,
unharmed, uninjured.

ANT. _Noxious, hurtful, nocuous, savage, cruel, deadly, mischievous,
violent, pernicious, destructive._

=Harmonious.= Concordant, harmonic, consonant; melodious, tuneful,
musical, dulcet, mellifluous; correspondent, consistent, symmetrical,
congruent; friendly, cordial, amicable, fraternal, brotherly,
neighborly; accordant, proportioned, uniform, peaceful, agreeable.

ANT. _Discordant, incongruous, unshapely, harsh, disproportioned,
unmelodious, sharp, grating, riotous, unfriendly, unpeaceful,
quarrelsome._

=Harmony.= Concord, amity, accordance, unison, consent, unanimity,
unity, accord, agreement, uniformity, symmetry, union, conformity,
consonance, congruity, concurrence, consistency.

ANT. _Hostility, separation, discord, warfare, battle, variance,
conflict, disagreement, disunion, dissension, contention, antagonism,
contest, controversy, schism, opposition, incongruity, difference,
inconsistency, disproportion._

=Harsh.= Rough, sour, crabbed, tart, hard, biting, sharp, corrosive,
caustic; grating, discordant, jarring; morose, severe, stern, austere,
acrimonious, ill-natured, unkind, unfeeling; rude, uncivil, blunt,
ungracious, gruff, brutal, bearish; abusive, rigorous, rancorous.

ANT. _Smooth, lenient, melodious, genial, kindly, suave, bland, gentle._

=Harvest.= Fruit, crop, increase, yield, result, return, proceeds,
product, growth, ingathering, harvest-feast, harvest-festival,
harvest-time, harvest-home.

=Haste.= Despatch, celerity, speed, promptitude, quickness; hurry,
precipitation, vehemence, precipitance; expedition, excitement,
heedlessness, swiftness.

ANT. _Delay, slowness, tardiness, coolness, reflection, moderation,
steadiness._

=Hasten.= Expedite, despatch, accelerate, speed, hurry, hustle, quicken,
precipitate, press on, urge forward; haste, make haste; urge, press.

ANT. _Retard, impede, obstruct, demur, halt, hesitate._

=Hasty.= Quick, swift, fleet, fast, rapid, brisk, speedy; cursory,
slight, hurried, superficial; headlong, rash, reckless, precipitate,
indiscreet, thoughtless; passionate, touchy, irritable, petulant,
waspish, excitable, fiery, hot, irascible, peppery, fretful; impetuous,
crude, incomplete, immature, undeveloped.

ANT. _Tardy, slow, leisurely, careful, reflective, developed, complete,
matured, elaborate, thoughtful, deliberate._

=Hateful.= Malignant, malevolent, malign; abominable, detestable,
odious, execrable, abhorrent, horrid, shocking, accursed, damnable;
loathsome, disgusting, nauseous, foul, repulsive, offensive, vile,
obnoxious, revolting, repugnant; heinous.

ANT. _Lovely, loveable, desirable, delightful, attractive, enticing,
enjoyable, tempting, pleasant._

=Hatred.= Enmity, dislike, hostility, anger, abhorrence, aversion,
spite, revenge, grudge, ill will, malice, antipathy, resentment,
animosity, malignity, repugnance, rancor, detestation, malevolence.

ANT. _Friendship, love, benevolence, charity, beneficence._

=Have.= Hold, occupy, own, possess, be in possession of, regard,
consider, esteem; wish, require, desire; obtain, get, acquire, receive,
gain; be obliged, be under necessity; take, accept; bear, bring forth;
feel, entertain, enjoy, keep.

ANT. _Want, need, lose, discard, forego, miss, reject, covet, desire._

=Havoc.= Ravage, devastation, destruction, desolation, waste, ruin;
carnage, slaughter; demolition, wreck.

ANT. _Conservation, enrichment, enhancement, augmentation, development,
prosperity, productiveness, luxuriance._

=Hazard=, _n._ Chance, peril, venture, risk, casualty, accident,
contingency, danger, jeopardy, fortuity.

ANT. _Safeguard, protection, security, surety, certainty, necessity,
plan, assurance, safety; warrant, calculation, law._

=Hazy.= Foggy, misty, nebulous, filmy, gauzy, cloudy, murky, gloomy.

ANT. _Clear, crystalline, diaphanous, transparent, bright, luminous,
shining._

=Head.= Top, summit, acme; front, fore part; rise, commencement, source,
origin, beginning; chief part, principal part; person, individual;
chief, chieftain, leader, commander, master, superintendent, director;
first place; understanding, mind, thought, intellect; topic, subject;
class, section, department, category, division; seat of the brain;
crown, ruler, crisis, gathering, culmination, leadership, guide.

ANT. _Tail, bottom, foot, follower, servant, retainer, subordinate,
subordination, inferiority, body, bulk, substance, continuation._

=Heal.= Cure, remedy, restore; reconcile, compose, soothe, harmonize,
settle; be cured, get well; repair, assuage, cicatrize.

ANT. _Harm, hurt, wound, pierce, ulcerate._

=Healthy.= Healthful, sanitary, hearty, hygienic, well, vigorous,
strong, sound, wholesome, hale, salutary, salubrious, invigorating,
bracing.

ANT. _Unhealthy, noxious, pernicious, insalubrious; ill, sickly,
unhealthful, weak, diseased, feeble, wasted, emaciated, fainting,
failing, unsound, worn, frail, fragile, exhausted, delicate._

=Heart.= Organ of circulation; interior, center, essence, core, kernel;
disposition, mind, will, inclination, intent, passion, purpose; spirit,
courage, firmness, fortitude, resolution; love, affection, feeling,
emotion; conscience, character, moral nature; nucleus, hardihood, life,
benevolence.

ANT. _Hand, action, aspect, exterior, manifestation, deed, conduct,
timidity._

=Heart-broken.= Forlorn, disconsolate, inconsolable, miserable,
wretched, desolate, cheerless, comfortless, in despair, broken-hearted,
wobegone.

ANT. _Cheerful, hopeful, trusting._

=Heartily.= Cordially, zealously, sincerely, earnestly.

ANT. _Half-heartedly, insincerely, indifferently._

=Hearty.= Earnest, warm, cordial, sincere, true, deep, profound,
heartfelt, unfeigned; active, zealous, vigorous, energetic, animated;
healthy, hale, sound, strong, well, robust; abundant, full, heavy;
nourishing, rich, nutritious; honest, genuine.

ANT. _Delicate, infirm, unhealthy, cold, insincere, hollow, dissembling,
deceptive, deceitful, hypocritical, false._

=Heat.= Warmth, high temperature; excitement, flush, vehemence,
impetuosity, passion, violence, fever; ardor, earnestness, fervor, zeal;
contest, race, struggle; intensity, ebullition.

ANT. _Coolness, indifference, calmness, subsidence, composure,
reflection._

=Heathenish.= Heathen, pagan, Gentile; cruel, savage, inhuman,
ferocious; unconverted, unChristian, unbelieving, uncivilized.

ANT. _Christian, believing, refined, civilized, polished._

=Heave.= Lift, hoist, raise, elevate; breathe, exhale; throw, toss,
hurl, fling, send; uplift, upraise, subelevate.

ANT. _Dash, sink, lower, detrude, precipitate._

=Heaven.= Firmament, sky, welkin, empyrean; Paradise, bliss, Elysium;
felicity, transport, ecstasy, happiness, rapture, transcendent delight.

ANT. _Gehenna, limbo, abyss, Hades, Tartarus, Avernus, infernal regions;
misery, agony, torment, remorse._

=Heavenly.= Celestial, divine, angelic, seraphic, cherubic, godlike,
saintly, sainted, blessed, holy, beatific, beatified, glorified, blest;
enrapturing, ravishing, rapturous, transporting, ecstatic, delightful,
blissful, golden.

ANT. _Demoniacal, diabolical, foul, hideous, fiendish, hellish,
infernal; terrene, human, terrestrial._

=Heavy.= Weighty, ponderous, oppressive, grievous, severe, burdensome,
cumbersome, afflictive; dull, sluggish, inert, inactive, stupid, torpid,
indolent, slow, lifeless, inanimate; dejected, depressed, sorrowful,
sad, gloomy, despondent, melancholy, disconsolate, crushed, downcast,
crestfallen; onerous, difficult, laborious, hard; tedious, weary,
tiresome, wearisome; loaded, encumbered, burdened; miry, muddy, clayey,
cloggy, soggy, ill-raised; tempestuous, stormy, strong, violent,
energetic, boisterous; impenetrable, stolid; loud, deep, roaring; dense,
dark, gloomy, cloudy, lowering; thick.

ANT. _Light, trifling, trivial, agile, active, joyous, brisk,
alleviative, quick, consolatory, buoyant, inspiriting, animating._

=Hector.= Threaten, bully, menace; vex, tease, annoy, worry, fret,
irritate, provoke, harass, harry; swagger, bluster, boast, vaunt.

ANT. _Cower, shrink, hide, abscond, skulk._

=Heed.= Observe, regard, notice, mind, attend, harken to, listen to,
obey, care, be wary or cautious.

ANT. _Slight, ignore, disregard, neglect, omit, overlook._

=Heedful.= Observing, regardful, watchful, careful, cautious, attentive,
wary, provident, circumspect, mindful.

ANT. _Heedless, careless, unobserving, thoughtless, unobservant,
inattentive, negligent, regardless, unmindful, neglectful, remiss,
inconsiderate, precipitate, reckless, headlong, rash._

=Height.= Altitude, elevation; eminence, summit, top, apex, acme; hill,
mountain; exaltation, stature, dignity, loftiness, grandeur; tallness,
culmination, crisis.

ANT. _Depth, lowness, depression, base, littleness, abasement;
profundity._

=Heighten.= Elevate, raise; magnify, exalt, ennoble; increase, enhance,
augment, improve; aggravate, intensify; color, exaggerate, vivify,
amplify, lift up.

ANT. _Lower, diminish, depress, abase, deteriorate, temper, tone,
modify, qualify, extenuate._

=Heinous.= Flagrant, flagitious, infamous, villainous, nefarious,
wicked, atrocious, enormous, monstrous; hateful, detestable, odious,
abominable, execrable.

ANT. _Excellent, laudable, distinguished, praiseworthy, justifiable,
meritorious, excusable._

=Help.= Foster, aid, assist, encourage, succor, uphold, sustain,
support, abet, coöperate, second, stand by, befriend, remedy, prevent,
avoid, promote, relieve.

ANT. _Obstruct, incur, resist, aggravate, oppose, thwart, discourage,
withstand, counteract._

=Hereditary.= Ancestral, patrimonial; transmitted, inherited; lineal.

ANT. _Conferred, acquired, won, achieved._

=Heresy.= Heterodoxy, error, unsound doctrine, schism, unorthodoxy.

ANT. _Orthodoxy, catholicity; convention, prevailing belief._

=Heretic.= Dissenter, schismatic, nonconformist, heresiarch.

ANT. _Orthodox believer, fanatic, adherent._

=Heritage.= Inheritance, entailment, legacy, bequest, portion,
patrimony, estate.

ANT. _Wages, acquisition, merit, compensation._

=Hermetically.= Secretly, mysteriously, mystically, occultly,
emblematically, symbolically; air-tight, closely.

ANT. _Loosely, misfittingly; openly._

=Heroic.= Brave, valiant, courageous, bold, daring, intrepid, fearless,
dauntless, noble, magnanimous, gallant; epic; violent, extreme,
desperate, extravagant; undaunted, chivalrous, romantic.

ANT. _Dastardly, cowardly, cravenly, fearful, timorous._

=Hesitate.= Doubt, pause, delay, demur, waver, vacillate; falter,
stammer; dubitate, scruple.

ANT. _Decide, run, flow, determine, precipitate._

=Heterodox.= Unsound, unorthodox, heretical, freethinking.

ANT. _Sound, orthodox._

=Heterogeneous.= Unlike, variant, various, confused, conglomerate,
mingled, mixed, discordant, miscellaneous, dissimilar, non-homogeneous;
alien, strange, different, opposed, contrary, contrasted.

ANT. _Homogeneous, identical, like, same, pure, uniform, similar, alike,
accordant, congruous._

=Hew.= Cut, chop, hack; smooth, fashion, form; mold, model, engrave,
carve, sculpture, turn.

ANT. _Leave intact._

=Hibernal.= Wintry, brumal, arctic, glacial, frigid.

ANT. _Summery, balmy, zephyrous, halcyon, tropical._

=Hide.= Conceal, secrete, mask, dissemble, protect, store, disguise,
screen, cover, burrow, ensconce; suppress, shelter, withhold, cloak,
veil, bury, inter, entomb, overwhelm.

ANT. _Expose, disclose, discover, exhume, show, tell, raise, reveal,
unveil, unmask, uncover, exhibit, confess, betray, avow, divulge,
disinter, make known, lay bare, lay open, publish, advertise, manifest,
promulgate, admit; strip._

=Hideous.= Frightful, dreadful, appalling, horrible, ghastly, terrible,
horrid, grim, shocking, grisly; unshapely, ugly, monstrous.

ANT. _Graceful, beautiful, attractive, captivating._

=High.= Prominent, superior, distinguished, preëminent; dignified,
great, admirable; recondite, abstruse, occult, profound, dark, obscure,
transcendental; proud, haughty, arrogant, supercilious, lordly;
boastful, ostentatious, bragging, vainglorious; despotic, domineering,
overbearing, tyrannical; turbulent, violent, strong, tumultuous,
boisterous; extreme; complete, full; dear; shrill, acute, sharp,
high-pitched; northerly, southerly; early, primeval; capital, principal;
strong-flavored; noble, exalted, steep, tall, towering, uplifted,
elevated, eminent, lofty.

ANT. _Low, base, degraded, inferior, mean, short, stunted, depressed,
dwarfed, ignoble._

=Hinder.= Delay, embarrass, oppose, prevent, stay, stop, retard, hamper,
impede, baffle, encumber, check, bar, clog, counteract, frustrate, foil,
interrupt, obstruct, resist, thwart, block, balk, debar.

ANT. _Quicken, hasten, speed, accelerate, expedite, enable, facilitate,
promote._

=Hinge.= Turn, depend, hang, be dependent; move, work, rotate,
circulate.

ANT. _Halt, jar, grate, precipitate, abrade; give, fail._

=Hire.= Engage, commission, rent, employ; bribe, buy up; lease, let.

ANT. _Buy, purchase._

=History.= Annals, chronicle, recital, memoir, narrative, record,
register, story, account, archives, narration, muniment, memorial,
autobiography, biography.

ANT. _Fiction, fable._

=Hit.= Strike; reach, attain, win, secure, gain; suit, accord with;
clash, collide; succeed, be successful; chance, hazard, touch, mistake.

ANT. _Fail, err, miss, mischance, swerve, deflect, overshoot._

=Hitch.= Catch, get stuck or impeded; go by jerks; fasten, unite,
connect, tie, attach; bar, stick, stickle, jam.

ANT. _Run, glide, slide, rotate, flow, continue._

=Hoard.= Store, deposit, save, garner, husband, hive, accumulate, amass,
treasure.

ANT. _Waste, squander, dissipate, scatter._

=Hoarse.= Husky, raucous; grating, rough, harsh, low, guttural, gruff.

ANT. _Melodious, rich, mellow, sweet, mellifluous._

=Hoary.= Hoar, white, gray, silvery, frosty.

ANT. _Dark, raven, jet, black._

=Hoax.= Deceive, cheat, impose upon; befool, bamboozle, trick, dupe.

ANT. _Guide, enlighten, inform, undeceive, direct, regulate, correct._

=Hobby.= Nag, hobby-horse; pursuit, whim, amusement, specialty,
idiosyncrasy.

ANT. _Nuisance, horror, aversion, incubus, bugbear, scarecrow._

=Hold.= Possess, retain, have, occupy; clasp, grasp, clutch, clinch;
restrain, confine, imprison, detain; bind, fasten, unite, connect; stop,
stay, arrest, suspend, withhold; support, maintain, sustain, continue,
prosecute; embrace, entertain, cherish; heed, regard, consider, notice,
judge, esteem, count, reckon, deem; contain, admit; celebrate,
solemnize; assemble, convene; cohere, adhere, cling, stick, cleave; be
firm, be fast, persist, last, endure; be derived; think, be of opinion,
believe; stand, be true.

ANT. _Drop, surrender, fail, abandon, desert, release, forego, vacate,
concede, break, cease; speed, accelerate; give, dispense; disperse._

=Hollow=, _a._ Empty, void, vacant, vacuous, cavernous; insincere,
false, faithless, hypocritical, treacherous, deceitful, false-hearted,
pharisaical; artificial, concave, insubstantial, flimsy, transparent,
senseless, unsound; deep, low, rumbling.

ANT. _Full, solid, firm, sincere, well-stored, strong, true, sound,
genuine, substantial._

=Holy.= Hallowed, sacred, consecrated, blessed, devoted, set apart;
righteous, saintly, spiritual, devout, saintlike, godly, religious,
heavenly-minded, pious, pure; reverend, sanctified, divine.

ANT. _Cursed, polluted, unsanctified, unconsecrated, unhallowed, wicked,
worldly, abominable, common, impure, unholy, secular, profane, evil._

=Homage.= Fealty, allegiance, devotion, loyalty, fidelity; reverence,
obeisance, respect, deference, duty, service, honor; worship, adoration;
affiance, submission, veneration.

ANT. _Treason, rebellion, defiance, insubordination, disaffection._

=Home.= Habitation, hearth, residence, house, abode, dwelling, domicil,
fireside, hearthstone, ingleside.

=Homely.= Domestic, homelike; plain, coarse, uncomely, inelegant,
homespun; rather ugly.

ANT. _Handsome, beautiful, courtly, refined, elegant._

=Honest.= Honorable, fair, open, straightforward, equitable; upright,
virtuous, conscientious, just, true, faithful, trusty, reliable,
trustworthy; genuine, thorough; decent, reputable, respectable,
creditable, suitable, proper; chaste; truthful, ingenuous, sincere,
frank, unreserved, candid, good.

ANT. _Lying, unscrupulous, mendacious, untrue, deceitful, dishonest,
false, hypocritical, fraudulent, disingenuous, perfidious, faithless,
treacherous, unfaithful, traitorous; dishonorable, improper, wrong,
insincere, vicious._

=Honesty.= Integrity, uprightness, probity, justice, fairness, equity,
honor, fidelity, faithfulness; truth, truthfulness, veracity;
genuineness, thoroughness; chastity, virtue; sincerity, candor,
frankness, openness, unreserve, ingenuousness; straightforwardness,
rectitude.

ANT. _Insincerity, trickery, dishonesty, guile, fraud, deception,
unfairness, chicanery._

=Honor.= Veneration, reverence, respect, homage, deference, civility;
dignity, elevation, distinction; majesty; reputation, repute, fame,
esteem, credit, glory, consideration; integrity, probity, rectitude;
pride, nobility, eminence, high-mindedness, spirit, self-respect,
grandeur, renown.

ANT. _Contempt, irreverence, disrespect, slight, obscurity,
demoralization, degradation, debasement, disgrace, cowardice, infamy,
dishonor._

=Honorable.= Honest, upright, high-minded, illustrious, noble, great,
just, fair, trustworthy, conscientious, virtuous, estimable, reputable,
right, proper, creditable, equitable.

ANT. _Dishonorable, dishonest, false, treacherous._

=Honorary.= Unofficial, nominal, gratuitous, titular, unremunerative.

ANT. _Professional, official, remunerative, jurisdictional._

=Hoot.= Shout; cry like an owl; denounce, hiss, execrate, cry down,
decry, sibilate.

ANT. _Salute, welcome, cheer, honor, acclaim, eulogize._

=Hope.= Trust, confidence, faith, reliance; expectancy, expectation,
possibility; dependence; anticipation, prospect, longing, vision,
desire.

ANT. _Despair, despondency, distrust, abandonment, disbelief,
abjuration._

=Horizontal.= Plain, flat, level, even, plane.

ANT. _Vertical, inclined, uneven, slanting, sloping, hilly, broken,
irregular, rough, rolling, rugged._

=Horrible.= Horrid, frightful, terrible, terrific, alarming, dire,
portentous, appalling, horrific, horrifying, formidable, awful,
harrowing, dreadful, hideous, fearful; abominable, ghastly, detestable,
hateful, direful.

ANT. _Lovely, desirable, enjoyable, attractive, beautiful, fair,
pleasant, amiable._

=Horror.= Fright, alarm, dread, fear, consternation, terror, affright,
dismay, panic; abomination, abhorrence, detestation, disgust, hatred,
shuddering, antipathy; shrinking.

ANT. _Love, attraction, enticement, allurement._

=Horse.= Steed, charger, stallion, gelding, mare, colt, pony, nag,
courser, barb, filly, palfrey; cavalry, horsemen; stand, support, frame.

=Hospitable.= Generous, liberal, bountiful, open, kind, unconstrained,
unreserved, receptive, large-minded; sociable, neighborly, charitable.

ANT. _Unsociable, exclusive, retired, recluse, unneighborly, churlish._

=Host.= Entertainer; innkeeper, landlord; army, legion; multitude,
horde, throng, number, assemblage.

ANT. _Handful, sprinkling, group, knot, corps, section; guest, traveler,
boarder, lodger._

=Hostage.= Sponsor, bail, surety.

ANT. _Dictator, conqueror._

=Hostile.= Inimical, unfriendly; adverse, opposite, contrary, repugnant,
opposing, opposed.

ANT. _Friendly, kindly, amicable, neighborly, cordial, congenial._

=Hostility.= Enmity, animosity, hatred, unfriendliness, ill will;
opposition, repugnance, variance, contrariety.

ANT. _Companionship, congeniality, sympathy, harmony, fellow-feeling,
concord, alliance, kindliness, friendship._

=Hot.= Burning, fiery, scalding, heated, very warm; irascible,
impetuous, excitable, passionate, hasty, furious, violent; ardent,
fervent, vehement, eager, glowing, animated, fervid; biting, pungent,
sharp, acrid, peppery, stinging, piquant, high-flavored; choleric.

ANT. _Cold, frigid, cool, arctic, chilled, chilly, boreal, bleak,
wintry, frosty, icy; apathetic, unresponsive, unfeeling, stoical,
passionless, uninspiring, dull, dead, indifferent, unconcerned._

=Huge.= Immense, enormous, colossal, vast, bulky, stupendous, gigantic,
elephantine, Herculean, Cyclopean, large, great, monstrous, prodigious.

ANT. _Petty, pigmy, puny, undersized, small, minute._

=Human.= Cosmical, ethnical, anthropological, rational, civilized.

ANT. _Inhuman, beastly, irrational, animal, brutish._

=Humane.= Kind, benevolent, benignant, accommodating, tender,
compassionate, charitable, sympathetic, gentle, clement, kind-hearted;
tender-hearted; elevating, refining, cultivating, rational, spiritual,
humanizing; benign, merciful, gracious, pitying, human, forgiving.

ANT. _Barbarous; inhuman, unkind, cruel, unmerciful._

=Humanity.= Mankind; benevolence, kindness, philanthropy, tenderness,
sympathy, charity, humaneness, good nature; human spirit, rationality,
reason, culture; man, compassion, sensibility.

ANT. _Unkindness, cruelty, inhumanity, irrationality, bestiality,
barbarity._

=Humanize.= Soften, make humane; civilize, cultivate, refine, polish,
improve, enlighten, reclaim, educate; ameliorate, christianize.

ANT. _Barbarize, degrade, debase, brutalize, depress._

=Humble.= Meek, modest, unassuming, unobtrusive, lowly, unpretending,
submissive, small, poor, low; obscure.

ANT. _High, lofty, assuming, pretentious, proud, boastful, arrogant,
eminent._

=Humid.= Damp, wet, moist, vaporous, dank, spongy.

ANT. _Dry, arid, moistureless, parched._

=Humor=, _n._ Disposition, temper, bent, propensity, bias, predilection;
mood, frame of mind, fancy, caprice, whim, freak, vagary, crotchet;
pleasantry, fun, jocularity, wit, facetiousness.

ANT. _Nature, personality, mind, purpose, will, seriousness._

=Humorous.= Facetious, jocular, jocose, funny, comical, sportive, comic,
ludicrous, pleasant, witty.

ANT. _Grave, serious, sober, matter-of-fact, solemn, sad._

=Hurry=, _n._ Flutter, flurry, precipitation, confusion, bluster,
bustle, agitation, perturbation; haste, despatch, celerity, expedition,
quickness, promptness.

ANT. _Slowness; composure._

=Hurry=, _v._ Haste, hasten, move quickly; urge, speed, expedite,
despatch, accelerate.

ANT. _Delay, retard, slow down; loiter, saunter, move slowly._

=Hurt=, _n._ Damage, harm, injury, mischief, disadvantage, detriment,
wound.

ANT. _Benefit, pleasure._

=Hurt=, _v._ Injure, harm, damage, impair, mar; pain, wound; grieve,
afflict, bruise.

ANT. _Heal, soothe, console, repair, benefit, compensate, reinstate._

=Hurtful.= Harmful, injurious, mischievous, detrimental, deleterious,
disadvantageous, baneful, noxious, prejudicial, pernicious, baleful.

ANT. _Helpful, beneficial, advantageous, wholesome, salubrious, good,
sanative, remedial._

=Hybrid.= Mixed, impure, mongrel, mule, half-breed.

ANT. _Pure, unmixed, thoroughbred._

=Hypocrisy.= Formalism, Pharisaism, cant, pietism, sanctimoniousness,
assumed piety; deceit, deception, dissimulation, false profession,
imposture; sanctimony, pretense, sham, affectation.

ANT. _Sincerity, transparency, truth, honesty, genuineness, candor,
frankness, openness, ingenuousness, truthfulness._

=Hypocrite.= Deceiver, impostor, pretender, cheat, dissembler; Pharisee,
formalist.

ANT. _Saint, believer, Christian; dupe, bigot, fanatic, simpleton._

=Hypocritical.= Canting, Pharisaical, sanctimonious; insincere,
dissembling, false, hollow, faithless, deceitful, unctuous, smug,
smooth, mincing.

ANT. _Candid, truthful, sincere, plain-spoken, transparent, genuine._

=Hypothesis.= Scheme, speculation, system, supposition, conjecture,
guess, surmise, theory.

ANT. _Certainty, demonstration, evidence, fact, proof, discovery._




                                   I


=Idea.= Concept, conception, impression, judgment, plan, opinion,
purpose, conceit, design, fancy, pattern, thought, theory, belief,
image, imagination, notion, supposition, ideal, apprehension, fantasy,
model, sentiment, archetype; doctrine, understanding; fiction.

ANT. _Object, form, subject; substance, fact, actuality, reality._

=Ideal=, _n._ Idea, archetype, original, model, standard, prototype.

ANT. _Fact, performance, reality, practice, act, accomplishment,
achievement, action, realization, attainment, development, doing,
incarnation, embodiment, execution._

=Ideal=, _a._ Mental, conceptional, intellectual, notional, creative,
spiritual, poetical, supposititious, unreal, fictitious, imaginary,
fanciful, imaginative, chimerical.

ANT. _Physical, material, visible, tangible, historical, substantial,
real, actual, palpable._

=Ideality.= Imagination, conception, invention, fancy, creativeness,
genius.

ANT. _Imitation, uninventiveness, copyism, unimaginativeness;
literality._

=Identical.= Same, selfsame, not different; particular.

ANT. _Different, separate, contrary._

=Identify.= Prove identical, make identical, confound; unite, integrate,
incorporate, recognize, verify.

ANT. _Divide, disunite, confound, confuse, overlook, mistake._

=Identity.= Sameness, unity, oneness, union, personality, individuality,
convertibility.

ANT. _Difference, separateness, distinctness, contrariety, plurality._

=Idiocy.= Imbecility; foolishness, fatuity, irrationality; aberration,
insanity; stupidity, folly, senselessness, incapacity.

ANT. _Intelligence, sagacity, wisdom, capacity, brilliancy, astuteness,
acuteness, sense, common sense, soundness; sanity, judgment._

=Idiom.= Specialty, phrase, turn, peculiarity, characteristic.

ANT. _Barbarism, solecism._

=Idiosyncrasy.= Peculiarity, idiocrasy; constitution, temperament,
specialty, characteristic, individuality, singularity, eccentricity.

ANT. _Community, universality, generality._

=Idiot.= Fool, natural, imbecile.

ANT. _Sage, authority, luminary._

=Idle.= Unbusied, unused, leisure; useless, ineffectual, fruitless,
bootless, unavailing, vain, abortive, futile; trifling, trivial,
unimportant, trashy, foolish, unprofitable; waste, empty; indolent,
inert, lazy, slothful, unoccupied, vacant, inactive, sluggish,
unemployed.

ANT. _Active, busy, diligent, industrious, employed, working; occupied;
tilled; filled, populated; assiduous._

=Idolize.= Deify; adore, worship, reverence, venerate.

ANT. _Loathe, abominate, execrate, abhor._

=Ignoble.= Plebeian, vulgar, untitled, baseborn, low, mean, rustic,
peasant; worthless, insignificant, contemptible; dishonorable,
disgraceful, inferior, unworthy; humble.

ANT. _Honorable, eminent, exalted, noble, lordly, illustrious, grand,
notable._

=Ignominious.= Dishonorable, infamous, disgraceful, shameful,
scandalous, disreputable, opprobrious; despicable, base, deserving
ignominy, contemptible.

ANT. _Honorable, creditable, reputable, estimable, worthy._

=Ignominy.= Dishonor, disgrace, discredit, shame, infamy, disrepute,
contempt, obloquy, opprobrium, scandal, abasement, odium; reprobation,
reproach.

ANT. _Credit, honor, reputation, glory, luster, distinction, renown._

=Ignoramus.= Smatterer, novice, wiseacre, dunce, simpleton, dullard,
greenhorn, numskull.

ANT. _Savant, sage, luminary._

=Ignorance.= Illiteracy, stupidity, nescience, blindness, darkness.

ANT. _Knowledge, wisdom, sense, learning, erudition._

=Ignorant.= Illiterate, unlearned, unlettered, unskilled, untaught,
untutored, uneducated, ill-informed, uninstructed, uninformed.

ANT. _Educated, learned, instructed, sage, wise, skilled, cultured,
trained, well-informed, cultivated._

=Ignore.= Disregard, neglect, overlook, not recognize; set aside,
reject; disown, repudiate.

ANT. _Own, notice, recognize, mark, visit, avow, claim._

=Ill=, _n._ Wickedness, depravity, evil; misfortune, calamity,
affliction, misery, harm, pain.

ANT. _Good, blessing, fortune; righteousness, integrity, honor._

=Ill=, _a._ Bad, evil, unfortunate, unfavorable; wicked, wrong,
iniquitous, naughty; sick, ailing, diseased, disordered, poorly,
indisposed; cross, crabbed, surly, peevish, hateful, malicious;
ill-favored, ugly.

ANT. _Well, strong, good, vigorous, healthy, robust, hearty, hale._

=Ill-bred.= Impolite, uncivil, uncourteous, uncourtly, uncouth,
unpolished, rude, ill-behaved, ill-mannered.

ANT. _Polite, well-behaved, civil, refined, courteous._

=Illuminate.= Light, illumine, illume; enlighten, make wise, instruct,
inspire; emblazon, irradiate.

ANT. _Darken, obscure, bedim, mislead, delude._

=Illusion.= Delusion, hallucination, deception, error, fallacy, mockery,
fantasy, phantasm, chimera; dream, vision, myth.

ANT. _Body, substance, form, reality, actuality, essence._

=Illusive.= Delusive, deceptive, deceitful, fallacious; visionary,
unreal, disappointing, fugitive, erroneous, false, imaginary, illusory,
chimerical.

ANT. _Substantial, real, true, satisfactory, solid, permanent._

=Illustrate.= Elucidate, explain, exemplify, make clear; interpret,
demonstrate, represent, embody, paint, image; adorn with pictures.

ANT. _Obscure, misinterpret, confuse, mystify, darken, misrepresent._

=Illustrious.= Glorious, splendid, brilliant, bright, radiant; famous,
famed, noted, renowned, distinguished, celebrated, eminent, signal,
remarkable, conspicuous; deathless, noble.

ANT. _Ignominious, disgraceful, infamous, inglorious, disreputable._

=Ill will.= Malevolence, unkindness, malice, enmity, hatred, hate,
rancor, envy, grudge, uncharitableness, ill nature; antipathy, dislike,
aversion.

ANT. _Good will, benevolence, beneficence._

=Im-= or =In-=. This prefix, which is regularly _in-_, and which becomes
_il-_ before _l_, _ir-_ before _r_, and _im-_ before a labial, means
_in_, _into_, _on_, or _among_, or denotes the negative _not_, or,
occasionally, has a simple intensive meaning. Such words as begin with
this prefix without modification of the combined meaning of the prefix
and root word, will be easily derived from the antonyms and synonyms of
the root words. Others of more derived meaning are found here.

=Image.= Statue; idol, object of worship; likeness, effigy, figure,
resemblance, similitude, representation, picture; trope, metaphor; idea,
copy, conception, fiction, shadow, vision.

ANT. _Person, original, substance, subject, object, reality, truth,
verity._

=Imagery.= Phantasm, phantom, vision, dream; tropes, figures of speech,
poetry, fancy, illustration, metaphor, similitude.

ANT. _Prose, statement, fact._

=Imagination.= Conception, invention, ideality, fancy, fantasy, creative
power; esemplastic faculty; idea, notion; contrivance, scheme, device,
plot; illusion.

=Imaginative.= Inventive, creative, plastic, poetical, esemplastic,
poetic; conceptive, romantic, ideal, original.

ANT. _Unimaginative, unpoetical, prosaic, unromantic, literal,
uninventive, matter-of-fact._

=Imagine.= Conceive, think, image, fancy, picture; devise, contrive,
frame, project, invent, create, mold; suppose, assume; deem, apprehend,
believe; surmise, understand, fabricate, presume.

ANT. _Represent, exhibit, depict, prove, demonstrate, verify,
substantiate._

=Imbecile=, _a._ Weak, feeble, helpless, infirm, decrepit; foolish,
witless, idiotic, driveling, fatuous.

ANT. _Shrewd, clever, sagacious._

=Imbecility.= Weakness, debility, feebleness, infirmity, helplessness;
foolishness, childishness, idiocy, fatuity, dotage, senility.

ANT. _Strength, energy, virility, vigor, power._

=Imbibe.= Absorb, take in, suck in, swallow up; receive, gather, gain,
acquire, get, pick up; assimilate, learn.

ANT. _Discard, reject, renounce, disavow, abjure, repudiate._

=Imitate.= Copy, follow, pattern after; mimic, ape, mock, impersonate,
take off; burlesque, travesty, parody; represent, resemble, portray,
depict, repeat, counterfeit.

ANT. _Misrepresent, caricature, alter, vary, distort, remodel,
differentiate, dissimilate, modify._

=Imitative.= Imitating, copying, mimicking, aping, apish, caricaturing,
unoriginal, servile.

ANT. _Original, creative, inventive._

=Immaculate.= Spotless, unspotted, stainless, unsullied, unsoiled,
untainted, unblemished, untarnished, clean, pure, undefiled; innocent,
guiltless, sinless, faultless, fair, holy, saintly; virgin, unpolluted.

ANT. _Impure, corrupt, sinful, contaminated, defiled, polluted, tainted,
spotted._

=Immanent.= Intrinsic, inherent, internal, indwelling; empirical;
innate, subjective, congenital, ingrained, natural, implicit.

ANT. _Emanant, transitive, developed, projective, exsilient, phenomenal,
explicit, accidental, transcendental, transeunt._

=Immaterial.= Incorporeal, unbodied, unfleshly, spiritual,
supersensible; unimportant, insignificant, unessential, non-essential,
trivial, trifling.

ANT. _Material, physical, important, corporeal, essential._

=Immature.= Unripe, crude, raw, green, unformed, unprepared, imperfect,
rudimentary, unfinished; premature, hasty, unseasonable, untimely;
undeveloped.

ANT. _Ripe, complete, developed, mature, finished._

=Immeasurable.= Illimitable, unbounded, boundless, limitless,
measureless, immense, infinite; vast, unfathomable.

ANT. _Finite, limited, circumscribed, restricted, shallow, bounded._

=Immediate.= Proximate, close, near, next; direct, unmediated;
instantaneous, instant, present; contiguous.

ANT. _Distant, remote, mediate, future._

=Immediately.= Presently, this instant, straightway, directly,
forthwith, at once, now, right off, instantly, without delay.

ANT. _Hereafter, by-and-by, after a while, sometime._

=Immemorial.= Olden, ancient, hoary, archaic, primitive, remote,
time-honored, primordial.

ANT. _Recent, modern, late, fresh, upstart._

=Immerse.= Dip, plunge, submerge, sink, douse, duck, bury; soak, steep,
macerate, drown, inundate, overwhelm.

ANT. _Dry, drain, parch, ventilate, air, ground, strand._

=Immigration.= Migration, colonization, settlement.

ANT. _Exodus, emigration._

=Imminent.= Impending, hovering, threatening.

ANT. _Improbable, doubtful, unexpected, unlikely, contingent,
chimerical, problematical; warded, staved, escaped._

=Immunity.= Freedom, exemption, release, exoneration; prerogative,
privilege, right, liberty, charter, franchise; dispensation.

ANT. _Liability, obligation, jurisdiction, impost, amenability, burden._

=Imp.= Sprite, hobgoblin, demon, devil, flibbertigibbet, scamp, brat.

ANT. _Cherub, angel._

=Impact.= Impulse, shock, impression, stroke; collision, contact,
striking, impinging; application.

ANT. _Isolation, separation, interval, removal, avoidance, non-contact,
shave._

=Impair.= Deteriorate, vitiate, injure, harm, make worse; lessen,
diminish, decrease; enervate, weaken, enfeeble; reduce, damage.

ANT. _Enhance, improve, repair, augment, better, increase._

=Impassioned.= Passionate, vehement, impetuous, animated, exciting,
glowing, intense, fervid, fervent, warm, ardent, zealous; spirited.

ANT. _Cool, impassive, unimpassioned, apathetic, indifferent._

=Impatience.= Uneasiness, disquietude, restlessness; haste, vehemence,
eagerness, precipitation, impetuosity; heat, violence of temper,
irritability, irritableness.

ANT. _Patience, calmness, endurance, composure, leniency, submission,
forbearance, long-suffering._

=Impediment.= Bar, hindrance, obstacle, obstruction, difficulty, clog,
encumbrance, stumbling-block, check.

ANT. _Assistance, aid, benefit, help, relief, succor, advantage;
aidance, support, furtherance._

=Imperative.= Commanding, authoritative, peremptory; binding,
obligatory; urgent, irresistible, dictatorial, inexorable, compulsory.

ANT. _Indulgent, lenient, supplicatory, mild, optional, discretional,
entreative._

=Imperial.= Belonging to an empire, kingly, regal, sovereign, royal;
majestic, grand, magnificent, exalted, great, noble, supreme,
consummate, superb.

ANT. _Ignoble, servile, slavish, beggarly, mean, paltry._

=Imperious.= Magisterial, dictatorial, despotic, domineering,
tyrannical, overbearing, lordly, haughty, arrogant, authoritative,
exacting.

ANT. _Yielding, compliant, submissive, gentle, mild, docile, ductile._

=Impetuous.= Fierce, vehement, violent, furious, passionate,
precipitate, hasty, headlong, over-zealous, reckless, rash, excitable.

ANT. _Careful, slow, deliberate, thoughtful, reflective, leisurely._

=Implement.= Utensil, tool, appliance, instrument.

ANT. _Labor, work, science, art, agriculture, manufacture._

=Implicate.= Entangle, enfold, involve, connect, associate, compromise,
charge, incriminate.

ANT. _Disconnect, extricate, acquit, dissociate._

=Implication.= Entanglement, involution; inference, conclusion;
intricacy, complication; concealment, latency; allusion, insinuation,
innuendo, adumbration.

ANT. _Arrangement, system, orderliness; manifestation, expression,
exposition, demonstration, production._

=Implicit.= Understood, implied, inferred, tacit; unreserved,
unhesitating, firm, steadfast, unshaken, undoubting; involved.

ANT. _Expressed, explicit, developed, stated, plain, specific,
unambiguous._

=Imply.= Involve, import, include, signify, mean, indicate, suggest,
hint, denote.

ANT. _Express, declare, state, pronounce._

=Import=, _n._ Meaning, sense, purport, drift, signification, gist,
spirit, bearing, tenor, intention.

ANT. _Statement, proceeding._

=Import=, _v._ Bring into; purport, denote, imply, betoken, signify,
mean; concern, be of significance to; introduce.

ANT. _Export, banish, exile, send abroad._

=Importance.= Consequence, moment, weight, significance, momentousness,
import, concern; avail; self-importance, pomposity.

ANT. _Nothingness, insignificance, unimportance, immateriality._

=Important.= Grave, weighty, momentous, serious, material, significant;
influential, prominent, pompous, self-important, consequential;
expressive, leading, main, relevant, considerable, essential, great,
dignified.

ANT. _Insignificant, trivial, inconsiderable, irrelevant, secondary,
petty, mean, uninfluential, minor, unimportant._

=Importunate.= Urgent, pertinacious, pressing, teasing, busy,
solicitous, overurgent, overentreative.

ANT. _Modest, diffident, self-reliant, self-respecting._

=Importune.= Urge, entreat, press, solicit, dun, beset, pester, tease,
worry, trouble.

ANT. _Surrender, sacrifice, abandon; grant, bestow._

=Impose.= Put, set, lay, place; appoint, enjoin, prescribe; obtrude,
palm off, pass; inflict, subject.

ANT. _Remove, disburden, unload, free; hold up, arrest, disclose._

=Imposing.= Stately, august, majestic, grand, noble, commanding,
impressive; striking, effective, dignified.

ANT. _Petty, undignified, unimposing, insignificant, paltry, puny._

=Imposition.= Imposing, putting, placing, laying; burden, levy, tax,
constraint, oppression, injunction; deception, fraud, artifice,
trickery, imposture, cheating; presumption, exaction, encroachment.

ANT. _Sanction, warrant, authority; truth, verity, fact, certainty,
verification, genuineness, authenticity, honesty._

=Impost.= Tax, duty, custom, excise, levy, toll, tribute, rate;
imposition.

ANT. _Revenue, proceeds, exemption, immunity._

=Impostor.= Deceiver, pretender, cheat, hypocrite, knave, charlatan,
mountebank, rogue, Pharisee, trickster, dissembler.

ANT. _Guide, enlightener, detector, undeceiver._

=Imposture.= Cheat, trick, deception, imposition, fraud, ruse, delusion,
dodge, artifice, wile, deceit, stratagem, hoax.

ANT. _Truth, fact, verity, reality._

=Impotence.= Disability, incapacity, incompetence, powerlessness,
weakness, inefficiency, infirmity, frailty, imbecility, inability,
incapability, helplessness, disqualification.

ANT. _Capacity, vigor, qualification, ability._

=Impoverish.= Make poor or indigent, exhaust, deplete, rob, beggar,
fleece, denude.

ANT. _Enrich, aggrandize, augment, store, enhance, endow._

=Impregnable.= Invincible, unassailable, invulnerable, immovable,
inexpugnable, secure, tenable, irrefragable.

ANT. _Pregnable, weak, exposed, defenseless, expugnable._

=Impregnate.= Fecundate, imbue, infuse, tincture, saturate, fill,
fertilize; mix, combine, insert, steep, vivify, teach.

ANT. _Remove, evolve, extricate, separate, destroy, quench, extinguish,
be studious, learn._

=Impression.= Printing, stamping, imprinting; stamp, impress, brand;
mark; sensation, effect, influence; notion, idea, opinion, fancy.

ANT. _Concept, apprehension, comprehension._

=Impressive.= Affecting, touching, moving, stirring, powerful, striking,
overpowering; forcible, solemn, imposing, important.

ANT. _Weak, feeble, vapid, tame, unimpressive, dry, insignificant._

=Improve.= Mend, gain, become better, get on, gain ground; increase,
rise, be enhanced; better, amend, ameliorate, rectify; progress; avail
one’s self of, use, make productive; correct, reform.

ANT. _Debase, deteriorate, vitiate, spoil, mar, impair, injure,
depress._

=Improvement.= Amending, bettering, amelioration, amendment, progress,
efficiency, proficiency, advancement, use, betterment; increase,
correction.

ANT. _Degeneracy, retrogradation, degeneration, debasement,
deterioration, retrogression._

=Impudence.= Assurance, boldness, impertinence, pertness, rudeness,
sauciness, effrontery, forwardness, incivility, insolence, presumption,
officiousness, intrusiveness.

ANT. _Bashfulness, humility, diffidence, meekness, lowliness, modesty,
submissiveness; coyness, obsequiousness, subserviency, abasement._

=Impugn.= Attack, assail, contradict, oppose, resist, gainsay,
controvert, deny, blame.

ANT. _Declare, state, allege, approve, commend, defend, repel; propose,
propound, confront, face._

=Impulse.= Thrust, push, impetus; passion, instinct, proclivity,
inclination, appetite; motive, influence, incitement, instigation,
incentive, force, sudden thought.

ANT. _Deliberation, premeditation, rebuff, repulse._

=Impulsive.= Propulsive, impelling, moving; hot, quick, rash, hasty,
passionate; wayward, impressible.

ANT. _Discreet, hesitating, reluctant, timid, calculating, wary,
cautious._

=Impute.= Ascribe, refer, charge, attribute, imply, insinuate.

ANT. _Withdraw, retract, recall; clear, justify, acquit._

=Inane.= Empty, void; worthless, trifling, vacuous, vain, puerile,
frivolous; pointless, feeble, vapid, characterless.

ANT. _Significant, pointed, powerful, sensible, forcible._

=Inanition.= Emptiness, vacuity, inanity; vanity, folly, puerility,
worthlessness, frivolousness; exhaustion, starvation.

ANT. _Fulness, repletion, plethora; significance, meaning._

=Inaugurate.= Install, invest, induct; celebrate; commence, begin,
initiate, originate.

ANT. _Divert, deprive, conclude, terminate._

=Inauguration.= Investiture, installation, induction, consecration,
institution, initiation; commencement, formal opening, beginning,
origination.

ANT. _Dismissal, discharge; valediction, valedictory; close, conclusion,
end, termination._

=Incandescence.= White heat, incalescence, glow.

ANT. _Iciness, refrigeration, congelation, crystallization._

=Incantation.= Sorcery, charm, enchantment, spell, magic, conjuration,
witchcraft, witchery, necromancy; recitation, invocation.

ANT. _Evocation, exorcism._

=Incarnation.= Embodiment, impersonation, manifestation,
exemplification, personification.

ANT. _Disembodiment, abstraction, spiritualization._

=Incendiarism.= Arson; conflagration.

ANT. _Extinction, quenching, annihilation._

=Incense=, _v._ Enrage, exasperate, irritate, provoke, inflame, anger,
excite, heat, chafe, sting, nettle, gall.

ANT. _Allay, soothe, pacify, appease, conciliate, mollify._

=Incentive.= Inducement, incitement, spur, impulse, stimulant, goad,
motive, cause, encouragement, rousing, excitation.

ANT. _Deterrent, prohibition, warning, discouragement, dissuasion._

=Inception.= Beginning, inauguration, commencement.

ANT. _Ending, finis, conclusion, termination._

=Incessant.= Ceaseless, continual, unceasing, unremitting, perpetual,
constant, everlasting, eternal, uninterrupted, unintermittent.

ANT. _Periodic, occasional, intermittent, interrupted._

=Incidence.= Impact, stroke, impingement.

ANT. _Reflection, resilience, rebound._

=Incident=, _n._ Event, occurrence, circumstance, chance, accident,
fact, adventure, casualty.

ANT. _Cause, antecedent, reason, tendency, inducement, influence._

=Incident=, =Incidental=, _a._ Happening, liable; belonging, pertaining,
appertaining, natural, relating; falling, impinging; casual, occasional,
pertinent, fortuitous, concurrent, concomitant, accidental.

ANT. _Regular, systematic, disconnected, independent, irrelative,
inherent, essential, immanent, invariable, uniform._

=Incipient.= Beginning, inchoate, commencing, embryonic.

ANT. _Final, terminal._

=Inclemency.= Harshness, severity, rigor, roughness, boisterousness,
storminess, tempestuousness.

ANT. _Clemency, mildness, leniency, gentleness._

=Inclement.= Harsh, tyrannical, cruel, unmerciful, severe, rigorous,
stormy, rough, boisterous.

ANT. _Benign, clement, mild, genial, merciful._

=Inclination.= Inclining, slope, leaning, slant; trend, verging,
obliquity; disposition, predilection, bent, bias, proclivity, proneness,
tendency, leaning, aptitude, propensity; desire, wish, fondness, liking,
partiality; aptness, attachment, affection.

ANT. _Tangency, disinclination, divergence, ineptitude, inaptness,
dislike._

=Incline=, _v._ Slant, lean, slope; trend, verge, tend; be disposed,
have a desire _or_ propensity; dispose, predispose, turn, bias; bend,
bow; bear, dip, induce, prompt.

ANT. _Deter, restrain, check; ascend, rise; indispose, disincline._

=Include.= Hold, contain; comprise, embody, comprehend, embrace, take
in.

ANT. _Exclude, leave out._

=Inclusive.= Enclosing, encircling; including, comprehending, embracing;
comprehensive, additive, implied.

ANT. _Exclusive, excepted; adversative, opposite, contrary,
antithetical._

=Income.= Revenue, profits, gains; proceeds, pay, allowance.

ANT. _Expenditure, disbursement, outlay, expense._

=Incongruous.= Inconsistent, unsuitable, absurd, conflicting,
discordant, discrepant, repugnant, mismated, incompatible, inapposite,
contrary, contradictory, inappropriate, inharmonious, ill-matched,
irreconcilable, mismatched.

ANT. _Consistent, harmonious, suitable, accordant, agreeing,
compatible._

=Increase=, _n._ Accession, growth, extension, augmentation, addition,
enlargement, expansion, increment; product, produce, gain, profit;
offspring, issue, progeny, descendants.

ANT. _Deduction, detraction, diminution, contraction, loss, waste,
detriment, curtailment, reduction, expenditure, impoverishment._

=Increase=, _v._ Advance, heighten, pile up, enhance, aggregate, dilate,
magnify, spread, augment, greaten, enlarge, raise; extend, prolong;
aggravate, intensify; grow; multiply, be fruitful.

ANT. _Decrease, lessen, diminish, decline, abate, lower, reduce,
curtail, retrench._

=Inculcate.= Infuse, impress, enforce, instil, implant, ingraft, urge,
teach.

ANT. _Insinuate, suggest, abjure, disavow, denounce._

=Incumbent.= Obligatory, binding, devolving; lying, leaning, reclining,
resting, weighing down, prone; coercive, indispensable, urgent;
threatening, impending.

ANT. _Optional, discretional, elective, voluntary._

=Incur.= Contract, become liable to; bring on; meet, run.

ANT. _Avoid, shun._

=Incursion.= Inroad, raid, invasion, irruption, descent, foray, sally,
encroachment.

ANT. _Encampment, retreat, abode, settlement._

=Indebted.= Owing, obliged, beholden, under obligation.

ANT. _Disobliged, unbeholden._

=Indeed.= Truly, really, verily, positively, absolutely, in fact,
veritably, certainly, in truth; strictly, in point of fact.

ANT. _By no means, not at all._

=Indefatigable.= Unwearied, untiring, persevering, persistent,
assiduous, sedulous, unremitting, never-tiring, unflagging; incessant,
indomitable.

ANT. _Idle, indifferent, indolent._

=Indelible.= Ineffaceable, indestructible, ingrained, indefeasible,
irreversible, persistent.

ANT. _Mutable, evanescent, transient, effaceable._

=Indemnify.= Secure, save; compensate, remunerate, reimburse, requite;
satisfy.

ANT. _Fine, mulct, amerce._

=Indicate.= Show, denote, mark, betoken, signify, point out, designate,
specify; evidence, evince, betray, manifest, declare.

ANT. _Conceal, misdirect, falsify, misindicate, negative, contradict._

=Indication.= Indicating sign, mark, note, index, symptom, token, hint,
suggestion, manifestation; evidence, demonstration, proof, prognostic.

ANT. _Silence, surmise, misdirection, undemonstrativeness, misguidance,
misindication._

=Indictment.= Indicting, presentment; accusation, charge, impeachment,
arraignment, crimination.

=Indifference.= Neutrality, impartiality, disinterestedness; unconcern,
apathy, coolness, negligence, carelessness, inattention, heedlessness;
triviality, insignificance, unimportance; inferiority; insensibility,
composure.

ANT. _Importance, interest, significance, weight, gravity, affection,
ardor, eagerness._

=Indifferent.= Neutral, unbiased, impartial, disinterested; cool,
unconcerned, unmoved, cold, inattentive, apathetic, dead, regardless,
heedless, unmindful; equal, all the same, all one, just the same;
passable, tolerable, ordinary, middling, mediocre, rather poor;
lukewarm, careless.

ANT. _Anxious, careful, susceptible, sympathetic, sensitive._

=Indigent.= Poor, needy, destitute, necessitous, reduced, penniless,
moneyless, distressed, insolvent, in want; impecunious, straitened.

ANT. _Wealthy, moneyed, rich, affluent, opulent._

=Indignation.= Resentment, anger, ire, wrath, fury, rage, exasperation,
choler; denunciation, displeasure, protestation.

ANT. _Gratification, admiration, approval, applause, complacency._

=Indignity.= Insult, outrage, affront, slight, dishonor, abuse,
disrespect, contumely, reproach, opprobrium, obloquy; rudeness,
contemptuousness, ignominy, disgrace.

ANT. _Deference, compliment, honor, respect._

=Indiscriminate.= Undistinguishing, undiscriminating; mixed, confused,
mingled, promiscuous, indistinguishable; ill-assorted, undiscerning.

ANT. _Careful, sorted, select, discerning._

=Indisposed.= Averse, disinclined, unwilling, reluctant, backward,
loath; ill, ailing, sick.

ANT. _Prompt, willing, eager, desirous, inclined; healthful, sound._

=Indite.= Compose, write, dictate, pen; prompt, suggest, word, describe,
phrase.

ANT. _Transcribe, copy, imitate, duplicate._

=Individual=, _n._ Person, personage, character, some one; unit, single
instance; personality.

ANT. _Species, genus, family, kind._

=Individual=, _a._ Particular, special, separate, single, unique, one;
peculiar, personal; positive, decided, unconventional, independent,
specific, indivisible, singular, identical, idiosyncratic.

ANT. _General, common, collective, plural, universal._

=Individuality.= Personality, distinct existence; character, decision,
self-direction, originality, self-determination, uniqueness.

ANT. _Generality, mediocrity._

=Indolence.= Laziness, sloth, inertness, idleness, sluggishness,
slothfulness.

ANT. _Activity, energy._

=Indomitable.= Unyielding, unconquerable, invincible; untamable,
irrepressible, indefatigable.

ANT. _Effortless, feeble, languid._

=Indorse.= Superscribe; sanction, approve, vouch for, confirm, ratify;
accept.

ANT. _Protest, repudiate, renounce, abjure, cancel._

=Induce.= Influence, impel, move, prompt, instigate, persuade, actuate,
urge, incite, spur, prevail upon; cause, produce, effect, bring on.

ANT. _Prevent, disincline, dissuade, deter, hinder, restrain._

=Induction.= Introduction, installation, inauguration, institution;
conclusion, inference, generalization, inductive method; collection,
collation, application.

ANT. _Statement, hypothesis; deduction; subtraction; principle, class,
law, proposition, argumentation, discourse._

=Indulge.= Gratify, yield, satisfy; humor, pamper, favor; allow, permit,
suffer, cherish, foster, harbor; spoil, revel, grovel.

ANT. _Thwart, deny, disappoint, discard, contradict, renounce,
counteract, mortify, abjure, discipline._

=Indulgence.= Gratification, humoring, pampering; leniency, kindness,
tenderness, favor, liberality.

ANT. _Abstinence, self-sacrifice, repression, restraint._

=Indulgent.= Yielding, compliant; lenient, mild, clement, tolerant,
gentle, kind, tender, forbearing.

ANT. _Harsh, severe, rough, austere, self-controlled, abstinent._

=Industrious.= Diligent, active, busy, assiduous, engaged, employed,
sedulous, occupied, laborious, hard-working; brisk, persistent,
persevering.

ANT. _Lazy, shiftless, idle._

=Industry.= Diligence, labor, application, assiduity, attention,
constancy, exertion, intentness, patience, perseverance, persistence,
sedulousness, pains, effort, activity, toil.

ANT. _Idleness, inattention, neglect, negligence, sloth, remissness,
changeableness, indolence, inconstancy, inactivity, fickleness, ease,
indiligence._

=Ineffable.= Unspeakable, indescribable, inexpressible, unutterable;
inconceivable, unsurpassable, undeclarable, exquisite, perfect.

ANT. _Common, trivial, superficial, vulgar, commonplace, conversational,
colloquial, obvious._

=Inert.= Inactive, lifeless, dead, passive, motionless; dull, indolent,
torpid, lazy, idle, supine, sluggish, slothful; heavy, dormant.

ANT. _Active, alert, brisk, energetic, quick, vigorous._

=Inevitable.= Necessary, unavoidable, infallible, certain, fixed,
irresistible.

ANT. _Uncertain, avoidable, indeterminate._

=Infamy.= Dishonor, shame, disgrace, discredit, ignominy, opprobrium,
scandal, obloquy, abasement; villainy, disgracefulness, wickedness,
atrocity, shamefulness; despair, degradation.

ANT. _Honor, reputation, renown, glory, celebrity._

=Infantile.= Young, childish, tender; babyish, weak; childlike,
babylike; puerile, imbecile.

ANT. _Manly, vigorous, mature, robust._

=Infatuation.= Folly, stupefaction, foolishness, prepossession,
obsession; fatuity, hallucination, madness, self-deception.

ANT. _Sagacity, soundness, wisdom, sanity, clear-sightedness._

=Infection.= Contagion; contamination, taint, bane, pest, poison,
corruption, defilement, vitiation, pollution.

ANT. _Purification, disinfection, antidote, antisepsis._

=Infectious.= Contagious, catching, pestilential, pestiferous;
contaminating, corrupting, defiling, polluting, poisoning, vitiating.

ANT. _Wholesome, sanative, beneficial, antiseptic._

=Infer.= Deduce, conclude, gather, collect, consider probable; derive,
argue.

ANT. _State, enunciate, assume, guess, conjecture, propound, anticipate,
prognosticate._

=Inference.= Conclusion, deduction, corollary, consequence;
generalization, induction.

ANT. _Statement, proposition, enunciation._

=Inferiority.= Subordination; deficiency, imperfection, minority,
poverty, subjection, servitude, depression; mediocrity.

ANT. _Superiority, eminence, excellence, majority, elevation,
independence, mastery, exaltation._

=Infernal.= Hellish; diabolical, devilish, fiendish, demoniacal,
satanic, atrocious, nefarious, dark, accursed, abominable.

ANT. _Angelic, cherubic._

=Infest.= Throng, overrun, beset, swarm in; disturb, plague, annoy,
tease, harass, trouble, molest, torment, worry, pester.

ANT. _Comfort, refresh, regale, gratify._

=Infidel.= Unbeliever, disbeliever, atheist, denier, freethinker, deist,
skeptic, heretic.

ANT. _Believer, pietist, devotee, Christian._

=Infidelity.= Unbelief, disbelief, skepticism; faithlessness,
unfaithfulness, disloyalty.

ANT. _Fidelity, belief, faith, religiousness, credulity, credulousness;
faithfulness, loyalty._

=Infinite.= Absolute, illimitable, limitless, boundless, interminable,
eternal, unlimited, unmeasured, measureless, unfathomable,
unconditioned, numberless, unbounded, immeasurable, innumerable,
countless.

ANT. _Brief, bounded, relative, short, limited, finite, restricted,
transient, transitory, small, little, evanescent, circumscribed,
measurable, moderate, narrow, shallow; infinitesimal._

=Infinitesimal.= Minute, atomic, microscopic, inappreciable,
inconspicuous, undiscernible, infinitely small.

ANT. _Enormous, vast, infinite, immeasurable._

=Infinitude=, =Infinity=. Boundlessness, vastness, immensity;
infiniteness; eternity, absoluteness, self-determination,
self-existence.

ANT. _Relativity._

=Infirm.= Weak, feeble, frail, debilitated, enfeebled, weakened;
faltering, wavering, irresolute, vacillating; unsound, unstable,
insecure; decrepit, lame, failing, impotent.

ANT. _Sound, forcible, firm, strong, sure, cogent, healthy, healthful._

=Infirmity.= Weakness, decrepitude, debility, feebleness, frailness,
frailty; foible, fault, failing, defect; disease, malady, unsoundness.

ANT. _Strength, vigor, unhealthfulness, soundness._

=Inflame.= Excite, stimulate, incite, enkindle, rouse, animate,
inspirit, work up, fire; irritate, exasperate, anger, nettle, provoke,
enrage, incense, madden, infuriate; fan, embitter.

ANT. _Quench, extinguish, allay, cool, pacify, quiet._

=Inflate.= Distend, expand, swell, bloat, blow up; puff up, make
conceited; increase, enlarge.

ANT. _Exhaust, empty, flatten, squeeze, compress._

=Inflated.= Distended, swollen, bloated; tumid, turgid, bombastic,
stilted, declamatory, rhetorical, sophomorical, high-flown; pompous.

ANT. _Simple, plain, unaffected, concise, laconic, explicit, brief._

=Inflection.= Bend, bending, curvature, flexure, crook; variation,
declension, conjugation, comparison; flexion.

ANT. _Straightness, directness, rectilinearity._

=Inflict.= Impose, lay on, put on; afflict.

ANT. _Spare, remove, alleviate, suspend._

=Infliction.= Imposition, inflicting; punishment, judgment; grievance,
trouble, nuisance.

ANT. _Remission, sparing; pleasure, gratification; accommodation,
condoning._

=Influence=, _n._ Authority, ascendency, control, predominance, sway;
reputation, weight of character, credit; influx, inflow; effect,
causation, impulse, affection, power, weight, prestige.

ANT. _Inefficiency, ineffectiveness, inefficacy, nullity,
inoperativeness, neutrality._

=Influence=, _v._ Induce, incite, incline, persuade, move, stir,
actuate, sway, compel, urge, instigate, prompt, lead, impel, excite,
drive, draw, direct, bias.

ANT. _Prevent, restrain, retard, deter, discourage, impede, inhibit,
hinder, dissuade._

=Influential.= Potent, powerful, controlling; efficacious, persuasive,
forcible, guiding, considerable; authoritative.

ANT. _Weak, ineffective, inoperative, inconsiderable, unpersuasive._

=Inform.= Quicken, animate, inspire; acquaint, apprise, mention to,
notify, advise, tell; educate, enlighten, instruct, impart, communicate.

ANT. _Misinstruct, misjudge, deceive, hoodwink, misinform, mystify._

=Information.= Advice, notice, intelligence; knowledge; accusation,
complaint, denunciation; instruction, counsel, notification.

ANT. _Concealment, mystification, ignorance, occultation._

=Infringe.= Transgress, violate, break, disobey, nullify.

ANT. _Preserve, observe, conserve, maintain._

=Infuse.= Instil, inspire, introduce, inculcate, implant, diffuse, shed,
steep, soak, water, infiltrate, insinuate, breathe into.

ANT. _Strain, dry, drain, divert, retract._

=Ingenious.= Inventive, gifted, able, clever, bright, ready, sagacious,
adept, skilful.

ANT. _Unskilful, uninventive, slow, unready, unresourceful, unprepared,
unapt._

=Ingenuity.= Inventiveness, ingeniousness, acuteness, skill, ability,
readiness, faculty, aptitude, cunning, turn, gift, genius.

ANT. _Inability, ineptitude, clumsiness._

=Ingenuous.= Artless, open, candid, frank, sincere, straightforward,
honest, transparent, guileless, truthful, childlike, naive, noble,
generous, honorable.

ANT. _Mean, reserved, sly, insincere, disingenuous._

=Ingratiate.= Commend one’s self into favor, insinuate, recommend.

ANT. _Alienate, estrange._

=Ingredient.= Element, component, constituent.

ANT. _Refuse, residuum, incongruity, counteragent._

=Inherent.= Sticking fast, adhering; essential, immanent, inborn,
inbred, native, natural, subjective, innate, intrinsic, inhering,
congenital, indispensable, indwelling, infixed, internal, ingrained,
inseparable, inwrought.

ANT. _Extrinsic, superficial, fortuitous, casual, accidental, external,
outward, superfluous, transient, unconnected, supplemental, incidental,
subsidiary, superadded; foreign, extraneous, separable, temporary._

=Inherit.= Get as legacy; occupy, possess, enjoy.

ANT. _Acquire, earn, gain, squander, bequeath, leave, demise, devise;
dissipate, alienate._

=Inheritance.= Inheriting; heritage, patrimony; bequest, possession,
legacy.

ANT. _Acquisition, purchase, donation; forfeiture, lapse; escheatment,
alienation._

=Inheritor.= Heir, successor, legatee, devisee.

ANT. _Testator, devisor._

=Inimical.= Antagonistic, hostile, unfriendly; adverse, opposed,
contrary, repugnant, noxious, pernicious, hurtful, harmful.

ANT. _Friendly, companionable, comradely; unanimous, agreeable,
beneficial._

=Iniquity.= Injustice, wickedness, sin, unrighteousness; crime, offense,
misdeed, grievance, evil-doing.

ANT. _Justice, integrity, virtue, holiness, honesty, uprightness._

=Initiation.= Introduction, entrance, admission; instruction; opening,
beginning, inauguration, commencement.

ANT. _Termination, completion, finish, fulfilment, outcome._

=Initiative.= Commencement, beginning; power to originate or begin;
start, leadership, example.

ANT. _Termination, wake, rear; prosecution, progress, perseverance,
accomplishment._

=Injunction.= Command, order, mandate, precept, exhortation.

ANT. _Disobedience, non-observance, non-compliance, insubordination._

=Injure.= Maltreat, wrong, abuse; harm, damage, spoil, mar, disfigure,
wound, cripple, sully.

ANT. _Benefit, profit, advantage, advance, repair._

=Injurious.= Wrong, unjust, iniquitous; hurtful, detrimental,
pernicious, deleterious, noxious, deadly, mischievous, baneful, fatal,
destructive, damaging, ruinous, disadvantageous; libelous, slanderous;
prejudicial.

ANT. _Helpful, advantageous, beneficial, salutary, profitable._

=Injury.= Blemish, damage, evil, disadvantage, detriment, hurt, loss,
wrong, prejudice, injustice, mischief, impairment, outrage, harm.

ANT. _Remedy, advantage, amelioration, benefit, service, boon, help,
blessing, improvement, utility._

=Injustice.= Wrong, unrighteousness, iniquity, grievance, unfairness,
injury.

ANT. _Equity, fairness, justice, right, rectitude, integrity, honesty,
impartiality, uprightness, lawfulness, righteousness, honor,
faithfulness, fair play._

=Inlet.= Opening, entrance, commencement, ingress.

ANT. _Outlet, egress, debouchure._

=Inmate.= Occupant, dweller, denizen, inhabitant, tenant, resident.

ANT. _Visitor, intruder, foreigner, stranger, traveler._

=Inn.= Hotel, public house, tavern.

=Innate.= Inherent, inborn, natural, inbred, native, congenital,
organic.

ANT. _Unnatural, adventitious, assumed._

=Inner.= Inmost, within, interior, secret, close, vital.

ANT. _Outer, outermost, exterior, open._

=Innocence.= Harmlessness, inoffensiveness, innocuousness; sinlessness,
purity, stainlessness, simplicity, guilelessness, guiltlessness,
blamelessness.

ANT. _Guilt, offensiveness, contamination, sinfulness, impurity, guile,
corruption._

=Innocent.= Pure, sinless, virtuous, upright, stainless, right,
faultless, guileless, clear, clean, blameless, guiltless, harmless,
inoffensive, righteous, spotless, immaculate, innocuous.

ANT. _Criminal, culpable, immoral, guilty, blameworthy._

=Innocuous.= Harmless, innocent, inoffensive, wholesome, innoxious.

ANT. _Hurtful, deleterious, insidious, obnoxious._

=Innovation.= Change, alteration, novelty, reversal.

ANT. _Archaism, conservation, maintenance, old fashion, obsolescence._

=Inoculate.= Vaccinate, impregnate, indoctrinate, instil, insert, imbue,
ingraft, ingrain.

ANT. _Prune, divest; disabuse._

=Inquiry.= Query, interrogation, question, interrogatory; study,
investigation, research, exploration, examination, scrutiny; asking,
search.

ANT. _Guess, intuition, conjecture, assumption, supposition,
hypothesis._

=Inquisitive.= Curious, meddlesome, intrusive, searching, prying,
inquiring, meddling, peeping, scrutinizing.

ANT. _Uninterested, unconcerned, careless, heedless, apathetic,
inattentive, indifferent._

=Inroad.= Incursion, foray, raid, irruption, encroachment, trespass,
infringement, dragonnade.

ANT. _Occupation, sally, retreat, settlement, evacuation, excursion,
egress._

=Insane.= Crazy, lunatic, mad, deranged, demented, crazed, delirious.

ANT. _Sane, sound, sensible, quiet, composed, sober._

=Insanity.= Delirium, dementia, frenzy, lunacy, mania, aberration,
madness, alienation, derangement, monomania, hallucination, craziness.

ANT. _Sanity, clearness, rationality, lucidity, good sense, reason,
intellect, intelligence._

=Inscribe.= Write, engrave, impress, imprint; address, dedicate; label,
letter, mark, delineate.

ANT. _Erase, efface, cancel, expunge, obliterate._

=Inscrutable.= Incomprehensible, unsearchable, impenetrable,
unintelligible, hidden, mysterious, untraceable, insolvable, profound.

ANT. _Obvious, intelligible, explainable, self-evident, familiar._

=Insert.= Set in, place in, introduce.

ANT. _Exclude, follow, add._

=Inside.= Within, internally.

ANT. _Without, outside, externally._

=Insidious.= Artful, crafty, scheming, cunning, intriguing, tricky,
designing; secret, deceptive.

ANT. _Straightforward, sincere, undesigning._

=Insinuate.= Push slily, ingratiate; infuse, inculcate; hint, intimate,
suggest; introduce, insert.

ANT. _Withdraw, extract, retract, alienate._

=Insipid.= Tasteless, stale, flat; spiritless, heavy, stupid,
uninteresting, prosaic, tame, prosy, dull, unentertaining,
characterless, flavorless.

ANT. _Racy, interesting, engaging, piquant, spirited, lively._

=Insist.= Demand, maintain, urge, contend, persist, press, persevere.

ANT. _Abandon, surrender, concede, yield, waive, forego._

=Insolence.= Rudeness, contempt, disrespect, contumely; impertinence,
pertness, impudence; frowardness, disobedience, insubordination;
arrogance, assumption.

ANT. _Consideration, deference, modesty, respect, politeness,
bashfulness._

=Insolvent.= Bankrupt, penniless, beggared, ruined.

ANT. _Solvent, wealthy, flush, flourishing, thriving._

=Inspect.= Examine, scrutinize, investigate, oversee, superintend,
supervise, overhaul.

ANT. _Overlook, connive, dismiss, glance, pretermit._

=Inspector.= Examiner, critic, visitor, superintendent, censor,
supervisor.

=Inspiration.= Inhalation; afflatus, obsession; exaltation, enthusiasm,
frenzy, impulse, revelation, intuition; insight, genius.

ANT. _Study, education, acquirement, learning, elaboration, observation,
deduction._

=Instance.= Request, impulse, instigation, incitement; solicitation,
importunity, pressure, urgency; illustration, example, citation, case,
exemplification, specification; entreaty, point, prompting, persuasion,
occurrence.

ANT. _Dissuasion, warning, deprecation, reluctance; rule, principle,
statement._

=Instant=, _n._ Moment, twinkling, second, minute, flash, trice, jiffy;
particular hour or moment.

ANT. _Period, time, cycle, duration; eternity, permanence, perpetuity._

=Instant=, _a._ Immediate, instantaneous, quick; pressing, earnest,
urgent; current, present, passing.

ANT. _Continuous, continual; perpetual, eternal._

=Instantly.= Immediately, forthwith, directly, at once, presently,
straightway.

ANT. _In the future, after a time._

=Instigate.= Incite, impel, move, urge, prompt, provoke, stimulate,
rouse, influence, encourage, persuade, prevail upon.

ANT. _Repress, restrain, discourage, withhold, retard._

=Instil.= Infuse, insinuate; implant, enforce, impress, inculcate,
import, introduce.

ANT. _Extract, remove, eliminate, eradicate, drain, extirpate._

=Instinct=, _n._ Impulse, proclivity, tendency, inclination, prompting,
intuition.

ANT. _Reason, deliberation, experience, judgment, elaboration,
experiment._

=Instinctive.= Natural, spontaneous; impulsive, unreflecting; voluntary,
intuitive.

ANT. _Rational, cultivated, logical, judicious, reasonable, reasoning._

=Institute=, _v._ Found, establish, originate, appoint, settle, fix;
ordain, enact, pass; begin, commence; invest, instal, appoint, induct,
organize.

ANT. _Subvert, degrade, deprive, disestablish._

=Institution.= Establishment, investiture, custom, practice; college,
school, academy, seminary, university.

=Instruct.= Teach, inform, train, educate, enlighten, indoctrinate;
direct, command, order; acquaint, discipline, initiate.

ANT. _Misinform, misguide, mislead, deceive, neglect; brutalize; learn,
study._

=Instruction.= Teaching, education, training, schooling, information,
discipline, tuition, advice, counsel, direction, precept, order,
command, mandate.

ANT. _Misguidance, misinformation, misdirection; pupilage, obedience._

=Instrument.= Tool, utensil, implement; agent, medium, machine;
document, deed, writing, charter, indenture, record.

ANT. _Obstruction, bar, stop, preventive; counteragent, opponent,
neutralizer; misapplication, counteraction._

=Instrumentality.= Intervention, medium, means, agency, mediation; use,
employment.

ANT. _Property, quality, virtue, force, efficacy; non-intervention,
spontaneity; counteragency, neutralization._

=Insult=, _n._ Offense affront, indignity, outrage, abuse, rudeness,
dishonor, slight, disrespect.

ANT. _Respect, homage, compliment, deference._

=Insult=, _v._ Outrage, offend, dishonor, abuse; provoke, mock,
ridicule.

ANT. _Respect, salute, honor, compliment, flatter, praise._

=Insure.= Make secure; assure; underwrite; provide, warrant, secure,
guarantee, stabilitate.

ANT. _Imperil, jeopardize, shake, stake._

=Insurgent=, _n._ Rebel, malcontent, mutineer, traitor, rioter.

ANT. _Patriot, adherent, supporter; ruler, magistrate._

=Insurgent=, _a._ Rebellious, disobedient, mutinous, unruly,
insubordinate, seditious.

ANT. _Obedient, loyal, patriotic._

=Insurrection.= Rebellion, revolt, uprising, mutiny, sedition, riot,
tumult, anarchy; pronouncement.

ANT. _Law, order, peace, subjection, obedience, submission, bondage,
subsidence, acquiescence; government, pacification._

=Intact.= Untouched, unhurt, unharmed, uninjured, scatheless; whole,
entire, unbroken, undiminished; safe, inviolate, sacred, undefiled,
uncorrupted, uncontaminated.

ANT. _Defiled, hurt, touched, injured, corrupt, affected, contaminated._

=Integrate.= Unite, combine, consolidate, solidify, incorporate; sum,
complete.

ANT. _Analyze, dismember, detach, remove, amputate, disintegrate._

=Integrity.= Completeness, entirety, wholeness; honesty, rectitude,
virtue, goodness, principle; uprightness, honor, probity, candor,
truthfulness, conscientiousness.

ANT. _Fraud, meanness, rascality, duplicity, unfairness,
underhandedness._

=Intellect.= Reason, mind, sense, brains, understanding; consciousness,
instinct; ability, genius, talent.

ANT. _Matter, mechanism, force; passion; spirit, soul._

=Intellectual.= Mental, psychological, inventive, learned, cultured;
philosophical, metaphysical.

ANT. _Illiterate, unlearned, ignorant._

=Intelligence.= Knowledge, information, understanding, apprehension,
discernment, acumen, penetration, quickness, brightness, comprehension;
news, announcement, tidings, report, rumor, statement, notice,
notification, publication, advice, instruction; intellect, spirit.

ANT. _Misinformation, misunderstanding; ignorance, concealment,
stupidity, misapprehension, dulness, suppression, silence._

=Intelligible.= Clear, plain, understandable, distinct, comprehensible,
explainable, familiar, self-evident, obvious.

ANT. _Inscrutable, mysterious, hidden, insolvable, impenetrable,
unfathomable._

=Intend.= Design, resolve, mean, propose, purpose, contemplate,
determine, meditate.

ANT. _Venture, risk, hazard, chance._

=Intense.= Close, severe, strict, intent, strained; extreme; forcible,
energetic, powerful; ardent, earnest, vehement, excessive, immoderate.

ANT. _Relaxed, easy, moderate, forceless, impotent, indifferent, cool,
languid._

=Intensity.= Intenseness, closeness, severity, strictness; tension,
force, concentration, attention, strain; vehemence, violence, excess;
ardor, energy, eagerness, power, vigor, activity, strength.

ANT. _Laxity, relaxation, debility, languor, coolness, indifference._

=Intent=, _n._ Purpose, aim, object, design, end, meaning, intention,
purport, scope, drift, view.

ANT. _Chance, lot, accident, fate._

=Intent=, _a._ Eager, fixed, earnest, close, bent, set.

ANT. _Distracted, diverted, indifferent._

=Intention.= Design, purpose, intent, meaning, purport.

ANT. _Chance, fortune, luck._

=Intentional.= Deliberate, contemplated, designed, intended, studied,
purposed, premeditated.

ANT. _Casual, accidental, undesigned, fortuitous._

=Inter.= Bury, entomb, inhume.

ANT. _Exhume, disinter._

=Inter-.= The synonyms and antonyms of words beginning with the prefix
_inter-_, signifying _between_, _among_, _amidst_, _mutually_, may be
obtained by adding this meaning to that of the synonyms and antonyms of
the root word, in such cases as are of simple derivation.

=Intercede.= Mediate, arbitrate, interpose, plead, make intercession,
advocate, interfere.

ANT. _Abandon, excuse, incriminate, inculpate._

=Intercept.= Stop, cease; arrest, catch; obstruct, interrupt.

ANT. _Send, despatch, delegate, forward, commission, interchange._

=Intercourse.= Converse, communication, communion, commerce, connection,
correspondence, intimacy, dealing, intercommunication.

ANT. _Cessation, suspension, reticence, disconnection, interception._

=Interdict.= Prohibit, forbid, proscribe, inhibit, restrain, stop,
debar, disallow.

ANT. _Indulge, grant, allow, concede._

=Interest=, _n._ Advantage, benefit, profit, good; part, portion;
regards, sympathy, concern, attention, curiosity, selfishness, behalf,
share; authority, influence; premium.

ANT. _Disadvantage, loss; inattention, unconcern, indifference;
disconnection, repudiation._

=Interfere.= Intermeddle, interpose; clash, conflict, intervene, be
opposed.

ANT. _Withdraw, retract, retire, recede._

=Interior.= Inside, internal, inner, inward, inland.

ANT. _Outside, exterior._

=Interloper.= Intruder, meddler, supernumerary.

ANT. _Member, constituent._

=Intermediate.= Intervening, interposed, interjacent, included,
comprised, middle, moderate.

ANT. _Surrounding, enclosing, outside, embracing, circumjacent; extreme;
exclusive._

=Interment.= Burial, sepulture, inhumation.

ANT. _Exhumation, resurrection._

=Intermission.= Suspension, interruption, stoppage, rest, stop, pause,
suspense, respite, interlude, remission, cessation, discontinuance,
interval, interregnum.

ANT. _Continuity, continuance, constancy, uninterruptedness, permanence,
perpetuity._

=Intermit.= Suspend, interrupt, relax, discontinue, break, stop, cease,
abate, subside.

ANT. _Continue, prosecute; urge, despatch._

=Internal.= Inner, interior, inside; within.

ANT. _Outer, exterior, outside._

=Internecine.= Destructive, exterminating, deadly, inextinguishable,
irreconcilable, mortal, internecinal.

ANT. _Desultory, incursive, marauding, skirmishing, buccaneering,
guerilla, freebooting._

=Interpolate.= Introduce, insert, foist in, intercalate; interlard,
interweave, import, garble, intersperse, gloss.

ANT. _Expunge, erase, expurgate; verify, authenticate; elide._

=Interpose.= Interfere, intercede, interrupt, mediate, meddle,
arbitrate, intermeddle.

ANT. _Avoid, shun, retire, withdraw, hold aloof, let be, keep clear,
stand aside._

=Interpret.= Explain, define, expound, elucidate, unfold, decipher;
translate, render, construe; declare, represent, solve.

ANT. _Mistake, misconceive, misunderstand, falsify, misinterpret,
distort, misrepresent._

=Interpretation.= Exposition, explanation, elucidation; version,
construction, rendering, translation; sense, meaning, definition,
signification, solution.

ANT. _Misinterpretation, misrendering; problem, text, difficulty._

=Interrogate.= Question, ask, examine, inquire of, catechise.

ANT. _Affirm, answer, assert, indorse, pronounce._

=Interrupt.= Disturb, stop, hinder, delay, interfere with; separate,
disconnect, divide, sever, sunder, cut, dissolve; suspend, discontinue,
break off; intersect.

ANT. _Continue, prosecute, expedite._

=Interstice.= Crevice, hole, interval, chink, cleft, cranny, gap, crack,
fissure, interspace.

ANT. _Seam, suture, stop-gap._

=Interval.= Interstice; spell, season, period, term, intermediate time,
interim, meantime, intermission, interspace, cessation.

ANT. _Continuity, uninterruptedness, simultaneousness._

=Intervention.= Interposition, interference, intrusion, intercession,
insinuation; agency, mediation.

ANT. _Continuance, non-interference._

=Interview.= Meeting, parley, conference, consultation, colloquy,
confabulation.

ANT. _Isolation, exclusion, independence, avoidance._

=Intestate.= Unwilled, undevised, unbequeathed.

ANT. _Willed, bequeathed, devised._

=Intestine=, _a._ Internal, domestic, interior, inward; civil;
subjective.

ANT. _External, outward, foreign, federal; objective._

=Intimate=, _n._ Confidant, associate, crony, familiar, companion,
friend.

=Intimate=, _v._ Suggest, hint, insinuate, allude to, remind of;
announce, declare, communicate, tell.

ANT. _Conceal, reserve, withhold, repress._

=Intimate=, _a._ Near, close, familiar, friendly, confidential;
internal, interior, inward, deep-seated, hearty; thorough, complete,
direct, exact; conversant.

ANT. _Distant, strange, unfamiliar; superficial._

=Intimidate.= Frighten, alarm, scare, daunt, dismay, threaten, appal,
terrify, deter, dishearten.

ANT. _Calm, compose; encourage, inspirit, animate, reassure._

=Intolerable.= Insufferable, unendurable, insupportable, unbearable.

ANT. _Endurable, comfortable, tolerable, supportable, possible to be
borne._

=Intolerant.= Bigoted, unforbearing; extreme.

ANT. _Tolerant, forbearing, large-minded, indulgent._

=Intoxication.= Inebriety, inebriation, drunkenness; excitement,
infatuation, exhilaration, delirium, bewilderment, hallucination,
ecstasy; poison, venom.

ANT. _Antidote, sobriety, sanity, gravity, melancholy, depression;
abstinence, abstemiousness._

=Intrenchment.= Ditch, dike, fortification, earthwork, moat; defense,
protection, shelter, invasion, inroad, encroachment, infringement,
trespass.

ANT. _Wall, rampart, mole, embankment, mound, bastion; forbearance,
deference, respect._

=Intrepid.= Bold, brave, fearless, undaunted, courageous, valorous,
unterrified, dauntless, chivalrous, heroic, undismayed, unawed, valiant,
doughty.

ANT. _Cautious, timid, fearful, cowardly, dismayed, terrified._

=Intricacy.= Complexity, complication, entanglement, perplexity,
difficulty, intricateness, obscurity, confusion.

ANT. _Directness, obviousness; system, method; disposition, array._

=Intricate.= Involved, perplexed, complicated, entangled, complex; mazy,
labyrinthine, tortuous.

ANT. _Simple, direct, obvious, plain, uninvolved._

=Intrigue.= Plot, scheme, cabal, conspiracy, machination, artifice,
cunning, duplicity, trickery, chicanery, ruse; liaison, amour.

ANT. _Insurrection, assault, rebellion, force, violence; sincerity,
candor, honesty, openness, straightforwardness._

=Intrinsic.= Inward, internal, essential, real, genuine, true, inherent,
native, innate, natural, immanent, inbred, inborn.

ANT. _Extrinsic, acquired, apparent, accidental, borrowed, assumed,
pretended, added, external, adventitious._

=Introduce.= Lead in, usher in, present, conduct in, commence, make
acquainted, make known, begin, preface.

ANT. _Come after, succeed, follow; end, conclude._

=Introduction.= Introducing, presentation, ushering in; preface,
prelude, preamble, proem, exordium; induction, importation, insertion,
commencement, preliminary; portico, gate, vestibule, entrance.

ANT. _Eduction, ejection; extraction, exportation, elimination,
estrangement; completion, conclusion, end; egress._

=Introductory.= Prefatory, initiatory, preliminary, precursory,
preparatory; commendatory.

ANT. _Final, conclusive, terminal, valedictory, supplemental;
alienative._

=Intrude.= Obtrude, encroach, infringe, trespass, trench, interfere,
meddle.

ANT. _Withdraw, retire, recede; remove, retract._

=Intrusion.= Encroachment, interference, intruding, obtrusion,
infringement.

ANT. _Withdrawal, removal, retirement, retraction._

=Intuition.= Apprehension, cognition, perception, beholding; instinct,
insight, recognition.

ANT. _Information, instruction, learning, experience, acquirement,
induction._

=Inundate.= Flood, deluge, overflow, submerge, cover, overwhelm.

ANT. _Drain, dry, reclaim, desiccate, parch._

=Invade.= Attack, infringe, violate, encroach on, trench upon; march
into, enter in, assault, assail, occupy.

ANT. _Abandon, relinquish, vacate, evacuate._

=Invalid=, _a._ Week, feeble, infirm, sick, frail; null, void; unsound,
baseless, untrue, unfounded, fallacious.

ANT. _Strong, well, healthy, vigorous; sound, legal, constitutional;
legitimate, authorized; genuine, true, correct, exact._

=Invalidate.= Nullify, cancel, annul, overthrow, make void.

ANT. _Conserve, maintain, establish, confirm, enact, institute._

=Invasion.= Trespass, incursion, irruption, encroachment, inroad.

ANT. _Evacuation, abandonment, relinquishment; settlement; retreat._

=Invective.= Satire, sarcasm, diatribe, railing, abuse; obloquy,
denunciation, vituperation, reproach, castigation.

ANT. _Praise, commendation, encomium, eulogy, panegyric._

=Invent.= Discover, find out, devise, contrive, produce; design,
concoct, elaborate; conceive, contrive, fabricate, originate, forge,
frame.

ANT. _Copy, imitate, reproduce; execute._

=Invention.= Contrivance, construction, device; fiction, fabrication,
falsehood; thought, idea.

ANT. _Material._

=Inventive.= Ingenious, skilful, clever, adept, resourceful.

ANT. _Slow, unskilful, uninventive._

=Inventor.= Contriver, originator, author, creator.

ANT. _Destroyer._

=Inventory.= List, catalogue, register, record, enrolment, enumeration.

=Inversion.= Reversal, transposition, alteration, deflection, violation,
permutation.

ANT. _Erectness, verticality; stability, permanence, fixity, state,
order, sequence; conservation._

=Invert.= Upset, overthrow, reverse, subvert.

ANT. _Restore, set up, make upright._

=Invest.= Clothe, dress, array, endow; attend, surround; lay out.

ANT. _Divest, dismantle, unclothe, strip, disrobe; deprive._

=Investigate.= Inquire, examine, test, scrutinize, prove, search,
explore, inspect, criticize, discuss, study.

ANT. _Conjecture, guess._

=Investigation.= Search, examination, inquiry, research, exploration,
inquisition, sifting, scrutiny, study.

ANT. _Discovery, clue, indication; solution, thread._

=Investiture.= Installation, induction, investment, habilitation.

ANT. _Divestiture, divestment._

=Inveterate.= Long-established, obstinate; malignant, spiteful,
virulent; besetting, confirmed, chronic, ingrain, incarnate, habitual,
deep-rooted, hardened, accustomed.

ANT. _Undeveloped, incipient, unformed._

=Invidious.= Hateful, offensive, odious; unfair, partial, inconsiderate;
gratuitous.

ANT. _Fair, just, considerate, impartial, due._

=Invigorate.= Strengthen, brace, harden, nerve, refresh, stimulate,
animate, exhilarate.

ANT. _Weaken, enfeeble, debilitate, deteriorate, relax, unstring,
enervate._

=Invitation.= Solicitation, allurement, enticement.

ANT. _Rebuff, snub, check, repulse._

=Invite.= Ask, summon, bid, request, solicit, call, attract, entice,
persuade, allure; tempt, incite, challenge.

ANT. _Repel, forbid, deprecate; exclude, discard._

=Invoke.= Supplicate, implore, solicit, summon, call, beseech, invite,
challenge, invocate, appeal to, conjure, imprecate.

ANT. _Defy; deprecate, deter; ignore, elude; warn, inhibit._

=Involution.= Complication, entanglement; envelope; implication,
mingling.

ANT. _Evolution, disconnection, evolvement, extrication, separation._

=Involve.= Envelop, wrap, cover; comprise, embrace, contain; connect,
unite, mingle, blend, twine, interweave; implicate, entangle,
complicate, embroil, embarrass, include, overwhelm, imply.

ANT. _Extricate, remove, disconnect, separate, disentangle, distinguish,
explicate._

=Inward.= Secretly, privately; internal, interior, inner; within.

ANT. _Outward, external, exterior._

=Iota.= Jot, tittle, particle, atom.

ANT. _Whole, mass._

=Irate=, =Irascible=. Hasty, angry, enraged, incensed, choleric,
irritable.

ANT. _Good-tempered, calm, forbearing, gentle, mild._

=Ire.= Anger, wrath, rage, fury, choler, indignation, resentment,
displeasure, vexation.

ANT. _Good will, patience, forbearance, mildness, forgiveness,
reconciliation, peaceableness._

=Irridescent.= Prismatic; opaline, polychromatous, nacreous.

ANT. _Blanched, neutral, colorless, dingy, achromatic._

=Isolate.= Separate, detach, dissociate; insulate.

ANT. _Associate, unite._

=Isolation.= Separation, loneliness, segregation, detachment,
disconnection, insulation; solitariness, solitude.

ANT. _Organization, community, co-membership, connection; continuity,
concatenation._

=Issue.= Egress, exit, outlet; delivery; copy, number, edition,
impression; event, outcome, result, end, conclusion, consummation,
effect, termination; children, offspring, posterity, progeny;
antagonism, controversy, contest.

ANT. _Cause, principle, influence, action, working, operation; law,
system, commencement; ancestry, paternity._

=Iteration.= Recital, repetition, reiteration, recurrence, harping,
succession.

ANT. _Single statement._

=Itinerant=, _a._ Traveling, wandering, roving, roaming, journeying,
unsettled, nomadic.

ANT. _Stationary, domestic, settled, fixed, local._

=Itinerary.= Guide, guidebook, schedule.




                                   J


=Jade=, _v._ Tire, weary, fatigue, exhaust, fag; worry, harass, oppress.

ANT. _Refresh, recruit, invigorate, inspirit._

=Jagged.= Notched, indented, uneven, ragged.

ANT. _Smooth._

=Jangle=, _n._ Jargon, babel, bickering, wrangle, quarrel, squabble,
contention.

ANT. _Argument, discourse, debate._

=Jar=, _v._ Shake, agitate; clash, interfere; wrangle, quarrel, contend,
bicker, spar, squabble, jangle.

ANT. _Agree, harmonize, accord, concur._

=Jargon.= Gabble, gibberish; nonsense, twaddle, flummery, trash, stuff,
gabble; slang; lingo, patois.

ANT. _Speech, conversation; discourse, oration; literature._

=Jaundiced.= Biased, prejudiced, warped, prepossessed; bilious.

ANT. _Unprejudiced, unbiased._

=Jaunty.= Airy, showy, finical, fluttering, gay, fine, bedizened,
flighty, fantastic, flaunting.

ANT. _Staid, sober, sedate, dignified, demure._

=Jealous.= Envious, suspicious, resentful, covetous, invidious; anxious,
apprehensive, solicitous, zealous, watchful.

ANT. _Indifferent, genial, unenvious, liberal, self-denying._

=Jealousy.= Suspicion, envy, rivalry, solicitude.

ANT. _Vigilance, watchfulness, magnanimity, generousness, friendliness;
certainty._

=Jeer=, _v._ Scoff, taunt, jibe, sneer, flout, mock, jest, deride,
banter.

ANT. _Flatter, compliment, praise; adulate, fawn, cringe._

=Jejune.= Empty, barren, meager, dry, sterile, bare, lean,
uninteresting, thin, scant, poverty-stricken, poor, void.

ANT. _Full, rich, exuberant, racy, interesting, overwrought, redundant,
abundant._

=Jeopardy.= Hazard, peril, risk, danger, venture.

ANT. _Security, safety, insurance, provision._

=Jest=, _n._ Joke, witticism, quip, sally, raillery, fun, sport.

ANT. _Seriousness, gravity, earnest._

=Jest=, _v._ Joke, sport, rally, banter, ridicule, mock, grin.

ANT. _Preach, sermonize._

=Jocose.= Humorous, facetious, witty, droll, funny, comical, jocular,
sportive, merry, waggish.

ANT. _Melancholy, serious, earnest, grave, lugubrious._

=Jocund.= Joyous, joyful, merry, frolicsome, blithe, jolly, sportive,
lively, playful, airy, gay, debonair, jovial, gleeful, careless,
blithesome, mirthful, hilarious, sprightly, vivacious.

ANT. _Melancholy, dull, sorrowful, grave, mournful, cheerless, rueful,
doleful, careworn, woful._

=Join.= Add, attach, annex; connect, couple, link, unite, conjoin,
cement; adjoin, be adjacent to, connect with; associate with,
confederate, league.

ANT. _Separate, disconnect, disjoin, subtract, sever._

=Joint.= Juncture, union; flexure, elbow, knee, articulation.

ANT. _Disconnection, continuity, uniformity, solution, disjunction._

=Jollification.= Revelry, conviviality, festivity, revel, carousal,
wassail, carouse, fun, carnival.

ANT. _Weariness, tedium, tediousness, soberness, monotony._

=Jolly.= Merry, joyous, gay, jovial, mirthful, jocund, sportive,
jocular, funny, sprightly, facetious, waggish, blithe, blithesome,
cheery, cheerful; portly, bouncing, stout, plump.

ANT. _Sad, mournful, cheerless, mirthless, joyless, lugubrious, gloomy,
morose._

=Jostle.= Push, crowd, hustle, collide, strike against; shake,
incommode, joggle, jog, jolt.

ANT. _Clear, lead, convoy, escort, pilot, precede, extricate, attend._

=Jot.= Iota, whit, tittle, particle, atom, grain, bit, mite, scrap,
scintilla, cipher, trifle, idea, thought, morsel, fraction.

ANT. _World, mass, volume, heap, bulk._

=Journey.= Travel, transit, expedition, excursion, tour, voyage, trip,
pilgrimage.

ANT. _Sojourn, tarrying, delay, stop, stay, abiding, stopover._

=Jovial.= Merry, joyous, gay, festive, mirthful, jolly, gleeful,
hilarious, genial, convivial.

ANT. _Ungenial, gloomy, lugubrious, melancholy, saturnine._

=Joviality.= Merriment, jollity, mirth, hilarity, gaiety, frolic, fun.

ANT. _Sadness, seriousness, soberness._

=Joy.= Gladness, delight, pleasure, happiness, transport, felicity,
exultation, ecstasy, bliss, rapture, gaiety, hilarity, glee, beatitude,
ravishment.

ANT. _Sorrow, grief, melancholy, affliction, tears, depression,
despondency, pain, misery, trouble, despair._

=Joyful.= Glad, joyous, merry, jubilant, jocund, happy, jolly, jovial,
elate, elated, delighted, buoyant.

ANT. _Grave, solemn, mournful, sad, melancholy, lugubrious._

=Jubilant.= Rejoicing, exultant, triumphant, joyous, festive, exulting,
congratulatory.

ANT. _Doleful, sorrowful, remorseful, wailing, penitent, lugubrious._

=Jubilee.= Festival, season of rejoicing, feast, holiday, festivity,
revel, carnival, merriment.

ANT. _Fast, mourning, humiliation, penitence._

=Judge.= Justice, referee, arbiter, arbitrator, umpire; magistrate,
authority; critic, connoisseur.

ANT. _Criminal, novice, tyro, ignoramus._

=Judgment.= Discernment, estimate, award, criticism, understanding,
discrimination, intelligence, taste, sagacity, penetration, wisdom,
brains, prudence, sense; determination, decision, opinion, notion,
conclusion; judiciousness, intellect; verdict, sentence, reward,
condemnation.

ANT. _Argument, speculation, inquiry, proposition, investigation,
consideration, evidence, pleading, pronouncement; fickleness,
insagacity, impulsiveness._

=Judicial.= Just, well-balanced, deliberative; juridical, forensic.

ANT. _Legislative, executive, or administrative; impulsive._

=Judicious.= Discreet, wise, prudent, sagacious, sensible, reasonable,
rational, sober, sound, staid, politic, enlightened, well-considered,
well-chosen; discerning, thoughtful.

ANT. _Silly, imprudent, indiscreet, ill-judged, inexpedient, rash,
impolitic, blind, foolish._

=Juggle=, _v._ Cheat, conjure, impose, trick, practice jugglery,
deceive, defraud; bamboozle, beguile, swindle, mystify, mislead,
overreach.

ANT. _Expose, enlighten, undeceive; detect, reveal, correct._

=Jumble=, _n._ Confusion, disorder, hodge-podge.

ANT. _Order, system, neatness, arrangement._

=Jump=, _v._ Leap, skip, bound, hop, spring, vault, caper; bounce, jolt,
overleap; coincide, agree, accord.

ANT. _Walk, pace, promenade; dance._

=Junction.= Joining, union, combination, coalition, connection, linking,
coupling; joint, juncture, angle; fastening, attachment; alliance,
confederacy.

ANT. _Division, separation, disconnection, hiatus, chasm, uncoupling,
disunion; continuity._

=Jungle.= Thicket, brake, wilderness, labyrinth, underbrush,
entanglement.

ANT. _Open, clearing; order, arrangement, system._

=Junior.= Younger; subordinate, less advanced.

ANT. _Senior, elder, older; more advanced, superior._

=Jurisdiction.= Right, authority, sphere, judicature, legal power;
government, control, sway, administration, magistracy.

ANT. _Immunity, exemption, freedom, independence._

=Just.= Upright, righteous, honest, true, conforming to justice; exact,
normal, reasonable, due; equitable, fair, impartial, right, rightful,
lawful; fair-minded, blameless, honorable, straightforward, virtuous,
uncorrupt; accurate, correct; deserved, fit, merited, appropriate,
suitable, happy, proper, harmonious.

ANT. _Evil, untrue, unjust, dishonest, prejudiced, unfair, unreasonable,
partial, unlawful, unequitable; blameworthy, corrupt, dishonorable;
inaccurate, incorrect; undeserved, unfit, inappropriate, inharmonious._

=Justice.= Legality, equity, rectitude, fairness, law, lawfulness,
right, truth, uprightness, virtue, fair play, faithfulness,
impartiality, integrity, righteousness; reasonableness, desert,
propriety.

ANT. _Injustice, dishonesty, favoritism, partiality, wrong,
unlawfulness, unfairness, unreasonableness._

=Justification.= Vindication, defense, exoneration, exculpation;
absolution; apology, advocacy, plea, maintenance.

ANT. _Censure, condemnation, conviction, implication, crimination,
inculpation._

=Justify.= Vindicate, maintain, defend; absolve, clear, exonerate;
pardon, exculpate; adjust; excuse.

ANT. _Condemn, convict, censure, criminate._

=Justness.= Exactness, propriety, correctness, accuracy, exactitude,
strictness, fidelity, nicety.

ANT. _Incorrectness, inexactness, slovenliness._

=Juvenile.= Young, youthful, puerile, childish, boyish, girlish,
infantine, immature, adolescent.

ANT. _Mature, elderly, aged, senile, adult, manly, womanly,
superannuated._

=Juxtaposition.= Nearness, contiguity, adjacency, proximity, contact.

ANT. _Distance, remoteness, separateness; opposition._




                                   K


=Keen.= Sharp; acute; bitter, severe, piercing, stinging; eager,
vehement, fierce; prompt, ardent, cutting, biting, sarcastic,
penetrating, satirical, shrewd; poignant, acrimonious, caustic;
discerning, quick, astute.

ANT. _Blunt, dull, languid, blind, indifferent, obtuse, undiscerning,
slow, simple._

=Keep.= Retain, hold, reserve, detain, preserve, restrain, withhold,
maintain, support, sustain, continue, guard, protect, adhere to, obey,
fulfil; celebrate, honor, conduct, commemorate, solemnize; haunt,
frequent; observe, perform; conceal, suppress; hinder, prevent, refrain.

ANT. _Release, speed, liberate, send, dismiss; neglect, betray, abandon,
discard; disregard, disobey, transgress, forsake, desert, forget._

=Keeping.= Charge, guardianship, custody, care; holding, preservation,
restraint; maintenance, support, feed, provision; harmony, consistency,
congruity, conformity, agreement.

ANT. _Neglect, abuse, disregard; abandonment, destruction; non-support,
betrayal; disagreement, incongruity._

=Keepsake.= Souvenir, token, remembrancer.

=Ken.= Sight, view, cognizance, knowledge, survey, range.

ANT. _Ignorance, oversight, inexperience, inobservance._

=Kernel.= Seed, grain; nucleus; core, gist.

ANT. _Peeling, meat, shell, husk._

=Key.= Lock opener; clue, guide, solution, explanation; keynote, tonic;
wedge, clamp; lever.

ANT. _Mystification, confusion, mystery, secret, problem._

=Kick.= Strike or thrust at with the foot; recoil; resist, rebel, spurn,
be calcitrant.

ANT. _Caress, soothe, flatter, obey._

=Kill.= Murder, massacre, assassinate, butcher, execute, despatch, slay,
slaughter, put to death.

ANT. _Resuscitate, vivify, reanimate, revivify, quicken, enliven._

=Kin.= Family, birth, blood, consanguinity, descent, race, relationship,
kind, kindred, affinity, alliance.

ANT. _Strangership, inaffinity, alienage, foreignership._

=Kind=, _n._ Race, family, species, breed, class, genus; character,
sort, variety, nature, fashion, description, denomination, designation.

ANT. _Dissimilarity, differentiation._

=Kind=, _a._ Benign, indulgent, humane, compassionate, gentle, tender,
beneficent, propitious, generous, forbearing, lenient, bounteous,
clement, mild, good, obliging, bland, friendly, amicable, philanthropic,
charitable, sympathetic, affectionate, tender-hearted.

ANT. _Harsh, severe, hard, cruel, unkind, rough, stern, forbidding,
austere, crabbed, illiberal._

=Kindle.= Light, ignite, inflame, enkindle, set on fire; excite, arouse,
awaken, stir up, stimulate, incite, animate, foment; exasperate,
provoke, enrage.

ANT. _Quench, suppress, extinguish, allay._

=Kindness=, =Kindliness=. Benevolence, humanity, charity, sympathy,
compassion, amiability, good nature; mildness, gentleness, softness.

ANT. _Harshness, cruelty, severity, sternness, roughness, austerity._

=Kindred=, _n._ Relationship, consanguinity, affinity; relations, kin,
kith and kin, relatives, kinsmen, kinsfolk.

ANT. _Disconnection, unrelatedness; strangers, foreigners._

=Kindred=, _a._ Related, cognate, akin, allied, congenial; responsive,
sympathetic.

ANT. _Unrelated, uncongenial, unallied; different, unresponsive._

=Kingdom.= Empire, monarchy, sovereignty, domain, dominion.

=Kingly.= Regal, royal, monarchical, imperial, august, sovereign, noble,
splendid, magnificent, imposing, grand, majestic.

ANT. _Plebeian, humble, popular, commonplace, simple, vulgar._

=Knack.= Toy, plaything, gimcrack; dexterity, skill, adroitness,
facility, aptness, aptitude, expertness, quickness.

ANT. _Clumsiness, awkwardness, ineptitude._

=Knave.= Villain, rascal, rogue, scoundrel, cheat, scamp, miscreant,
swindler, scapegrace.

ANT. _Gentleman, hero; gull, dupe, simpleton._

=Knavish.= Trickish, cheating; mischievous, roguish, waggish;
fraudulent, villainous.

ANT. _Honest, upright, honorable._

=Knot=, _n._ Tie, bond, intricacy, connection; entanglement,
complication; joint; group, band, clique, gang, crew.

ANT. _Loosening, unfastening, unraveling, dispersion; solution,
simplification; evenness, smoothness; individual._

=Knotty.= Knotted, difficult, intricate, perplexed, tough, hard,
complicated.

ANT. _Plain, simple, obvious, easy, smooth, uninvolved._

=Know.= Perceive, apprehend, understand; be convinced or assured;
acquaint, recognize; distinguish, comprehend.

ANT. _Be ignorant or illiterate, overlook, misunderstand, misconstrue._

=Knowing.= Intelligent, skilful, competent, well-informed, proficient,
qualified, experienced, accomplished; conscious, percipient, thinking;
cunning, expressive, significant; shrewd, astute, discerning, sagacious.

ANT. _Simple, innocent, gullible, stolid, silly; dull, stupid,
inefficient; unresponsive, non-suggestible._

=Knowledge.= Learning, wisdom, scholarship, science, comprehension,
cognition, erudition, intelligence, light, lore, perception recognition,
acquaintance, intuition, experience, information, apprehension, notice,
understanding, conversance, cognizance, familiarity, instruction,
enlightenment; acquirements, attainments.

ANT. _Ignorance, illiteracy, unfamiliarity, rudeness, inexperience,
misapprehension, misconception, misunderstanding._




                                   L


=Labor=, _n._ Toil, exertion, work, effort, task, travail; drudgery,
industry, painstaking; burden, duties.

ANT. _Ease, indolence, rest, respite, recreation, refreshment, vacation,
inactivity, laziness._

=Labored.= Elaborate, studied, highly wrought, overwrought, stiff,
heavy.

ANT. _Easy, natural, simple._

=Laborer.= Workman, operative, workingman, hand, employee, bread-winner.

ANT. _Employer._

=Laborious.= Toilsome, difficult, tiresome, onerous, wearisome,
fatiguing, arduous, hard, burdensome, tedious, irksome; industrious,
diligent, toiling, assiduous, hard-working, painstaking, sedulous,
indefatigable, active.

ANT. _Easy, light, simple, facile, feasible; lazy, indolent, indiligent,
idle._

=Labyrinth.= Maze, confusion, intricacy, windings; perplexity,
complexity, bewilderment, involutions; difficulty.

ANT. _Simplicity, calm, perspicacity; insight, understanding._

=Lack=, _n._ Deficiency, want, need, destitution, failure, scantiness,
dearth, scarcity, fault, deficit, shortness, insufficiency.

ANT. _Plenty, fulness, abundance, supply, sufficiency, competence,
satisfaction._

=Laconic=, =Laconical=. Short, epigrammatic, brusk, brief, concise,
pithy, sententious, terse, curt.

ANT. _Wordy, tedious, prolix, diffuse, prosy, loquacious, garrulous._

=Laggard=, _n._ Loiterer, lingerer, sluggard, saunterer, dawdler, idler.

=Laical.= Laic, lay, unprofessional; secular, temporal; civil,
non-legal.

ANT. _Clerical, professional, theological, sacred, divine, ecclesiastic,
ministerial, priestly, canonical, legal, sacerdotal._

=Laity.= Laymen, the people.

ANT. _Clergy, professional people._

=Lame.= Hobbling, crippled, limping; inefficient, imperfect, defective;
weak, feeble, poor, unsatisfactory, insufficient; halt, faltering,
impotent.

ANT. _Robust, strong, potent, efficient, cogent, effective, convincing,
telling, satisfactory._

=Lament=, _v._ Mourn, bemoan, bewail, deplore, sorrow over, regret,
grieve.

ANT. _Rejoice, enjoy, hail, welcome._

=Language.= Idiom, speech, dialect, tongue, patois, barbarism, diction,
expression, vernacular, vocabulary, mother tongue, phraseology,
discourse, conversation, talk; articulation, accents; style, utterance,
voice.

ANT. _Jargon, gibberish, cry, howl, roar; speechlessness,
inarticulateness, muteness, dumbness._

=Languid.= Drooping, indisposed, inanimate, feeble, weak, faint, sickly,
pining, weary, listless, heavy, dull, exhausted, heartless; enervated,
flagging, spiritless, unnerved, unbraced.

ANT. _Strong, vigorous, robust, active, braced, healthy, energetic,
animated, alert._

=Languish.= To be languid, pine, droop, sink, faint, decline.

ANT. _Luxuriate, thrive, prosper, flourish, bloom._

=Languor.= Feebleness, weakness, faintness, weariness, lassitude,
listlessness, heaviness, dulness.

ANT. _Strength, vigor, energy, freshness, lithesomeness._

=Lank.= Slender, thin, shrunken, lean, loose, slim, long, lax.

ANT. _Plump, fat, chubby, short, full, rounded._

=Lapse=, _n._ Slipping, falling, slip, fault; termination, failure;
escheatment, flow, flux, progress, reversion, elapsing; apostasy.

ANT. _Stability, fixedness, retention, fixture, stoppage, uprightness;
inheritance, possession._

=Large.= Colossal, ample, broad, bulky, extensive, vast, massive,
spacious, wide, commodious, enormous, coarse, grand, long, gigantic,
immense, huge, great, big, capacious, considerable, abundant; diffuse,
comprehensive, profuse, plentiful, populous, copious, liberal;
enlightened, catholic.

ANT. _Circumscribed, illiberal, contracted, niggardly, sordid, bigoted;
small, little, microscopic, mean, minute, tiny, slender, trifling,
trivial, diminutive, inconsiderable, slight, infinitesimal, limited,
short, insignificant, scanty, petty, narrow, paltry._

=Lash=, _v._ Strike, whip, scourge, flog, beat, tie, fasten; censure,
satirize, castigate.

ANT. _Soothe, smooth, caress; eulogize, compliment, extol._

=Lassitude.= Languor, weariness, weakness, debility, inertia.

ANT. _Energy, strength, robustness, vigor, freshness._

=Last=, _v._ Continue, endure, persist, remain, hold, abide, live.

ANT. _End, stop, terminate, depart, fade, cease, fail, die._

=Last=, _a._ Final, hindmost, farthest; next, past; highest or lowest,
supreme, utmost; most unlikely, least fit; latest, final, concluding,
ultimate.

ANT. _First, foremost, opening, introductory, initiatory; ensuing, next,
nearest._

=Lasting.= Durable, permanent, unending, enduring, abiding, perpetual.

ANT. _Temporary, transient, ephemeral, momentary, occasional, periodic,
recurrent._

=Late.= Slow, tardy; deceased, departed; far advanced; recent; not long
past; delayed.

ANT. _Early, coming, present, future, forthcoming, existing._

=Lately.= Recently, of late, not far past, but just.

ANT. _Formerly, remotely, distantly in past or future._

=Latent.= Hidden, secret, invisible, dormant, unobserved, concealed,
inapparent, potential, implicit, undeveloped, inherent.

ANT. _Visible, explicit, apparent, exposed, developed, active,
conspicuous, manifest._

=Lateral.= At the side, oblique; indirect, secondary, resultant,
parallel, incidental.

ANT. _Direct, primary, immediate, lineal._

=Latter.= Later, modern, more recent; last, final.

ANT. _Former, previous, ancient; penultimate._

=Laudable.= Praiseworthy, commendable.

ANT. _Blameworthy, execrable._

=Laughter.= Laughing, mirth, merriment, glee; derision, ridicule,
contempt.

ANT. _Weeping, tears, sorrow, mourning, lamentation; respect,
veneration, admiration._

=Launch=, _v._ Hurl, throw, let fly; set afloat; start, propel, move;
expatiate, enlarge.

ANT. _Recall, repress, retain; ignore, avoid, shun._

=Lavish=, _a._ Profuse, prodigal; superabundant, excessive, extravagant,
bountiful, wasteful.

ANT. _Sparing, economical, close, niggardly, chary._

=Law.= Code, canon, edict, decree, order, mandate, legislation,
ordinance, rule, regulation, jurisprudence, enactment, command,
commandment, economy, formula, polity, principle, statute; mode, method,
sequence, adjudication, jurisdiction.

ANT. _Misrule, anarchy, disorder, insubordination, rebellion; caprice,
chance, irregularity, accident, casualty._

=Lawful.= Conformable to law, legitimate, competent, constituted,
authorized; legal, constitutional, rightful, regular; permissible,
orderly, right, allowable, fair.

ANT. _Illegal, impermissible, unlawful, wrong._

=Lawless.= Contrary to law, illegal; unrestrained, unregulated; wild,
rebellious, savage, disorderly.

ANT. _Peaceful, law-abiding, loyal, civilized, honest, tractable,
well-disposed._

=Lawyer.= Counselor, attorney, counsel, advocate.

ANT. _Client._

=Lax.= Slack, vague, unconfined; dissolute, licentious; incoherent;
unprincipled, loose, remiss, flabby.

ANT. _Concise, strict, rigid, coherent, compact; conscientious,
principled._

=Lay.= Put, place, establish, deposit, arrange, spread, dispose, set
down; allay, prostrate.

ANT. _Raise, erect, lift up; excite, disorder, disarrange._

=Lazy.= Shirking, idle, inactive, slothful, slow, sluggish.

ANT. _Industrious, energetic, active, assiduous._

=Lead=, _n._ Guidance, direction, initiative, control; precedence,
priority, preëminence.

ANT. _Following, submission, subordination; inferiority._

=Lead=, _v._ Guide, conduct, direct, counsel; precede, draw, induce,
entice, allure; convoy; commence, inaugurate; persuade, influence.

ANT. _Follow; dissuade, mislead, misguide; leave, abandon._

=Leader.= Guide, conductor; director, chief, head.

ANT. _Follower, disciple._

=League.= Alliance, compact, coalition, confederacy, confederation,
bond, combination, union.

ANT. _Neutrality; divorce, disruption, disunion, secession,
disconnection, alienation, dissolution._

=Lean=, _v._ Incline, deviate, bend, rest, rely on; conform; tend,
depend, hang; slope; repose, confide.

ANT. _Support, raise, erect, stabilitate, rise, straighten._

=Lean=, _a._ Slender, spare, meager, thin, lank, gaunt, skinny, bare,
scant, barren, mean; shriveled, emaciated, bony, scraggy.

ANT. _Fat, plump, brawny, well-conditioned, obese, stout._

=Leaning.= Tendency, proclivity, propensity, bias, liking, partiality,
inclination.

ANT. _Loathing, aversion, repugnance, avoidance, dislike._

=Leap=, _v._ Jump, vault, spring, bound, hop, bounce.

ANT. _Walk, dive, swim, run._

=Learn.= Acquire, imbibe, attain, collect, know, gather, understand,
study.

ANT. _Forget, lose; teach, instruct._

=Learned.= Erudite, versed, well-informed, scholarly, skilled, literary,
conversant, read.

ANT. _Ignorant, unlearned, illiterate, unscholarly._

=Learner.= Pupil, scholar, student, disciple, novice.

ANT. _Teacher, professor, authority, adept, master, doctor._

=Learning.= Knowledge, erudition, skill, literature, science, lore,
letters, education, culture, tuition, acquirements, attainments,
scholarship.

ANT. _Ignorance, illiteracy, boorishness, stupidity; inspiration,
revelation._

=Least.= Smallest, shortest, lowest, most unimportant, meanest, last.

ANT. _Greatest, longest, noblest, highest, most important, first,
principal, main, leading, preëminent._

=Leave=, _v._ Quit, abandon, give up, forego, resign, surrender,
forbear; cease, stop, desist; depart, go from; bequeath.

ANT. _Persist, stay, hold, retain; continue; arrive._

=Legal.= Authorized, legitimate, constitutional, licit, lawful,
allowable.

ANT. _Illegal, unlawful, unconstitutional, lay, illegitimate._

=Legend.= Chronicle; myth, fable; inscription, motto; hearsay, fiction.

ANT. _Fact, history, truth, verity._

=Legible.= Distinct, plain, apparent, discernible, clear, manifest,
decipherable, well-written.

ANT. _Illegible, cryptographic, cabalistic, undecipherable, obscure._

=Legitimate.= Lawful, valid; authorized, real, genuine, licit,
allowable, normal, standard.

ANT. _Illegitimate, unallowable, unfair, unauthorized, illicit, false._

=Leisure.= Freedom, ease, vacation, convenience; opportunity,
retirement, spare time.

ANT. _Occupation, employment, absorption, work, labor, constraint,
engagement, business, toil._

=Leisurely.= Deliberate, convenient, easy, sauntering.

ANT. _Hurried, hasty, difficult, speedy, industrious, assiduous, eager,
precipitate, expeditious._

=Lend.= Let, afford, furnish, loan, advance, grant.

ANT. _Refuse, withhold, retain, appropriate, withdraw; recall._

=Lengthen.= Elongate, stretch, extend, prolong.

ANT. _Shorten, contract, confine, narrow._

=Lengthy.= Long, drawn out, tedious, verbose, diffuse, prolix.

ANT. _Concise, comprehensive, laconic, short, brief, condensed,
succinct, compact._

=Lenient.= Merciful, mild, relaxing, assuasive, softening,
compassionate.

ANT. _Harsh, cruel, hard, severe, stern._

=Lessen.= Diminish, reduce, decrease, abate, lower, impair, degrade,
weaken.

ANT. _Increase, enlarge, extend, develop, heighten, multiply,
strengthen, spread, enhance._

=Lesson.= Instruction, precept, doctrine, study; reproof, warning,
rebuke, lecture, homily.

ANT. _Misguidance, misinformation, deception._

=Let.= Permit, allow, suffer; rent, lease, hire out; assign, grant,
give, contract.

ANT. _Prevent, hinder, check, thwart; refuse, deny, withhold, withdraw._

=Lethal.= Fatal, deadly, mortal, poisonous, venomous, baneful, noxious.

ANT. _Remedial, wholesome, salutary, vital, invigorating, restorative._

=Lethargy.= Drowsiness, torpor, swoon, trance, stupor, oblivion;
indifference.

ANT. _Alertness, liveliness, vigilance, wakefulness, life, activity,
quickness; eagerness, attention, interest._

=Letter.= Epistle; mark, character; note, communication, message,
missive; (_pl._) erudition, learning.

=Level=, _n._ Plane; surface, floor; rank, standard, degree, position;
ground; horizontality, equality, platform.

ANT. _Unevenness, acclivity, inequality, verticality, declivity._

=Level=, _v._ Smooth, flatten, even; overthrow; aim, direct; plane,
raze, equalize.

ANT. _Roughen, furrow, graduate, grade._

=Level=, _a._ Flat, horizontal, even, plane, smooth.

ANT. _Rough, uneven, broken, rolling, undulating, hilly._

=Levity.= Inconstancy, unsteadiness, thoughtlessness, frivolity,
fickleness; flightiness, volatility.

ANT. _Gravity, earnestness, seriousness, sobriety, dignity, importance._

=Levy=, _v._ Raise, collect, assess, seize, exact; attack; tax, impose,
muster.

ANT. _Pay, forego, surrender, reimburse, repay, liquidate._

=Liable.= Accountable, bound, responsible, answerable, subject, exposed,
obnoxious; amenable.

ANT. _Irresponsible, refractory, independent, autocratic._

=Libel=, _n._ Lampoon, satire, defamation, detraction, slander, calumny,
traducement.

ANT. _Retraction, vindication, apology; puff, praise, encomium,
advocacy, panegyric._

=Liberal.= Generous, munificent, beneficent, large, free, catholic,
unselfish, unrestrained, tolerant; ample, profuse.

ANT. _Mean, grasping, greedy, niggardly, avaricious; narrow-minded,
bigoted, prejudiced, inadequate, contracted, scanty._

=Liberate.= Deliver, set free, disengage, release.

ANT. _Confine, imprison, arrest; sentence, doom, condemn._

=Libertine.= Rake, debauchee, dissolute person, profligate.

ANT. _Ascetic, anchorite._

=Liberty.= Emancipation, choice, freedom, license, independence, leave,
permission, exemption; privilege, franchise, immunity.

ANT. _Slavery, captivity, servitude, serfdom, compulsion, necessity,
constraint, imprisonment, oppression, thraldom, superstition,
obligation._

=License=, _n._ Permission, leave, privilege, right, warrant; laxity,
disorder, anarchy, lawlessness.

ANT. _Obligation, constraint, compulsion, submission, necessity,
restraint, restriction, moderation, temperance._

=License=, _v._ Permit, authorize, let.

ANT. _Prohibit, restrain, forbid, constrain, inhibit, interdict,
withhold, withdraw; annul, disallow._

=Licentious.= Excessive, abusive; unrestrained, uncurbed, unruly,
lawless, immoral, lewd, riotous, ungovernable, wanton, lax, dissolute,
profligate, loose, sensual, impure, unchaste, lascivious.

ANT. _Temperate, strict, moderate, controlled, self-controlled, ascetic,
austere, sober, self-denying, puritanic, renunciatory._

=Licit.= Lawful, legal.

ANT. _Illegal, illicit, unlawful, unlicensed, unauthorized,
illegitimate, improper, forbidden._

=Lie=, _n._ Untruth, fiction, fable, deception, falsehood,
falsification; delusion, illusion.

ANT. _Truth, verity, reality, fact; veracity, exactness, precision,
principle, honesty, sincerity._

=Lie=, _v._ Utter a lie; rest, recline, be situated; abide, remain,
continue; exist, belong, consist; lodge, sleep.

ANT. _Rise, stir, move, walk, be active, go, change, run._

=Life.= Being, soul, spirit; affairs; animation, vivacity, energy,
vigor, living being; biography.

ANT. _Death, mortality, decease, lifelessness, annihilation,
non-existence; lethargy, coma, stupor; demise, departure, dissolution._

=Lift=, _v._ Raise, elevate; exalt, improve; steal.

ANT. _Lower, sink, depress, let descend; reduce, degrade, humble; crush,
overwhelm; hurl, dash, fling, throw._

=Ligament.= Bandage, bond, connection, ligature, strap, girth, band,
brace, tie; tying, binding.

ANT. _Fracture, disconnection, dislocation, disruption, severance,
laceration, splinter, rupture, break._

=Light=, _n._ Gleam, shine, glitter, flame, blaze, illumination,
incandescence, glow, flash, flare, sparkle, twinkle, flicker, glare,
glimmer, glistening, sheen, luster, shimmer, shining, scintillation,
day; open view, publicity; enlightenment, knowledge, information;
prosperity, joy, happiness, felicity.

ANT. _Dark, gloom, darkness, dimness, blackness, dusk, shade, shadow,
gloominess, obscurity; extinction, night, tenebrosity, death; confusion,
mystification, ignorance, misunderstanding, illiteracy, blindness,
nescience._

=Light=, _a._ Bright, clear, white; unweighty, imponderable, portable,
easy, volatile, insubstantial, buoyant; small, trifling, inconsiderable,
moderate, insignificant; porous, spongy; unsteady, fickle, frivolous,
unsettled; empty, slight, vain, capricious, thoughtless.

ANT. _Weighty, ponderous, oppressive, grievous, burdensome; onerous,
difficult, laborious, hard; dejected, depressed, despondent; dull,
inert, inactive._

=Like=, _v._ Be pleased with, approve, enjoy, love, relish, esteem,
fancy, affect.

ANT. _Dislike, hate, loathe, detest, abhor, abominate._

=Like=, _a._ Resembling, similar; equal; probable, likely; disposed to,
inclined toward; correspondent.

ANT. _Different, dissimilar, counterpart; improbable, unlikely;
disinclined, indisposed._

=Likelihood.= Probability, semblance, appearance, verisimilitude.

ANT. _Improbability, inconceivability, impossibility, unlikelihood;
distinction, difference, uncertainty, contrariety; inconsistency._

=Likely.= Probable, presumable, reasonable, apt, credible, conceivable,
conjectural.

ANT. _Unlikely, doubtful, incredible, dubious, improbable, questionable,
unreasonable._

=Likeness.= Resemblance, similarity; guise; portrait, similitude,
correspondence, copy, imitation, image, representation, effigy, picture.

ANT. _Unlikeness, disparity, dissimilarity, inequality; original._

=Likewise.= Also, moreover, too, besides.

ANT. _Otherwise._

=Liking.= Inclination, pleasure, desire, preference, approval,
affection, fondness, taste, partiality.

ANT. _Dislike, disrelish, abhorrence, hatred, loathing, repugnance,
aversion._

=Limit.= Boundary, termination, restriction, confine, enclosure, border.

ANT. _Expanse, space, interior, center, tract, land; void._

=Limitless.= Boundless, illimitable, immeasurable, vast, immense,
infinite, interminable, unrestricted, unhindered, unobstructed.

ANT. _Bounded, limited, restricted, circumscribed, defined, restrained,
hindered, prevented, hampered, obstructed, conditioned._

=Limpid.= Clear, transparent, lucid, pellucid, pure, translucent,
bright, crystal.

ANT. _Turbid, foul, muddy, opaque, dark, black._

=Line=, _n._ Thread, cord, hawser, rope; boundary, contour, outline;
family, race; track, railroad, course, method; continuity, sequence,
succession.

ANT. _Breadth, width; expanse, space, deviation, divergency, variation;
discontinuance._

=Lineage.= Ancestry, family, descendants, house, breed, race, descent,
progeny.

ANT. _Ancestor, source, ancestry, origin, founder, progenitor._

=Lineament.= Profile, form, feature, mark, outline.

ANT. _Face, aspect, countenance, visage, front, expression._

=Linear.= Direct, straight, rectilinear, lineal.

ANT. _Zigzag, wandering, divergent, crooked, hooked, incurvate._

=Linger.= Lag, saunter, tarry, delay, halt, stop, hesitate, wait, pause.

ANT. _Hasten, speed, push on, go, press forward, advance, progress._

=Liquid=, _a._ Fluid, flowing, fluent, running, melting, liquescent;
mellifluous, soft, limpid, clear.

ANT. _Solid, hard, congealed, insoluble, solidified, concrete; harsh,
discordant._

=List.= Roll, catalogue, schedule, inventory, record, register, index.

ANT. _Non-registration._

=Listen.= Harken, hear, attend, hark, heed, list.

ANT. _Ignore, scorn, neglect, slight, be deaf to._

=Listless.= Indifferent, spiritless, heedless, careless, languid,
uninterested; indolent, vacant, supine, torpid.

ANT. _Interested, eager, earnest, spirited, careful, heedful,
thoughtful, alert, attentive, absorbed, curious, engaged, active._

=Literal.= Unimaginative, matter-of-fact; real; accurate, correct,
exact, grammatical, positive, verbal, close, plain, actual; word by
word, specific.

ANT. _General, free, liberal, metaphorical._

=Literary.= Learned, bookish, literate, lettered, erudite, scholarly,
well-read, studious, instructed, educated.

ANT. _Illiterate, unlettered, unscholarly._

=Literature.= Books, literary productions or works, publications,
writings, belles-lettres; study, lore, reading, scholarship, attainment;
inspiration, genius, intuition, the divine afflatus; science, learning,
letters, erudition.

=Lithe.= Pliant, flexible, limber, supple, elastic, agile, flexile.

ANT. _Stiff, tough, inelastic, inflexible, unresponsive, hard,
resistant._

=Litter.= Clutter, disorder, untidiness, rubbish.

ANT. _Order, cleanliness, arrangement, tidiness, system, method._

=Little.= Small, diminutive; insignificant, contemptible; short, brief;
inefficient, weak, slight; narrow, mean, illiberal; pigmy, scanty,
unimportant, inconsiderable, trivial, petty, paltry, dwarf, puny.

ANT. _Great, big, large, huge, monstrous, enormous, long, developed,
bulky, full; important, momentous, grave, serious, considerable,
significant; colossal._

=Live=, _v._ Have life; abide, dwell, reside; survive, remain, last;
enjoy; feed, subsist; vegetate, grow, continue, behave, act, exist,
breathe.

ANT. _Die, perish, depart, decay, wither, fade, vanish, fail, demise,
drop, languish, expire, decline, faint, sink, fall._

=Live=, _a._ Alive, living, active, vigorous, earnest, energetic,
animate.

ANT. _Defunct, inanimate, dead, moribund, deceased, departed, gone._

=Livelihood.= Support, maintenance, sustenance, subsistence; substance,
living.

ANT. _Beggary, want, starvation, penury, inanition._

=Liveliness.= Sprightliness, animation, gaiety, vivacity, smartness,
briskness, activity.

ANT. _Slowness, torpor, stupidity, dulness, insensibility, listlessness,
languor, inertness._

=Lively.= Quick, nimble, smart, active, alert, sprightly, brisk,
animated, prompt, earnest, energetic, strong, vivacious, gleeful,
blithe, airy, gay, jocund, keen, eager, vivid, spirited, vigorous.

ANT. _Lifeless, dull, torpid, inanimate, inert, insensate, listless,
languid, indifferent._

=Livery.= Release, deliverance; clothing, food, uniform, peculiar garb;
ration, boarding; dependence, servitude, badge, retinue.

=Living=, _n._ Subsistence, estate, existence.

ANT. _Want, starvation, privation, beggary, dearth, insufficiency,
paucity, poverty, indigence._

=Living=, _a._ Active, lively, vigorous; issuing, flowing; quickening,
invigorating; burning, ignited; vegetating, growing.

ANT. _Dead, perishable, decaying, perishing, departed, inanimate,
vanishing, deceased, defunct, withered._

=Load.= Burden, charge, weight, pack, lading, incubus, clog,
encumbrance, cargo, freight, drag, oppression, pressure.

ANT. _Support, solace, alleviation, lightness, refreshment, emptiness._

=Loan=, _n._ Advance, mortgage, hypothecation.

ANT. _Foreclosure, recall, resumption._

=Loath=, _a._ Averse, unwilling, reluctant; backward, indisposed,
disinclined.

ANT. _Eager, ardent, zealous, enthusiastic, anxious, desirous,
impatient, impetuous, earnest, forward, fervent._

=Loathe=, _v._ Abominate, execrate, abhor, dislike, detest, hate.

ANT. _Desire, like, long for, love._

=Locality.= Position, location; town, village, city; situation, place,
habitat.

=Locate.= Place, set; designate, define; establish, settle, lodge, fix,
dispose.

ANT. _Remove, leave, disestablish, dislodge, displace._

=Lock=, _n._ Clasp, catch, bar, bolt, fastening, hasp, hook, latch.

=Locomotion.= Movement, travel, passage, migration.

ANT. _Rest, abode, stoppage, remanence, fixture, stationariness,
permanence._

=Lodge=, _v._ Rest, remain, shelter, stay, abide, stop.

ANT. _Remove, travel, pass on, go, move, journey._

=Lofty.= Tall, sublime, exalted, dignified, stately, majestic, sublime,
proud, haughty, elevated, towering, high, eminent.

ANT. _Low, stunted, ordinary, unimposing, unassuming, undignified,
depressed._

=Logical.= Dialectical, reasonable, coherent, consistent, sound,
argumentative, close, discriminating.

ANT. _Illogical, unsound, inconsistent, unreasonable, incoherent,
undiscriminating, fallacious, inconclusive._

=Lonely=, =Lonesome=. Forlorn, forsaken, dreary, wild, desolate,
secluded, solitary, depressed, alone, retired.

ANT. _Frequented, populous, companioned; cheerful, festive, gay,
bustling, animated._

=Long=, _a._ Drawn out, protracted, extended; continued; lingering;
distant, far away; extensive, far-reaching.

ANT. _Short, brief, curtailed, contracted, abbreviated, condensed,
concise._

=Look=, _n._ Appearance, aspect; manner; glance, sight, view.

=Look=, _v._ Behold, see, stare, scan, contemplate, view, glance,
descry, watch, discern, gaze, regard, inspect, survey; consider; seem,
appear; face, front, take notice; expect, anticipate.

ANT. _Be blind or unseeing; overlook, miss, pass, neglect._

=Loose=, _a._ Unbound, untied, free, unattached, unfastened,
unconstrained; vague; liberal, unchaste, dissolute; unconnected,
rambling; lax; detached, flowing, scattered, sparse; inexact.

ANT. _Tight, close; bound, tied, fastened, secured; thick, compact,
dense; accurate, exact, strict, logical, scientific; conscientious,
self-controlled, firm, rigorous._

=Loquacity.= Garrulity, talkativeness.

ANT. _Taciturnity, silence, unresponsiveness._

=Lordly.= Imperious, noble, honorable; proud, haughty, lofty, majestic,
magnificent.

ANT. _Humble, mean, servile, ignoble, lowly, meek, dishonorable,
abject._

=Lordship=, _n._ Manor; dominion, power, authority; rule, jurisdiction.

ANT. _Subjection, subordination, homage, submission, subservience._

=Lore.= Knowledge; instruction, wisdom, advice, counsel.

ANT. _Ignorance, illiteracy, inexperience, folly, imprudence._

=Lose.= Part with, deprive of; destroy, waste, squander, wander, miss,
ruin; fail of.

ANT. _Keep, retain, hold, obtain, grasp, recover, preserve, treasure,
hoard, save, husband, economize, guard, utilize._

=Loss.= Failure, destruction, privation; defect, harm; waste;
squandering, deprivation, forfeiture; detriment, ruin, defeat, injury,
damage, disadvantage.

ANT. _Restoration, recovery, reimbursement, retention, preservation,
hoarding, guarding; utilization; gain, aggrandizement, augmentation,
advantage, acquisition, profit, benefit, increment, earnings._

=Lot.= Chance, accident, fate, fortune, hazard; destiny, doom,
allotment, apportionment; portion, division, part, parcel, land.

ANT. _Law, arrangement, design, purpose, plan, prearrangement._

=Loud.= Noisy; clamorous, boisterous, vociferous; obstreperous,
turbulent, blustering; ostentatious, gaudy.

ANT. _Gentle, subdued, soft, quiet, silent, inaudible; whispering,
murmuring; rustling._

=Love=, _n._ Friendship, liking, tenderness, regard, fondness, devotion,
affection, attachment, attraction, charity, courtship; good will;
kindness, delight, inclination; benevolence.

ANT. _Antipathy, hatred, enmity; alienation, dislike, disaffection,
estrangement, bitterness, coldness, repugnance, infidelity; desertion._

=Lovely.= Beautiful, charming, delightful, delectable, enchanting,
lovable, amiable; pleasing, winning, sweet, admirable.

ANT. _Hateful, hideous, ugly, homely, unattractive, unlovely, plain,
gawky, unamiable, unlovable._

=Low.= Sunken; quiet; small; submissive, humble; mean, vulgar, base,
ignoble, dishonorable; moderate; feeble, weak; plain, simple;
reasonable, cheap, abject, servile, slavish, degraded, vile, groveling;
deep; reverent; dejected, depressed, dispirited.

ANT. _High, tall, lofty, elevated, exalted; eminent, noble, illustrious,
rising, strong, influential; honorable; elaborate, ornate; notable;
costly, expensive, precious, dear; arrogant, haughty, proud, masterly,
lordly; high, loud, violent; irreverent, sacrilegious, blatant; elated,
excited; intensified._

=Lower=, _v._ Depress, sink, reduce, diminish, humble; let down, drop;
degrade, disgrace, debase; lessen.

ANT. _Raise, exalt, elevate, hoist; increase, aggrandize._

=Lower=, _a._ Inferior.

ANT. _Higher, superior, more influential._

=Lowering.= Gloomy, threatening, sullen; cloudy, overcast, murky, dark.

ANT. _Clear, bright, light; vaporless._

=Lowly.= Low, humble, unimportant, meek, modest; mean, unpretending,
mild.

ANT. _Lofty, eminent, proud, arrogant, lordly, haughty, elevated;
supercilious, conceited, pretentious._

=Loyal.= Faithful, true, constant, devoted, staunch, trusty, obedient,
submissive.

ANT. _Inconstant, untrue, traitorous, mutinous, seditious, insurgent,
insubmissive, rebellious, disobedient, unfaithful, disaffected,
dastardly._

=Loyalty.= Allegiance, fidelity, fealty, faithfulness, constancy.

ANT. _Treason, treachery, unfaithfulness, disloyalty; sedition,
rebellion, inconstancy, insurrection._

=Lucid.= Luminous, transparent, sane, reasonable; shining, resplendent,
bright; clear; radiant, brilliant; limpid, lucent; distinct,
intelligible, perspicuous, sober, sound.

ANT. _Dark, opaque, muddy, black, somber, turbid, obscure; indistinct,
unintelligible, mystifying, insane, unsound, confused, involved;
illegible._

=Luck.= Chance, hap, fate, fortune, hazard, casualty, accident; success,
good fortune.

ANT. _Rule, law, causation, purpose, design, certainty; fate._

=Luckless.= Unfortunate, unsuccessful, unlucky, ill-fated, unprosperous,
ill-starred, unpropitious, unhappy.

=Lucky.= Fortunate, successful, auspicious, prosperous, happy, favored,
blessed.

=Lucrative.= Profitable, gainful, paying, remunerative.

ANT. _Disadvantageous, unremunerative, unprofitable, useless, fruitless,
vain, unproductive._

=Lucre.= Gain, profit, riches, pelf, emolument, greed, mammon.

ANT. _Loss, poverty, failure, privation._

=Lucubration.= Nocturnal study, meditation, speculation, cogitation.

ANT. _Idleness, dulness, stupidity, torpor, vacuity._

=Ludicrous.= Laughable, comic, burlesque, droll, sportive, ridiculous,
comical, odd, funny, farcical, absurd.

ANT. _Grave, serious, important, momentous; sad, sorrowful, melancholy,
tragic, mournful, lugubrious._

=Lugubrious.= Mournful, woful, pitiable, doleful, sad, sorrowful,
melancholy, complaining.

ANT. _Ludicrous, droll, ridiculous, comic, witty, jovial, absurd, funny,
laughable, comical._

=Lull=, _v._ Compose, calm, quiet, soothe, hush, tranquilize, still.

ANT. _Excite, aggravate, incite, stimulate, exasperate, provoke,
inflame._

=Luminous.= Shining, brilliant, bright; illuminated; enlightened,
intelligent, clear, intelligible.

ANT. _Dark, black, gloomy; unintelligible, unintelligent, involved,
mixed, confused._

=Lunacy.= Derangement, mania, craziness, insanity, madness, aberration.

ANT. _Sanity, intellect, reason, rationality, lucidity, intelligence,
brains; mind; self-control._

=Lunatic=, _n._ Insane person, maniac, madman.

ANT. _Philosopher, sage, luminary, savant, scholar, scientist,
intellectual person._

=Lunatic=, _a._ Insane, mad, crazy, cracked, deranged.

ANT. _Sane, rational, intelligent, reasonable, reasoning, intellectual,
knowing, sound._

=Lure=, _n._ Enticement, decoy; allurement, bait, temptation,
attraction.

=Lure=, _v._ Allure, entice, decoy, tempt, attract, inveigle, seduce.

ANT. _Warn, guide, alarm, premonish, ward, instruct, conduct, guard;
extricate, save._

=Lurid.= Yellow, pale, wan, dismal, ghastly, gloomy, murky, lowering.

ANT. _Bright, luminous, radiant, clear._

=Lurk.= Lie hid, lie in wait, hide, skulk.

ANT. _Rise, spring, emerge, appear, reveal._

=Luscious.= Sweet, delicious, fulsome, cloying, savory, delightful,
pleasing, grateful; sugary, honeyed; rank, nauseous, unctuous.

ANT. _Sour, sharp, tart, bitter, pungent, acid._

=Luster.= Brilliancy, brightness, splendor, glitter; renown,
distinction, glory; gleam, radiance, resplendence; eminence, repute,
celebrity, honor.

ANT. _Darkness, tenebrosity, blackness, gloom, obscuration; detraction,
derogation, infamy, disrepute, dishonor, notoriety._

=Lustration.= Washing, purification, cleansing; lustrum.

ANT. _Defilement, contamination, infection, desecration; soiling,
pollution._

=Lustrous.= Bright, shiny, gleaming, luminous, brilliant, radiant.

ANT. _Dark, black, gloomy._

=Lusty.= Stout, strong, vigorous, robust, healthful, able, lively,
sturdy; bulky, large, fat.

ANT. _Weak, infirm, feeble, incapable, ailing, effete, listless,
invalid, powerless, convalescent._

=Luxuriant.= Exuberant, excessive, rank, abundant, profuse, plentiful,
plenteous.

ANT. _Delicate, frail, scanty, scarce, feeble._

=Luxuriate.= Grow exuberantly, feed luxuriously; flourish, indulge;
revel, wanton; delight, indulge to excess.

ANT. _Toil, slave, drudge, labor, work; pine, waste, droop, decay,
languish._

=Luxurious.= Voluptuous, epicurean, sensual, intemperate, effeminate,
self-indulgent.

ANT. _Austere, ascetic, hard, painful, self-denying, self-controlled,
temperate, restrained, restricted._

=Luxury.= Voluptuousness, epicurism, effeminacy, sensuality; dainty,
delicacy, gratification; pleasure, enjoyment, delight; treat, animalism.

ANT. _Stoicism, asceticism, self-denial, austerity, hardship;
spirituality._

=Lying=, _a._ False, mendacious, untruthful, untrue; recumbent.

ANT. _Truthful, true, veracious, upright, honest, accurate, exact;
erect._




                                   M


=Macerate.= Weaken, soften; attenuate, make lean, waste, wear away;
harass, mortify, torture; steep, soak, digest.

ANT. _Fatten, replenish, repair, pamper, swell._

=Machinate.= Plan, contrive, devise, plot, scheme, harm.

ANT. _Think aloud, speak out, be artless; counterplot, compete; expose,
defeat, baffle._

=Machination.= Plot, conspiracy, intrigue, cabal, stratagem, design,
trick, artifice, contrivance, scheme.

ANT. _Detection, counteraction, overthrow, baffling, defeat, exposure,
defiance, challenge; conflict, competition._

=Machine.= Engine, instrument; tool, puppet; organization, machinery,
system, supernatural agency.

=Maculate=, _a._ Blotched, defiled, impure, spotted, blurred, corrupt,
unclean, mottled.

ANT. _Unspotted, spotless, speckless, pure, clean, immaculate._

=Mad.= Crazy, insane; excited, inflamed, furious, rabid, angry;
distracted, lunatic, delirious, crazed, deranged, demented, maniac;
enraged, raging; exasperated, provoked, incensed, wrathful; wild,
infatuated; frenzied, frantic, raving.

ANT. _Sane, sound, sensible, quiet, composed, sober, unexcited._

=Madden.= Make mad, enrage; irritate, provoke, inflame, infuriate.

ANT. _Calm, pacify, assuage, mesmerize; heal, soothe, restore._

=Madness.= Insanity, craziness, derangement, mania, aberration; frenzy,
fury, rage, delirium.

ANT. _Sanity, calmness, rationality, soberness, reason._

=Magazine.= Warehouse, receptacle, storehouse, depository, repository;
periodical.

=Magic.= Sorcery, witchcraft, conjuration, necromancy, enchantment,
incantation; fascination, witchery, charm.

=Magisterial.= Stately, pompous, august, lordly, dignified, lofty,
official, imperious, proud, domineering, haughty, despotic, arrogant,
dogmatical; dictatorial, consequential, imposing, authoritative.

ANT. _Submissive, docile, undignified, unimposing, unassuming, modest._

=Magistrate.= Judge; civil _or_ police officer, chief official.

ANT. _Citizen, prisoner, civilian, subject._

=Magnanimity.= Generosity, disinterestedness, greatness, heroism,
nobleness, forbearance.

ANT. _Meanness, pettiness, paltriness, spitefulness, spleen._

=Magnanimous.= Great, elevated, generous, lofty, noble, courageous;
brave, dauntless, heroic, illustrious; unselfish, exalted, chivalrous,
high-minded, honorable.

ANT. _Mean, small, ignoble, base, selfish, cowardly, cringing; mediocre;
parsimonious, carping._

=Magnificent.= Glorious, grand, majestic, splendid, admirable, superb,
sublime; imposing, gorgeous, stately, showy; august, dignified.

ANT. _Petty, mean, paltry, little, flat, beggarly, ordinary,
small-minded, tawdry, unimposing, tame._

=Magnify.= Enlarge, augment, increase, amplify; laud, extol; exaggerate;
celebrate, glorify, bless, praise.

ANT. _Diminish, curtail, contract, palliate, extenuate, decry._

=Magniloquent.= Pompous, grandiloquent, bombastic, declamatory, stilted,
high-flown, turgid, inflated, boastful.

ANT. _Simple, vernacular, unaffected, plain-spoken._

=Magnitude.= Extent, size; grandeur, greatness; importance; volume,
dimension, mass; consequence; sublimity, loftiness.

ANT. _Smallness, diminutiveness, littleness, meagerness; insignificance,
meanness, unimportance._

=Maid.= Maiden, girl, damsel, virgin, lass.

ANT. _Matron, married woman._

=Maim.= Disable, cripple, mangle, mar, mutilate, disfigure, lame.

ANT. _Restore, strengthen, invigorate, mend._

=Main=, _a._ Bulk, majority, body, principal, trunk, chief, leading,
most important, first, cardinal, capital; necessary, vital, essential,
indispensable, requisite; huge, enormous; absolute, entire, mere,
direct.

ANT. _Subordinate, non-essential, auxiliary, minor, tributary,
inferior._

=Main=, _n._ Ocean, mainland, continent; main conduit or pipe; force,
power, might, strength; gross, majority.

ANT. _Bay, gulf; island; inability, weakness; tributaries; minority._

=Mainly.= Chiefly, principally; largely, greatly, mightily, absolutely,
primarily, entirely.

ANT. _Secondarily, subordinately; partially, somewhat, slightly._

=Maintain.= Uphold, assert, vindicate, allege, support, sustain; defend,
continue; supply; provide; affirm.

ANT. _Retract, deny, withdraw; fail, turn traitor to._

=Maintenance.= Sustenance, support, vindication, defense, justification,
provisions, subsistence, livelihood.

=Majestic.= August, sublime, magnificent, regal, royal, pompous,
stately, dignified, elevated, imperial, princely, grand, imposing.

ANT. _Low, humble, mean, sordid, groveling; plebeian, vulgar, common;
unassuming._

=Majesty.= Dignity, power, authority, loftiness, stateliness,
augustness, grandeur, elevation.

ANT. _Meanness, paltriness; humility._

=Majority.= Superiority, seniority; eldership, priority; bulk,
preponderance.

ANT. _Minority, inferiority, juniority._

=Make.= Produce, falsify; find; acquire; travel over; cause; esteem,
suppose, represent; compel, force; be; amount to; attain, reach, arrive
at; manage, interfere; proceed, tend, move, go; contribute, increase,
accrue, constrain, bring about, occasion, require; shape, fabricate,
construct, fashion, frame, manufacture, perform, do; become, compose,
constitute, create, establish, effect, execute, reach, get, render.

ANT. _Abolish, demolish, annihilate, break, disintegrate, unmake, undo;
destroy, defeat, mar, disestablish, miss, lose, fail of; upset;
misrepresent, mismanage; hesitate, stop; decrease, diminish._

=Maker.= Creator, former, manufacturer, builder, constructor; author,
composer, writer, compiler.

ANT. _Destroyer, exterminator, annihilator._

=Make up.= Collect; constitute, form; reconcile, settle, adjust,
compose; make good, compensate; supply, furnish, provide; determine.

ANT. _Distribute, disperse, scatter; pi; default._

=Mal-= or =Male-=. A prefix denoting _ill_. For words thus compounded
and not found here, see the synonyms and antonyms of the root word, from
which derivatives may be readily chosen.

=Malady.= Disorder, distemper, disease, sickness, ailment, illness;
complaint, indisposition.

ANT. _Health, sanity, vigor, robustness, soundness._

=Malediction.= Curse, cursing, execration, imprecation, denunciation,
anathema.

ANT. _Benediction, blessing, praise, compliment._

=Malefactor.= Evil-doer, culprit, felon, criminal, convict, outlaw.

ANT. _Benefactor, hero._

=Malice.= Spite, ill will, malevolence, grudge, pique, bitterness,
animosity, malignity, rancor, maliciousness, virulence.

ANT. _Good will, benevolence, kindliness._

=Manacle=, _n._ Handcuff, shackle, fetter.

=Manacle=, _v._ Handcuff, shackle, fetter, bind, chain.

ANT. _Unbind, unfetter, unchain._

=Manage.= Direct, govern, control, wield, order, contrive, concert,
conduct, transact; administer, regulate, supervise, superintend, handle,
rule.

ANT. _Mismanage, misgovern, misconduct, upset, misuse, derange; let go._

=Manageable.= Tractable, governable, controllable, tamable, docile.

ANT. _Unmanageable, untamable, uncontrollable, ungovernable, difficult,
impracticable, impossible, refractory._

=Management.= Conduct, administration, government, guidance, direction,
care, charge, contrivance, intrigue; skill, address; economy, treatment,
superintendence, surveillance; negotiations, dealings, transactions.

ANT. _Misconduct, maladministration, mismanagement._

=Manager.= Director, superintendent, supervisor, comptroller, governor,
overseer, conductor; economist.

ANT. _Workman, follower, workingman, employee._

=Mandate.= Command, commission, order, charge, precept, injunction,
requirement, edict.

ANT. _Petition, request, entreaty, suggestion._

=Maneuver= (=Manœuvre=), _n._ Management; stratagem, artifice, scheme,
plan, trick, ruse, intrigue; evolution, movement; operation, tactics,
contrivance.

ANT. _Countermovement, defeat, check, bafflement, counteraction,
detection, neutralization._

=Maneuver=, _v._ Perform an evolution, move; scheme, plot, intrigue,
manage, contrive.

ANT. _Counteract, play up to, check, checkmate._

=Mangle.= Cut, bruise, mutilate, lacerate, maim, hack, tear; destroy,
mar, spoil; polish, calender, smooth, press.

ANT. _Restore, heal._

=Manhood.= Virility, maturity; humanity; courage, resolution, bravery,
hardihood, fortitude, manliness, manfulness.

ANT. _Womanhood, femininity; effeminacy; cowardliness, cowardice,
delicacy._

=Mania.= Insanity, derangement, madness, lunacy, aberration, alienation,
delirium, frenzy.

ANT. _Sanity, health, soundness; poise, self-control._

=Maniac.= Lunatic, madman, insane, bedlamite.

=Manifest=, _a._ Open, clear, evident, apparent, visible, conspicuous,
plain, obvious; patent, palpable, unmistakable, distinct, indubitable.

ANT. _Hidden, indistinct, inconspicuous, occult, latent, obscure,
confused, hazy, foggy._

=Manifest=, _v._ Reveal, declare, evince, make known, disclose,
discover, display, show, exhibit, evidence, expose.

ANT. _Hide, cover, conceal._

=Manifold.= Various, duplicate, multiplied; numerous, many,
multitudinous; diverse, multifarious; sundry.

ANT. _Few, rare, limited, scarce, scant; uniform, facsimile._

=Mankind.= Man; humanity, humankind; men; society.

ANT. _Womankind; childhood; divinity, deity, Heaven, God; earth, world,
universe, nature, creation; cattle, animals, minerals, vegetables._

=Manly.= Bold, daring, valorous, courageous, undaunted, hardy,
dignified; intrepid, heroic, vigorous, firm, noble, chivalrous; mature,
masculine, manlike.

ANT. _Womanly, childlike; timid, womanish, childish, unmanly, boyish,
weak, dastardly, cowardly; effeminate._

=Manner.= Mode, custom, habit, deportment, fashion, air, look, mien,
aspect, appearance; behavior, conduct; method, form, style.

ANT. _Being, action, proceeding, life, work, performance, project,
business._

=Mannerism.= Characteristic, peculiarity, uniformity, self-repetition,
self-consciousness, affectation, idiosyncrasy, specialty.

ANT. _Unaffectedness, simplicity, naturalness, character, genuineness._

=Mannerly.= Civil, complaisant, respectful, courteous, polite, urbane,
refined, well-behaved, ceremonious, well-bred.

ANT. _Rude, coarse, unmannerly, rough, impolite, uncivil, boorish._

=Manufacture=, _n._ Making, production, fabrication; product,
composition, construction, manipulation, molding.

ANT. _Use, consumption, employment, wear._

=Manumission.= Release, emancipation, liberation, deliverance,
enfranchisement, dismissal, discharge.

ANT. _Slavery, capture, subjugation; restraint, repression, coercion._

=Manumit.= Release, liberate, enfranchise, free, emancipate.

ANT. _Enslave, capture, subjugate, enthral._

=Many.= Frequent, manifold, diverse, divers, sundry, numerous,
multiplied, various, abundant, multifarious.

ANT. _Few, rare, scarce, infrequent, scanty._

=Mar.= Injure, mark, spoil, ruin, blemish, damage, disfigure, deface,
hurt, harm, impair, maim, deform.

ANT. _Make, mend, restore, improve, reinstate, enhance, repair,
conserve._

=Marauder.= Plunderer, robber, ravager, pillager, outlaw, bandit,
brigand, freebooter, rover, invader.

ANT. _Guard, sentry, keeper, steward, ranger, outpost._

=Margin.= Border, edge, brim, lip, rim, brink, verge, confine, limit,
skirt, boundary, extremity; loophole, profit, interest, leeway.

ANT. _Center, main, space; limitation, stringency, restriction._

=Marine.= Naval, nautical, maritime; oceanic, salt-water, pelagic.

ANT. _Terrene, fresh-water, terrestrial, land._

=Marital.= Connubial, nuptial, hymeneal, conjugal, wedded, matrimonial.

ANT. _Single, unwedded, celibate._

=Maritime.= Marine, oceanic, nautical.

ANT. _Terrene, land._

=Mark=, _n._ Impress, stamp, vestige, impression, imprint, track,
evidence, proof, characteristic, badge, indication; distinction,
eminence, importance.

ANT. _Effacement, obliteration, erasure, plainness._

=Mark=, _v._ Remark, notice, regard, heed, show, betoken, characterize,
denote, stamp, imprint, impress, brand; label, designate, observe,
stigmatize, signalize, specify, specialize; decorate.

ANT. _Overlook, ignore, omit; mislabel, misindicate, mismark._

=Marked.= Noted, notable, prominent, remarkable, eminent, distinguished,
conspicuous.

ANT. _Ordinary, mean, commonplace, everyday, undistinguished._

=Marriage.= Matrimony, wedlock, wedding, espousal, nuptials, conjugal
union, spousal, union.

ANT. _Divorce, celibacy, virginity, bachelorhood, widowhood,
maidenhood._

=Marrow.= Medulla, pith, essence, quintessence; gist, substance, cream,
kernel.

ANT. _Excrescence, surplusage, redundancy, superfluity; surface,
exterior; amplification; body, volume, mass._

=Marsh.= Fen, swamp, quagmire, morass, bog, slough.

ANT. _Solid ground._

=Marshal=, _v._ Order, arrange, direct, guide, lead, rank, array,
dispose, draw up; herald.

ANT. _Disarray, misguide, disarrange, disorder._

=Martial.= Warlike, military, soldierly, brave.

ANT. _Peaceful, unmilitary, unwarlike._

=Martyrdom.= Martyrlike state; torture, torment, persecution;
confession.

ANT. _Denial, retraction; abjuration, renegation._

=Marvel=, _n._ Wonder, prodigy, miracle; surprise, astonishment,
amazement, admiration; portent, phenomenon.

ANT. _Commonplace, imposture, cipher, farce, trifle._

=Marvelous.= Wonderful, astonishing, surprising, strange, improbable,
incredible; miraculous, stupendous, extraordinary, wondrous,
supernatural, portentous, prodigious.

ANT. _Commonplace, everyday, regular, normal, customary, natural,
anticipated, current, calculated, expected._

=Masculine.= Male, manly, virile, manlike; strong, robust, powerful,
bold, hardy, courageous.

ANT. _Feminine, womanly, womanlike, female; effeminate, womanish._

=Mask=, _n._ Cover, disguise, pretext, subterfuge, screen; revel,
frolic, evasion, pretense, ruse, plea; redoubt; domino, blind, veil;
hypocrisy.

ANT. _Truth, nakedness, candor, verity, openness; exposure, detection,
unmasking._

=Mask=, _v._ Disguise, cover, hide, protect, conceal, veil, shroud,
screen.

ANT. _Expose, unmask, discover, detect._

=Mass.= Quantity, sum, bulk, magnitude, body, size, main part, majority;
aggregate, whole, totality; heap, assemblage, combination, concretion.

ANT. _Fragment, section, portion, bit, morsel, minority, segment._

=Massacre=, _v._ Murder, butcher, kill, slaughter, slay.

ANT. _Preserve, spare, rescue, restore._

=Massive.= Compacted, weighty, heavy, massy, ponderous, bulky, huge,
immense, vast, solid, colossal.

ANT. _Slight, slender, frail, airy; petty, small, light._

=Master=, _n._ Ruler, director, manager, leader, employer, owner,
governor, superintendent, commander, captain; teacher, instructor,
tutor; adept; possessor, proprietor; professor, head, chief.

ANT. _Servant, slave, pupil, employee, subject, learner, student._

=Master=, _v._ Conquer, subdue, vanquish, overcome; acquire, learn.

ANT. _Yield, fail, surrender, succumb._

=Masterly.= Imperious, domineering, arbitrary, despotic; skilful,
clever, expert, dexterous, adroit; finished, excellent, artistic,
consummate.

ANT. _Humble, obedient, compliant, rude, clumsy, bungling._

=Mastery.= Authority, dominion, supremacy; victory, triumph,
preëminence, ascendency, superiority; acquirement, attainment,
acquisition; skill, dexterity, cleverness, ability.

ANT. _Subservience, tutelage, submission, guidance, obedience,
inexpertness, ignorance; defeat, failure, surrender._

=Masticate.= Grind, chew.

ANT. _Bolt, gobble, swallow._

=Match=, _n._ Equal, mate; contest; union, marriage; competition, trial;
companion; pair.

ANT. _Superior, inferior; disparity, mismatch, oddity, inequality._

=Match=, _v._ Mate, rival, oppose, equal; correspond; adapt, fit, suit;
marry; harmonize; join, couple, combine.

ANT. _Fail, exceed, surpass, preponderate; separate, dissociate._

=Matchless.= Unequaled, peerless, unparalleled, incomparable,
inimitable, consummate, exquisite, excellent, surpassing, unrivaled.

ANT. _Common, ordinary, mediocre, everyday, commonplace, general._

=Mate=, _n._ Companion, associate, compeer, match, equal; fellow,
intimate; assistant, subordinate; peer.

ANT. _Stranger; superior, inferior; principal, chief, head._

=Material=, _n._ Substance, solidity, weight, stuff, matter.

ANT. _Work, production, design; spirit, purpose._

=Material=, _a._ Corporeal, physical; important, essential; momentous,
vital, weighty; bodily.

ANT. _Spiritual, sublimated, incorporeal, evanescent, ethereal._

=Matrimony.= Marriage, wedlock.

ANT. _Celibacy, virginity._

=Matron.= Wife, widow, dame; housekeeper, head nurse; dowager.

ANT. _Girl, maid, maiden, virgin, spinster, miss, lass._

=Matter.= Substance, body, material, constituency; concern, affair,
business; trouble, difficulty; amount, portion, space; sense,
significance, moment; import, importance; topic, subject, question;
thing, event.

ANT. _Immateriality, incorporeality, spirituality; mind, soul, spirit,
intellect; animus, zeal, temper._

=Mature.= Ripe, perfect, ready, perfected, completed, full-grown.

ANT. _Raw, crude, blighted, immature, undeveloped, unripe._

=Matutinal.= Morning, dawning, early, waking.

ANT. _Vesper, evening, late, waning, twilight._

=Maudlin.= Tearful, sentimental, weak, silly; drunken; intoxicated,
inebriated, tipsy, muddled.

ANT. _Dry, sober, sensible, unsentimental, unromantic._

=Mawkish.= Nauseous, disgusted, squeamish; insipid, flat, stale, sickly,
disgusting, loathsome, maudlin.

ANT. _Sensible, savory, fine, sound, palatable, pungent._

=Maxim.= Principle, axiom, proverb, aphorism, apothegm, adage, saying,
saw, dictum, precept, rule.

ANT. _Sophism, quibble, absurdity, enigma, paradox._

=Maximum.= Greatest; climax, zenith, apex, acme, culmination,
completion, utmost, ultimate.

ANT. _Minimum, least; morsel, fragment; initiative, commencement;
decrease, wane; incompletion, abortion._

=Maybe=, _ad._ Perhaps, possibly, haply, mayhap.

=Maze.= Labyrinth, intricacy; bewilderment, uncertainty, perplexity;
embarrassment.

ANT. _Clue, elimination, explication; solution._

=Meager.= Thin, lean, lank, poor, gaunt, starved, hungry, emaciated,
barren, scanty.

ANT. _Stout, brawny, fat, chubby; abundant, fertile, copious._

=Mean=, _n._ Middle, medium, average, intermediate point; (_pl._)
resources, property, revenue; media.

ANT. _Extreme, excess, exorbitance, enormity, extravagance; poverty,
end, purpose, object._

=Mean=, _v._ Purpose, intend, design; signify, import, indicate, denote,
express.

ANT. _Do, perform, execute; say, state, enunciate, declare._

=Mean=, _a._ Ignoble, abject, beggarly, wretched, degraded, degenerate,
vulgar, vile, servile, menial, groveling, slavish, dishonorable,
disgraceful, shameful, despicable, contemptible, paltry, sordid.

ANT. _Noble, kingly, heroic, princely, exalted, generous, eminent,
honorable, spirited, liberal, masterly, worthy, bountiful, munificent._

=Meaning.= Purpose, aim, intention, import, design, object; sense,
explanation, significance, interpretation, force, purport, acceptation.

ANT. _Statement; proceeding; affidavit, declaration._

=Meanness.= Stinginess, illiberality, sordidness, vileness,
penuriousness, niggardliness, abjectness, baseness; destitution,
poverty, lowness, scantiness, smallness, rudeness, selfishness.

ANT. _Nobleness, generosity, unselfishness, liberality,
large-heartedness._

=Measure=, _n._ Dimension, capacity, quantity, amount; moderation,
restraint; extent, limit, proportion, degree; rule, gage, standard;
meter.

ANT. _Bulk, mass; segment, section, portion; immensity, infinity._

=Measureless.= Unlimited, infinite, immeasurable, immense, boundless,
limitless, vast, unbounded.

ANT. _Circumscribed, finite, limited, bounded, restricted._

=Mechanic.= Artificer, artisan, handicraftsman, hand, craftsman,
operative, workman.

ANT. _Artist, designer, planner, architect, constructor._

=Mechanical.= Approximate, empirical; machine-made; automatic,
involuntary, blind; habitual, unreflective, spontaneous, effortless,
unimpassioned.

ANT. _Labored, feeling, self-conscious, forced, spirited, appreciative,
lifelike, lively, animated, impassioned._

=Meddle.= Interfere, handle, disturb; intrude, interpose, intervene,
intercede; mediate, arbitrate.

ANT. _Withdraw, retire, remove, recede, retreat._

=Meddlesome.= Meddling, intrusive, officious; pragmatical, interfering;
impertinent, obtrusive.

ANT. _Unobtrusive, modest, unofficious, shy, retiring, unassuming,
reserved._

=Mediate=, _v._ Intervene, reconcile, interpose, intercede, arbitrate.

ANT. _Retire, withdraw, let be, leave, abandon._

=Mediation.= Interposition, intercession, intervention, arbitration,
interference, adjustment, reconciliation.

ANT. _Indifference, neutrality; non-interference._

=Mediator.= Reconciler, intercessor, interceder, advocate, umpire,
propitiator.

=Medicament.= Remedy, specific, medicine, cure, relief, help,
restorative.

ANT. _Irritant, infection, aggravation, hurt, disease._

=Medicate.= Drug, treat, heal, cure.

ANT. _Harm, infect; catch, contract._

=Medicine=, _n._ Drug, physic, remedy, medicament; antidote, corrective,
salve, cure; therapeutics.

ANT. _Poison, virus, bane; aggravation._

=Mediocre.= Moderate, indifferent, ordinary, mean, medium, average,
middling, commonplace.

ANT. _Superior, inferior, extraordinary, distinguished, distinctive._

=Mediocrity.= Inferiority, average, moderate or middle state, medium;
moderation; commonplace, mean; sufficiency.

ANT. _Excellence, superiority, distinction, brilliance, rarity._

=Meditate.= Consider, ponder, revolve, study, weigh, plan, contrive,
devise, scheme, purpose, intend; contemplate, muse, reflect, think,
cogitate.

ANT. _Execute, enact, complete, consummate._

=Medium=, _n._ Middle, mean; moderation, average; proportion; mediator,
intermediary; means, agency, instrumentality.

=Medium=, _a._ Middle, mean, middling, intermediate, medial, mediocre,
central.

ANT. _Outer, extreme, distant, remote._

=Medley.= Mixture, jumble, miscellany, potpourri, hodge-podge; tumult,
confusion, litter, diversity, complexity.

ANT. _Order, harmony, simplicity; arrangement, classification,
assortment, disposition, grouping._

=Meed.= Merit, reward, recompense; worth, desert; guerdon, premium,
prize, award, remuneration; gift, present.

ANT. _Penalty, punishment, brand, stigma, amercement._

=Meek.= Submissive, yielding, unassuming, gentle; mild, patient, humble;
lowly, modest.

ANT. _Bold, arrogant, proud, self-assertive, irritable, presumptuous,
high-spirited._

=Meet=, _v._ Join; confront, encounter; be present; perceive,
experience, suffer; equal, satisfy; assemble, congregate; harmonize,
agree, unite; fulfil, comply, gratify, answer.

ANT. _Miss, escape, elude; be absent; avoid, separate, vary, diverge,
decline, part, disagree; disappoint, fall short, fail._

=Meet=, _a._ Suitable, fit, proper, appropriate, qualified, convenient.

ANT. _Inappropriate, unfit, inconvenient, unsuited, improper._

=Meeting.= Conference, assembly, company, convention, congregation,
junction, union, confluence; interview, encounter; assemblage,
concourse, gathering.

=Melancholy=, _n._ Melancholia; depression, dejection, brooding,
gloominess.

ANT. _Happiness, gladness, sanity, merriment, mirth, cheer,
hopefulness._

=Melancholy=, _a._ Sad, dispirited, low-spirited, down-hearted, unhappy,
hypochondriac, heavy, doleful, afflictive; dejected, depressed,
disconsolate, gloomy, sorrowful, moody, desponding; grave, somber, dark.

ANT. _Happy, cheerful, gladsome, sprightly, lively, merry, mirthful,
blithesome, gleeful._

=Mellifluous.= Smooth, honeyed, sweet, mellow, euphonious, silvery,
dulcet.

ANT. _Raucous, hoarse, discordant, harsh, rough, broken, abrupt._

=Mellow.= Ripe, soft, tender; subdued, delicate; genial, jovial.

ANT. _Unripe, hard, green, acid, sour; harsh, glaring; discordant._

=Melodious.= Musical, agreeable, harmonious, dulcet, sweet, tuneful,
rhythmical, concordant, mellifluous.

ANT. _Discordant, harsh, dissonant, raucous, jarring, inharmonious._

=Melody.= Harmony, rhythm, air, tune, music, song, sweetness of sound,
descant, theme, unison, symphony.

ANT. _Discord, jarring, dissonance, harshness, discordance._

=Melt.= Liquefy, fuse, thaw, mollify, soften; be dissipated, run, blend,
flow, dissolve.

ANT. _Harden, combine, consolidate, unite, crystallize._

=Member.= Organ, limb; constituent, part; clause, phrase; essential;
portion, component.

ANT. _Whole, body, entirety, aggregate, sum, totality, community,
society, association, organization, constitution._

=Memoir.= Memorial, biography, record, narrative, chronicle, register.

=Memorable.= Important, illustrious, remarkable, extraordinary, signal,
distinguished, famous, celebrated, great, conspicuous, prominent.

ANT. _Ordinary, trivial, commonplace, insignificant, mediocre._

=Memorial.= Monument, record, memorandum, memento, souvenir.

ANT. _Silence, oblivion; non-observance; erasure._

=Memory.= Remembrance, recollection, reminiscence; fame, renown,
reputation; monument; retrospection, retrospect; perpetuation,
retention.

ANT. _Oblivion, oversight, unmindfulness, obliviousness, forgetfulness._

=Menace=, _n._ Threat, evil intention, denunciation, threatening.

ANT. _Good will, benediction, blessing, kindness; protection._

=Mend.= Help, amend, emend, correct, rectify; repair, improve, reform,
better, restore, ameliorate.

ANT. _Impair, damage, spoil, corrupt; harm, deteriorate, pervert._

=Mendacity.= Lying, deceit, falsehood, untruth, duplicity, lie,
untruthfulness, deception; prevarication.

ANT. _Truth, honesty, rectitude, uprightness, veracity, accuracy,
exactness._

=Menial.= Servile, mean; domestic; dependent, attendant.

ANT. _Noble, independent, autocratic, supreme, superior._

=Mental.= Intellectual, spiritual, metaphysical, subjective,
psychological, psychical, intelligent.

ANT. _Physical, corporeal, objective, bodily._

=Mention=, _n._ Reference, allusion, notice, remembrance, hint,
communication, observation, declaration.

ANT. _Omission, silence, suppression, forgetfulness, neglect._

=Mention=, _v._ Speak of, notice, announce, observe, remark, hint,
declare, tell, state, report, disclose, allude to, name, refer to.

ANT. _Suppress, omit, be silent about, forget, silence, drop, neglect,
disregard, slight._

=Mercantile=. Commercial, traffic, business; wholesale, retail;
interchangeable, marketable.

ANT. _Professional; unmercantile, unmarketable, stagnant, unprofitable._

=Mercenary.= Paid, hired, hireling, venal; greedy, sordid, avaricious,
selfish.

ANT. _Generous, unselfish, lavish, prodigal, liberal, philanthropic,
benevolent._

=Merchandise.= Wares, commodities, goods; trade, traffic, commerce;
stock.

=Merchant.= Trader, shopkeeper, dealer, tradesman, trafficker; importer.

ANT. _Shopman, salesman, retailer, pedler, huckster._

=Merciful.= Compassionate, tender, humane, gracious, kind, mild,
clement, benignant, lenient, pitiful, forgiving; tender-hearted.

ANT. _Remorseless, pitiless, inexorable, unrelenting, severe, cruel,
hard, illiberal._

=Mercy.= Compassion, grace, favor, helpfulness, clemency, forbearance,
tenderness, forgiveness, gentleness, pardon, blessing, pity, kindness,
mildness, lenity, benevolence, benignity, lenience, leniency.

ANT. _Harshness, rigor, severity, sternness, penalty, justice,
vengeance, revenge, punishment, hardness, cruelty, implacability,
ruthlessness, inhumanity, brutality, exaction._

=Mere.= Unmixed, pure, absolute, unqualified, simple, bare, unaffected;
unadulterated.

ANT. _Compound, mixed, impure, blended, combined, adulterated._

=Meridian=, _n._ Midday, noon, zenith, height, culmination, summit,
apex, pinnacle, acme.

ANT. _Midnight, antipodes, depth, profundity, base, depression, nadir._

=Merit=, _n._ Desert, worth, excellence, reward, approbation;
worthiness, credit, goodness.

ANT. _Worthlessness, error, unworthiness, demerit, weakness,
imperfection, fault._

=Merry.= Gay, jovial, sportive; cheerful, happy; blithe, lively,
sprightly, vivacious, mirthful, gleeful, joyous, jocund, hilarious.

ANT. _Gloomy, sad, disconsolate, dismal, moody, dejected._

=Message.= Notice, word, communication, missive, letter, intimation.

ANT. _Interception, silence, non-communication, neglect._

=Messenger.= Carrier, harbinger, intelligencer, courier, forerunner,
herald, precursor.

=Metaphysical.= Mental, intellectual, psychological, abstract, general,
ideal, psychical, subjective, rational, abstruse, conceptual.

ANT. _Physical, substantial, physiological, material, practical,
objective, palpable, external._

=Method.= Order, system, rule, way, manner, mode, course, arrangement,
process, means, regularity.

ANT. _Disorder, experimentation, guesswork, conjecture, attempt,
empiricism._

=Midst.= Middle, center, heart; thick; press; burden.

ANT. _Circumference, rim, surface, border, outside, perimeter._

=Mien.= Aspect, manner, bearing, look, carriage, deportment, appearance.

ANT. _Character, disposition, nature, constitution, personality._

=Might.= Force, energy, power, means, resources; strength, capacity,
ability.

ANT. _Weakness, feebleness, infirmity, impotence; inability,
inefficiency, incapability; want, lack._

=Mild.= Gentle, pleasant, clement, kind, soft, bland; moderate, placid,
tender, genial, meek.

ANT. _Harsh, fierce, savage, rough, wild, violent, merciless, severe._

=Mind.= Understanding, intellect, soul; opinion, judgment, belief;
choice, inclination, liking, intent, will; courage, spirit; remembrance,
memory, recollection; reason, brain, sense, consciousness, disposition,
intelligence, thought, instinct.

ANT. _Body, matter, brute force, brawn, limbs, material substance,
members; feelings, emotions, heart, affections, sensibilities; conduct;
forgetfulness, obliviousness._

=Mindful.= Regardful, attentive, heedful, observant, thoughtful,
careful.

ANT. _Inattentive, regardless, careless, forgetful, oblivious,
absent-minded._

=Mingle.= Combine, join, confuse, compound, mix; unite, associate;
intermarry; blend, amalgamate.

ANT. _Separate, sever, segregate, dissolve, sift, sort, classify,
analyze._

=Minister=, _n._ Delegate, official, ambassador; clergyman, priest,
parson, ecclesiastic, preacher, divine, vicar, curate; envoy.

ANT. _Monarch, master, superior, principal; layman; government._

=Minor=, _a._ Inferior, less important, smaller, less, junior,
unimportant, younger.

ANT. _Major, greater, older, senior, elder, main, important._

=Minute.= Small, tiny, slender, diminutive, slight, little; precise,
particular, detailed, critical, circumstantial, exact, fine, comminuted,
specific; inconsiderable; microscopic.

ANT. _Monstrous, great, enormous, grand, huge; general, abstract, broad,
comprehensive; inexact, superficial._

=Miraculous.= Supernatural, super-physical; wonderful, awesome.

ANT. _Natural, ordinary, scientific._

=Mis-.= A prefix used in the sense of _amiss_, _wrong_, _ill_. Words to
which this prefix but adds this meaning are omitted here, and their
synonyms and antonyms may usually be readily found by reference to the
root words.

=Misanthropy.= Cynicism, hatred, egoism.

ANT. _Philanthropy, benevolence, altruism, humanitarianism._

=Miscellany.= Mass, mixture, collection, medley, jumble, variety,
hodge-podge, diversity.

ANT. _Selection, system, arrangement, order, group, assortment,
classification._

=Mischief.= Damage, harm, hurt, injury, detriment, evil, ill; mishap,
trouble.

ANT. _Benefit, good, blessing, profit, gratification, compensation,
favor._

=Miser.= Niggard, skinflint, curmudgeon, churl.

ANT. _Spendthrift, profligate._

=Miserable.= Abject, forlorn, pitiable, wretched, mean; worthless,
despicable, contemptible; unfortunate, unlucky.

ANT. _Comfortable, happy, respectable, contented, cheerful, easy._

=Misery.= Unhappiness, wretchedness, woe; calamity, disaster,
misfortune.

ANT. _Happiness, contentment, ease, comfort, pleasure, enjoyment._

=Misfortune.= Adversity, failure, ill luck, hardship, harm, ill,
affliction, calamity, blow, disaster, disappointment, trial,
tribulation, sorrow, ruin, distress, stroke, misery, reverse, mischance,
visitation, chastening, trouble, chastisement, misadventure,
bereavement, mishap.

ANT. _Consolation, blessing, boon, happiness, joy, prosperity, relief,
triumph, success, comfort, good fortune, gratification, good luck,
pleasure._

=Mission.= Message, errand, commission, deputation; embassy; ministry,
legation; trust, office.

ANT. _Assumption, usurpation, self-appointment; faithlessness,
betrayal._

=Mist.= Fog, vapor; obscuration, cloudiness, perplexity, bewilderment,
haze.

ANT. _Clarity, brightness; perspicuity, revelation, clearness,
discernment, insight, understanding; lucidity._

=Mob.= Rabble, masses, dregs of the people, the vulgar, populace, crowd,
canaille, lower classes.

ANT. _Élite, aristocracy, nobility, nobles, patricians._

=Mobile.= Movable, excitable, inconstant, changeable, fickle; variable,
ductile, sensitive.

ANT. _Immovable, firm, set, steady, unvarying, unchangeable,
inexorable._

=Model.= Mold, copy, design, example, image, imitation, standard, type,
representation, pattern, prototype, facsimile, original, archetype;
norm.

ANT. _Imitation; work, production, execution; accomplishment._

=Moderate=, _a._ Sparing, temperate, frugal, calm, mild; limited,
restrained, reasonable; dispassionate, controlled; abstinent, sober;
austere, ascetic.

ANT. _Immoderate, intemperate, luxurious, excessive, extravagant._

=Modern.= New, novel, modish, fashionable, present, late, extant,
recent.

ANT. _Past, ancient, antiquated, old, antique, obsolete, former._

=Modesty.= Humility, lowliness, humbleness, meekness, shyness, reserve,
coldness, bashfulness, backwardness, constraint, timidity,
unobtrusiveness, coyness.

ANT. _Frankness, freedom, impudence, indiscretion, self-conceit,
sauciness, abandon, arrogance, confidence, egoism, assumption,
assurance, boldness, forwardness, haughtiness, loquacity, pertness,
pride, vanity, self-sufficiency, openness, effrontery._

=Moment.= Instant, twinkling, consequence, weight, consideration, force,
value, signification, avail; second, trice.

ANT. _Age, period, decade, century, generation; insignificance,
unimportance, triviality._

=Monarch.= Ruler, sovereign; king, prince, emperor, queen.

ANT. _Subject, peer, plebes._

=Money.= Coin, cash, currency, gold, funds, property, specie, silver,
bills, bullion, notes, capital.

=Monopoly.= Exclusiveness, possession, privilege, appropriation,
engrossment, preëmption.

ANT. _Community, partnership, competition, free trade; participation,
sharing; communism; socialism._

=Monotonous.= Unvarying, uniform, wearisome, dull, tedious, same,
unison, humdrum, undiversified; similar, like.

ANT. _Varied, changed, diversified; harmonic; lively; divergent,
variant._

=Monster.= Prodigy, enormity, marvel, portent; monstrosity, wonder;
demon, fiend, dragon, sphinx, colossus, leviathan; ogre.

ANT. _Pigmy, dwarf, elf; angel, beauty, cherub._

=Monstrous.= Abnormal, extraordinary, prodigious, portentous, marvelous,
unnatural; vast, immense, colossal, stupendous; shocking, horrible,
hateful, terrible, hideous.

ANT. _Beautiful, small, reasonable, little, shapely, regular, fair,
pretty, comely; ordinary, familiar, natural; charming, lovely._

=Moral=, _a._ Dutiful, right, virtuous, just, worthy, ethical;
intellectual, spiritual, religious, pious, righteous, ideal.

ANT. _Immoral, wrong, sinful, unjust, unworthy, vicious, gross;
irreligious, impious, sensual; physical, bodily, carnal._

=Moreover.= Besides, further, in addition; also, likewise, in addition
to.

ANT. _Finally, lastly._

=Morose.= Gruff, gloomy, crusty, crabbed, acrimonious, severe, snappish,
sullen, surly, churlish, dogged, ill-humored, ill-natured, sulky.

ANT. _Bland, gentle, benignant, good-natured, kind, loving, pleasant,
sympathetic, genial, amiable, friendly, tender, indulgent, complaisant,
mild._

=Mortal.= Deathlike; deadly, destructive, poisonous; vulnerable, vital;
human, perishable, ephemeral, transient, transitory.

ANT. _Immortal, undying, everlasting, eternal, divine, celestial,
life-giving, perennial._

=Motherly.= Maternal, motherlike, parental; kind, loving, affectionate.

ANT. _Paternal, fatherlike, fatherly; harsh, unloving, unkind, hateful._

=Motion.= Movement, change, action, act, passage, move, process,
transit, transition.

ANT. _Quiescence, quiet, rest, repose, stillness, immobility._

=Motive.= Incentive, incitement, inducement, reason, spur, stimulus,
cause; object, purpose; argument, conviction; impulse, prompting.

ANT. _Deed, achievement, execution, action, attempt, project; deflector,
preventive, dissuasion, deterrent._

=Mourn.= Lament, grieve, regret, rue, bewail, sorrow.

ANT. _Exult, joy, rejoice, be joyful, triumph, make merry._

=Mournful.= Lugubrious, heavy, sad, sorrowful, grievous, calamitous.

ANT. _Joyful, jubilant, gladsome, cheerful, happy, pleasant, joyous._

=Move.= Stir, agitate, trouble, affect, persuade, actuate, impel,
prompt, instigate, incite, offer, induce.

ANT. _Stop, stay, arrest, prevent, deter; calm, appease, deflect._

=Movement.= Motion; compulsion, stimulation, incitement, agitation,
arousing, instigation.

ANT. _Stoppage, stay, pause, calm, quiet._

=Much.= Great; long; considerable; abundant; far; ample, plenteous.

ANT. _Little, small, scarce, few, scanty, near; narrow._

=Multiplication.= Teeming, multiplicity, multitude, increase, plurality,
reproduction, augmentation, swarming, multifariousness,
multitudinousness.

ANT. _Diminution, division, subtraction, reduction; extinction; rarity,
scantiness; unity, singularity._

=Multitude.= Throng, crowd, assembly, assemblage, commonalty, swarm,
populace; host, rabble, mob, concourse.

ANT. _Individual, solitude; aristocracy; oligarchy; scantiness, paucity,
scarcity._

=Mundane.= Worldly, terrestrial, earthly; sublunary; secular, temporal.

ANT. _Unworldly, spiritual, celestial, eternal, supramundane, stellar,
solar, lunar._

=Munificent.= Bounteous, bountiful, liberal, generous; beneficent, free,
lavish, extravagant.

ANT. _Small, niggardly, saving, sparing, mean, close._

=Musical.= Melodious, harmonious, tuneful, symphonious, mellifluous,
rhythmical.

ANT. _Discordant, inharmonious, harsh, raucous, unmelodious._

=Mute.= Silent, dumb, speechless; voiceless; still, unpronounced;
unresponsive; taciturn.

ANT. _Talkative, chattering, garrulous, vocal, speaking, loquacious,
loud, noisy._

=Mutual.= Common, correlative, reciprocal, joint, interchangeable.

ANT. _Detached, distinct, disunited, separate, severed, sundered,
unshared, unreciprocated, unrequited, disconnected._

=Mysterious.= Abstruse, enigmatical, dark, mystical, occult, obscure,
secret, transcendental, unknown, unfathomable, mystic, hidden,
inexplicable, inscrutable, cabalistic, incomprehensible, recondite.

ANT. _Clear, plain, apparent, manifest, bright, light, explainable,
simple, comprehensible, obvious, easy, revealed, understood._

=Mystic.= Unknowable, obscure, mysterious; allegorical, enigmatical;
transcendental; cabalistic, symbolical.

ANT. _Familiar, simple, ordinary, commonplace, obvious, plain._

=Myth.= Fable, tradition, legend; parable, invention, fiction, allegory;
falsehood, lie.

ANT. _Truth, fact, history, narrative, incident._




                                   N


=Nabob.= Millionaire, Crœsus, viceroy, governor, Dives.

ANT. _Beggar, suppliant._

=Naked.= Nude, bare; defenseless, unprotected, destitute; manifest,
undisguised; simple, mere, plain; unclothed, undraped, denuded;
uncolored, unvarnished.

ANT. _Robed, draped, veiled, dressed, shrouded, muffled; protected,
sheltered; colored, varnished, qualified._

=Name=, _n._ Appellation, denomination, cognomen, designation, surname,
title, style, epithet.

=Name=, _v._ Call, indicate, designate, specify, mention, denominate,
style, nominate.

ANT. _Miscall, misname, misindicate; be nameless or anonymous; hint,
suggest, shadow, intimate, imply._

=Narrate.= Relate, tell, recount, describe, detail, rehearse, report,
recite.

ANT. _Misrepresent, mistake; suppress, conceal._

=Narrative.= Narration, recital, account, rehearsal, relation,
description, story, tale, history.

=Narrow.= Not wide, straitened, limited, without margin; bigoted,
illiberal; parsimonious, niggardly, selfish; close, scrutinizing, exact;
slender, spare, thin, contracted, cramped.

ANT. _Wide, broad, ample, expanded, thick; generous, benevolent;
unlimited; liberal._

=Nascent.= Embryo, rudimental, budding, incipient.

ANT. _Grown, developed, mature; aged; confirmed, set._

=Nasty.= Filthy, foul, dirty, offensive, damp, disgusting, disagreeable,
wet; indecent, obscene.

ANT. _Pleasant, sweet, agreeable, savory, nice, pure._

=Nation.= People, race, stock; realm, community, state, commonwealth.

=Native.= Innate, natal, natural, original, indigenous.

ANT. _Alien, artificial, foreign, unnatural, acquired, assumed._

=Natural.= Native; essential, normal, regular, intrinsic, cosmical,
spontaneous, original, artless, ingenuous; kind, affectionate; genuine,
unaffected.

ANT. _Abnormal, monstrous, unnatural, improbable, adventitious,
fictitious, coarse; artful, affected._

=Nature.= Creation, universe; essence, constitution; kind, sort,
character, quality; temper, disposition, mood; mind, intelligence;
vitality.

ANT. _Thing, subject, object, man, being, creature, monstrosity,
unnaturalness; art, fiction, romance, invention._

=Naught.= Nothing, cipher, zero.

ANT. _Anything, everything, aught._

=Naughty.= Mischievous, perverse, froward; bad, corrupt, worthless,
good-for-nothing; refractory, wicked.

ANT. _Good, worthy, well-behaved, tractable, pure, docile, innocent._

=Nausea.= Seasickness, loathing, disgust, qualm; repugnance, aversion.

ANT. _Enjoyment, taste, delight, relish._

=Nautical.= Marine, maritime, naval, oceanic.

=Near=, _ad._ Nigh, not remote, almost, nearly, well-nigh, intimately,
closely.

=Near=, _a._ Nigh, close, adjacent, adjoining, approximate; imminent,
impending, forthcoming, approaching; familiar, dear, intimate;
immediate; literal, accurate; narrow, parsimonious; short; proximate,
contiguous, present, ready.

ANT. _Distant, remote, far; reserved, uncordial, cool, stiff;
indistinct, obscure, future._

=Nearly.= Almost, well-nigh, intimately, closely, approximately.

ANT. _Quite, entirely, distantly, remotely._

=Neat.= Trim, tidy, prim, precise, spruce, clean, cleanly, orderly,
natty, dapper, nice.

ANT. _Negligent, slack, slovenly, slouchy, dirty, soiled, disorderly,
dowdy, untidy, rough, unkempt, rude, uncared for._

=Necessary.= Essential, inevitable, needful, infallible, undeniable,
indispensable, required, requisite, unavoidable.

ANT. _Optional, useless, contingent, worthless, casual, non-essential,
needless._

=Necessitate.= Force, compel, coerce, make necessary, oblige, constrain,
make, drive, impel.

ANT. _Persuade, convince, induce, tempt, coax, allure; liberate,
release._

=Necessity.= Need, requirement, want, compulsion, fate, fatality,
requisite, destiny, essential, emergency, extremity, exigency,
indispensableness, urgency, unavoidableness, sine qua non.

ANT. _Choice, contingency, doubt, option, freedom, uncertainty,
fortuity, doubtfulness, dubiousness, possibility._

=Need.= Exigency, emergency, extremity, strait, distress, indigence,
penury.

ANT. _Competence, affluence, choice, wealth, luxury, profuseness;
superfluity, uselessness, dispensableness; casualty, accident;
contingency, freedom._

=Needful.= Requisite, needy, necessitous, distressful, essential,
indispensable.

ANT. _Contingent, casual, unnecessary, unessential, discretional,
optional, needless._

=Needless.= Unnecessary, useless, superfluous, groundless, gratuitous.

ANT. _Needful, useful, helpful, obligatory._

=Nefarious.= Wicked, abominable, iniquitous, execrable, atrocious,
impious.

ANT. _Noble, honorable, admirable, laudable; benevolent, generous,
humane._

=Negation.= Denial, disavowal, disclaimer, contradiction.

ANT. _Assertion, declaration, deposition, avowal, affirmation,
allegation, protestation, claim._

=Negative=, _a._ Denying, indirect, unaffirmative, privative,
disclaiming.

ANT. _Positive, direct, assertive, attributive, affirmative,
declarative._

=Neglect=, _n._ Negligence, failure, omission, disregard, oversight,
indifference, remissness, slight, thoughtlessness, slackness, default,
carelessness, disrespect, heedlessness, inadvertence, inattention,
scorn.

ANT. _Care, attention, notice, regard, esteem, consideration, respect._

=Negotiate.= Transfer, sell, pass, arrange, treat, bargain, trade,
communicate, transact, effect, perform.

ANT. _Stop, quash, mismanage, misconduct._

=Neighborly.= Kind, civil, social, friendly, near, adjoining, adjacent,
neighboring, friendly, attentive.

ANT. _Individual, solitary, personal, distant, remote, unkind, uncivil,
unfriendly._

=Nerve.= Steadiness, firmness, fortitude, self-command, resolution,
strength, courage, pluck, endurance, coolness, presence of mind.

ANT. _Weakness, cowardice, timidity, feebleness, nervelessness._

=Nervous.= Excitable, agitated, annoyed, irritable, weak, fearful;
strong, vigorous, spirited, nervy, forceful.

ANT. _Self-possessed, self-controlled, poised, calm, composed; dull,
inert, phlegmatic, sluggish._

=Neutral.= Neuter, undecided, indifferent, unpronounced, uninterfering,
negative, impartial, unavowed, unaffiliated.

ANT. _Interested, interfering, positive, partial, active, allied,
avowed, declared._

=Neutralize.= Render neutral, invalidate, counteract, counterbalance,
countervail, render inoperative.

ANT. _Enhance, intensify, aggravate._

=New.= Fresh, modern, novel, late, recent, juvenile, upstart, young,
new-fangled, youthful, new-fashioned.

ANT. _Old, antique, ancient, old-fashioned, aged, elderly._

=News.= Information, tidings, intelligence, advice, word, report,
account, announcement, rumor.

ANT. _Ignorance, silence, nonpublication, suppression; misintelligence,
misreport._

=Nice.= Exquisite, accurate, correct, precise, particular, punctilious,
squeamish, finical, effeminate, silly, exact, critical, definite,
strict, fastidious, cautious, scrupulous; discerning, discriminating;
fine, minute, refined, delicate, dainty, pleasant, agreeable.

ANT. _Coarse, rude, rough, inaccurate, blind, undiscriminating,
unscrupulous, incautious, undiscerning, careless, negligent,
disagreeable, nauseous._

=Nicety.= Fastidiousness, accuracy, scrupulousness, delicacy, precision,
daintiness, subtlety, distinction, exactness.

ANT. _Coarseness, roughness, inaccuracy, rudeness._

=Niggardly.= Avaricious, covetous, parsimonious, miserly, sordid,
sparing, penurious, stingy.

ANT. _Generous, bountiful, copious, ample, profuse, abundant, bounteous,
plentiful, munificent._

=Nimble.= Alert, brisk, bustling, lively, prompt, quick, speedy, swift,
spry, agile, sprightly, active.

ANT. _Clumsy, dilatory, dull, heavy, inert, inactive, slow, unready,
sluggish._

=Nobility.= Greatness, dignity, superiority, nobleness, eminence,
elevation, worthiness; family, rank, title, birth; aristocracy, peerage,
patrician class.

ANT. _Obscurity, meanness, serfdom, paltriness, plebeianism._

=Noble.= Honorable, worthy, dignified, elevated, superior, sublime,
great, eminent, stately. generous, liberal, free, aristocratic,
patrician, illustrious, grand, lordly, renowned, magnificent, knightly.

ANT. _Ignoble, plebeian, paltry, vulgar, baseborn, low-born, rustic,
peasant, contemptible, unworthy, mean._

=Nobody.= No person, no one, not anybody, cipher, nonentity.

ANT. _Somebody, notability, celebrity, colossus, star._

=Nocturnal.= Nightly, dark, tenebrose, gloomy.

ANT. _Daily, diurnal, solar, brilliant, light._

=Noise.= Cry, outcry, clamor, din, clatter, uproar; rumor, report,
rattle, tumult.

ANT. _Music, melody, harmony; silence, hush, stillness, voicelessness._

=Noiseless.= Silent, quiet, inaudible.

ANT. _Noisy, uproarious, turbulent, clamorous, boisterous, brawling,
tumultuous, loud._

=Noisome.= Noxious, insalubrious, unwholesome, mischievous, destructive,
nocuous, hurtful, pestilential, harmful.

ANT. _Wholesome, salutary, salubrious, beneficial._

=Noisy.= Loud, clamorous, stunning, boisterous, turbulent.

ANT. _Noiseless, subdued, inaudible, whispering; melodious, tuneful._

=Nominal.= Literal, verbal, titular; formal, avowed, pretended,
ostensible, supposititious.

ANT. _Veritable, essential, intrinsic, actual, substantial, important,
real, serious, true._

=Nominate.= Name, specify, appoint, designate, entitle.

ANT. _Suggest, withdraw, reject, indicate, cancel, deprive, recall._

=Nonsense.= Folly, silliness, absurdity, trash, inanity, platitude,
pretense.

ANT. _Sense, wisdom, fact, truth, gravity, reason, science._

=Normal.= Regular, ordinary, natural, standard, usual, typical,
recognized, common.

ANT. _Exceptional, abnormal, uncommon, singular, unusual, monstrous,
irregular, peculiar, rare, unprecedented, remarkable, unnatural._

=Notable.= Plain, evident, noted, noticeable, distinguished, memorable,
extraordinary, conspicuous, manifest; notorious.

ANT. _Ordinary, mean, commonplace, everyday, undistinguished,
unimpressive, insignificant._

=Note.= Memorandum, comment, remark, record, scholium; account,
catalogue, bill; heed, observation; reputation, distinction, celebrity,
fame, repute, renown.

ANT. _Misindication, misrepresentation, misleader._

=Notice=, _n._ Observation, regard, cognizance, information, advice,
news, intelligence, intimation, announcement, premonition, instruction,
warning, attention, consideration.

ANT. _Oversight, disregard, neglect, slight, ignorance, connivance,
omission, heedlessness, misinformation._

=Notice=, _v._ Mark, observe, note, heed, regard, perceive, see, remark,
mention, comment on, attend, mind.

ANT. _Overlook, disregard, misjudge, neglect._

=Notification.= Information, notice, declaration, publication,
announcement, advertisement.

=Notify.= Intimate, declare, publish, announce, acquaint, warn, apprise,
communicate, inform.

ANT. _Withhold, conceal, suppress, misinform, misreport._

=Notion.= Idea, conception, apprehension, sentiment, judgment, opinion,
belief, impression, estimation, conceit, conviction.

ANT. _Misconception, misapprehension, frustration, falsification._

=Notorious.= Distinguished, conspicuous, remarkable, famous, celebrated,
noted, renowned.

ANT. _Suspected, reputed, reported._

=Notwithstanding=, _conj._ Still, however, although, but, nevertheless,
howbeit, yet, though.

=Notwithstanding=, _prep._ Despite, in spite of.

=Nourish.= Feed, foster, cherish, nurse, tend, support, maintain, train,
educate, promote.

ANT. _Starve, blight, destroy, kill._

=Nourishment.= Nutrition, nutriment, food, aliment, provision,
sustenance.

ANT. _Poison, venom, bane, starvation, exhaustion._

=Novel=, _a._ New, recent, modern, fresh, strange, uncommon, rare,
unusual, fantastic, odd, upstart, new-fangled.

ANT. _Venerable, ancient, old-fashioned, time-honored._

=Noxious.= Noisome, injurious, hurtful, pernicious, unwholesome, deadly,
poisonous.

ANT. _Wholesome, salutary, beneficial, healthful, salubrious._

=Nucleus.= Kernel, core, center.

ANT. _Exterior, face, appearance._

=Nudity.= Nakedness, exposure, bareness.

ANT. _Clothing, dress, vestment, drapery._

=Nugatory.= Trifling, vain, insignificant, futile, ineffectual,
unavailing, trivial, worthless, useless, null.

ANT. _Important, potent, momentous, efficacious, successful, grave,
serious, satisfactory._

=Nuisance.= Annoyance, plague, pest, affliction, bane, trouble.

ANT. _Pleasure, delight, benefit, blessing, gratification._

=Nullify.= Revoke, annul, cancel, abolish, render void, abrogate,
neutralize, repeal.

ANT. _Enact, confirm, perpetuate, establish, stabilitate._

=Numb.= Enfeebled, destitute, torpid, benumbed, insensible, paralyzed,
deadened.

ANT. _Alive, alert, sensitive, keen, lively, animated, attentive._

=Number=, _n._ Aggregation, multitude, collection, numeral, numerous,
quantity.

ANT. _Scarcity, fewness, paucity._

=Number=, _v._ Count, enumerate, calculate, tell, compute, reckon,
estimate.

ANT. _Guess, hazard, conjecture; lump, mass._

=Numberless.= Innumerable, infinite, countless.

ANT. _Few, scarce, rare, infrequent._

=Numerous.= Many, abundant, diverse, multifarious, manifold, sundry.

ANT. _Few, scarce, rare, infrequent._

=Nuptial.= Wedding, marriage, hymeneal, espousal, connubial, bridal.

ANT. _Bachelor, virgin._

=Nurse=, _v._ Nourish, cherish, foster, attend, manage, train, educate,
teach, feed, nurture.

ANT. _Starve, kill, destroy; neglect._

=Nurture.= Nourish, nurse, tend, cherish, educate, train, feed.

ANT. _Neglect, deprive, disregard, slight._

=Nutriment.= Aliment, food, sustenance, nourishment, sustentation,
subsistence, nutrition.

ANT. _Starvation, detriment, exhaustion, poison, decay, inanition._

=Nutrition.= Nutriment, feeding, sustentation.

ANT. _Poison, venom._




                                   O


=Oath.= Curse, imprecation, profanity, swearing, adjuration, affidavit,
anathema, ban, blasphemy, denunciation, execration, malediction, vow,
reprobation, sworn statement.

ANT. _Blessing, benediction, benison._

=Obdurate.= Firm, unbending, inflexible, unyielding, obstinate,
stubborn, impenitent, callous, unfeeling, insensible.

ANT. _Yielding, teachable, tender, docile, amenable, flexible,
softened._

=Obedience.= Submission, duty, compliance, respect, dutifulness,
subservience.

ANT. _Resistance, rebellion, transgression, disobedience, antagonism,
insubordination._

=Obedient.= Dutiful, respectful, compliant, submissive, humble,
yielding, obsequious, modest, docile.

ANT. _Disrespectful, undutiful, arrogant, hard, unyielding, obstinate,
obdurate, stubborn._

=Obesity.= Fatness, corpulence, fleshiness, corpulency.

ANT. _Leanness, thinness._

=Obey.= Submit, yield, comply.

ANT. _Resist, refuse, disobey._

=Object=, _n._ Reality, fact, existence, phenomenon; aim, intention,
end, purpose, appearance, motive, design, sight, view, goal.

ANT. _Subject, idea, fancy, conception._

=Objective.= Outward, external, extrinsic, concrete, universal, actual,
positive, real.

ANT. _Subjective, intrinsic, abstract, notional._

=Oblation.= Offering, gift, sacrifice, contribution, presentation.

ANT. _Spoliation, sacrilege, withholding, refusal._

=Obligation.= Responsibility, engagement, contract, agreement, bond,
covenant, stipulation, necessity, debt, duty, compulsion.

ANT. _Choice, freedom, assurance, promise, declaration, intention._

=Oblige.= Bind, please, gratify, accommodate, favor, constrain, compel,
force, coerce, benefit, necessitate, obligate.

ANT. _Release, acquit; persuade, induce; annoy, disoblige._

=Obliging.= Civil, courteous, complaisant, kind, considerate,
accommodating, compliant.

ANT. _Discourteous, inconsiderate, rude, disobliging, unaccommodating._

=Oblique.= Indirect, slanting, inclined, perverse, disingenuous,
diagonal, divergent, angular.

ANT. _Straightforward, rectilineal._

=Oblivion.= Forgetfulness, disremembrance.

ANT. _Memory, reminiscence, remembrance, recollection, celebration,
commemoration._

=Obloquy.= Censure, odium, contumely, reproach, gainsaying, reviling,
calumny, slander, detraction.

ANT. _Praise, acclamation, encomium, panegyric._

=Obnoxious.= Odious, detrimental, blameworthy, pernicious, offensive.

ANT. _Pleasant, grateful, independent, wholesome, beneficial, salutary._

=Obscure=, _a._ Abstruse, deep, involved, difficult, hidden, profound,
mysterious, ambiguous, unintelligible, cloudy, complex, complicated,
dark, darksome, dense, dim, doubtful, intricate, dusky, indistinct,
enigmatical, incomprehensible, muddy, turbid, shadowy, misty, unknown,
secluded, unascertained, remote.

ANT. _Clear, luminous, distinct, lucid, plain, plain-spoken,
intelligible, prominent, eminent._

=Obsequious.= Servile, cringing, fawning, compliant, submissive,
deferential, sycophantic, flattering.

ANT. _Impudent, self-assertive, independent, arrogant, insubmissive,
haughty, proud._

=Observance.= Observation, heeding, form, practice, custom, attention,
celebration, ceremony, performance.

ANT. _Inobservance, inattention, disuse, disregard, disrespect,
omission, unceremoniousness, informality._

=Observant.= Observing, watchful, attentive, regardful, obedient,
mindful, careful, heedful.

ANT. _Unmindful, disobedient, disregardful, heedless._

=Observation.= Contemplation, remark, study, notice, view, conclusion,
judgment, attention, comment, note, observance.

ANT. _Inattention, oversight, silence, ignorance, inadvertence._

=Observe.= Remark, note, watch, heed, see, discover, attend, comment.

ANT. _Overlook, misconceive, misunderstand._

=Obsolete.= Disused, ancient, neglected, antiquated, archaic, effete,
past, old-fashioned, old, rare, obsolescent.

ANT. _Fashionable, modern, current, customary, new, novel, extant._

=Obstacle.= Impediment, obstruction, difficulty, hindrance, barrier,
check.

ANT. _Course, proceeding, career, advancement, progress._

=Obstinacy.= Pertinacity, firmness, resoluteness, inflexibility,
persistency, perverseness, contumacy.

ANT. _Flexibility, docility, complaisance._

=Obstinate.= Perverse, obdurate, intractable, determined, stubborn,
resolved, resolute, inflexible, unyielding, intractable, indomitable,
unflinching, contumacious, decided, dogged, mulish, heady, headstrong,
fixed, firm, immovable, opinionated, persistent, pertinacious,
refractory, unconquerable.

ANT. _Pliant, docile, submissive, dutiful, gentle, obedient, compliant,
tractable, yielding, amenable, complaisant, irresolute, wavering,
undecided, pliable, teachable._

=Obstruct.= Bar, barricade, hinder, oppose, impede, stay, stop, arrest,
check, embarrass, clog, choke, retard, interrupt.

ANT. _Aid, facilitate, accelerate, forward, promote, clear, advance,
open, pave the way for, further, free, expedite._

=Obstruction.= Obstacle, barrier, bar, impediment, check, clog,
hindrance.

ANT. _Course, proceeding, advancement, progress, career._

=Obtain.= Attain, gain, procure, acquire, earn, win.

ANT. _Lose, forfeit, surrender, forego._

=Obtrude.= Intrude, force, interfere, thrust.

ANT. _Suggest, hint, insinuate; retire, withdraw._

=Obtuse.= Blunt, dull, stupid, unintelligent, stolid.

ANT. _Keen, quick, sharp, intelligent, acute, clever._

=Obverse.= Opposite, facing.

ANT. _Hinder, reverse._

=Obvious.= Opposing; plain, evident, clear, manifest, apparent,
discovered, perceived, open, explicit, patent.

ANT. _Remote, obscure, far-fetched, involved, latent._

=Occasion=, _v._ Cause, produce, create, induce, originate, furnish,
compose, constitute, generate.

=Occasionally.= Sometimes, casually, rarely.

ANT. _Always, constantly, regularly, frequently._

=Occult.= Secret, concealed, hidden, unknown, invisible, latent,
eclipsed, unrevealed, mysterious.

ANT. _Developed, plain, exposed, patent, clear, familiar, open._

=Occupancy.= Possession, occupation, tenury.

ANT. _Eviction, ejection, dispossession._

=Occupation.= Occupancy, avocation, employment, engagement, vocation,
calling, office, trade, profession.

ANT. _Idleness, leisure, vacancy, vacation, abandonment, resignation._

=Occupy.= Possess, hold, employ, fill.

ANT. _Abandon, release, desert, surrender, vacate, concede._

=Occur.= Happen, appear, meet, befall, betide, take place.

ANT. _Threaten, pass, impend._

=Occurrence.= Event, happening, incident, affair, adventure,
circumstance, transaction, episode.

ANT. _Cause, antecedent, inducement, predisposition, tendency,
contribution._

=Odd.= Quaint, unmatched, queer, unusual, eccentric, fantastical, droll,
comical, singular, peculiar.

ANT. _Common, usual, regular, normal, matched._

=Odious.= Hateful, detestable, disgusting, abominable, repulsive,
forbidding, unpopular, invidious, loathsome.

ANT. _Pleasing, pleasant, acceptable, agreeable, grateful, delectable,
bewitching, charming._

=Odium.= Hatred, abhorrence, detestation, antipathy, unpopularity,
offensiveness.

ANT. _Welcome, acceptableness, popularity._

=Odor.= Scent, perfume, smell, fragrance, aroma, redolence; trail,
effluvium, fume.

ANT. _Inodorousness._

=Odorous.= Fragrant, perfumed, balmy, aromatic, odorant.

ANT. _Scentless, inodorous; fetid._

=Offend.= Displease, affront, harm, pain, annoy, transgress.

ANT. _Please, gratify, conciliate._

=Offense.= Umbrage, misdeed, delinquency, transgression, fault, affront,
indignity, outrage, insult.

ANT. _Defense, guiltlessness, innocence._

=Offensive.= Disagreeable, obnoxious, distasteful, impertinent,
disgusting, rude, saucy, opprobrious, insulting, insolent, attacking,
abusive, invading, assailant.

ANT. _Defensive, pleasing, grateful, savory._

=Offer.= Propose, propound, tender, sacrifice, immolate, undertake,
attempt, try, proffer.

ANT. _Withhold, withdraw, retract, retain, alienate, divert._

=Offhand.= Instant, ready, extemporaneous, unpremeditated, unstudied,
impromptu.

ANT. _Premeditated, elaborate, studied, thought-out._

=Office.= Service, duty, custom, position, charge, authority, function,
business.

ANT. _Leisure, vacancy, sinecure, resignation._

=Officer.= Official, functionary, director, dignitary, manager,
administrator.

ANT. _Member, servant, private, employee._

=Official=, _a._ Administrative, authoritative, functional,
professional.

ANT. _Private, unofficial, unprofessional._

=Officiate.= Act, serve, perform.

ANT. _Witness, retire._

=Officious.= Impertinent, meddlesome, interfering, forward, intrusive,
pushing.

ANT. _Negligent, backward, remiss; retiring, modest._

=Often.= Frequently, repeatedly, commonly, many times, not seldom.

ANT. _Infrequently, seldom, rarely._

=Old.= Aged, ancient, primitive, pristine, antique, antiquated,
old-fashioned, obsolete; senile; gray, hoary, olden, immemorial,
time-honored, decrepit, elderly, patriarchal, remote, venerable,
time-worn.

ANT. _Youthful, childlike, young; recent, modern, fresh, new-fashioned,
current._

=Omen.= Prognostic, augury, presage, sign, portent, foreboding.

ANT. _Fulfilment, event, occurrence, realization._

=Ominous.= Significant, portentous, unpropitious, threatening,
inauspicious, foreboding, premonitory, suggestive.

ANT. _Encouraging, auspicious, propitious._

=Omit=, _v._ Leave out, neglect, forbear, fail, miss, overlook.

ANT. _Consider, observe, notice, attend, regard._

=Omnipotent.= All-powerful, irresistible, Almighty.

ANT. _Powerless, inefficient, impotent._

=Omniscient.= All-knowing, infallible, all-wise.

ANT. _Shortsighted, fallible, ignorant._

=One.= Single, individual, solitary, certain, undivided, common, united,
unitary.

ANT. _Many, several; few._

=Onerous.= Burdensome, oppressive, heavy, toilsome, difficult,
laborious, responsible.

ANT. _Light, easy, trivial._

=Only=, _ad._ Solely, singly, exclusively, merely, barely, wholly.

ANT. _Among, amongst, together, collectively._

=Only=, _a._ Single, sole, alone, preëminent, chief.

ANT. _Many, together, several, mixed._

=Onset=, =Onslaught=. Assault, attack, storming, aggression, invasion.

ANT. _Repulse, resistance, protection, shelter, support, defense._

=Onward.= Forward, in advance, ahead.

ANT. _Aback, astern, backward._

=Opaque.= Impervious, not transparent, obscure, unintelligible.

ANT. _Pellucid, translucent, transparent, obvious, clear, intelligible,
perspicuous._

=Open=, _v._ Unclose, disclose, expose, explain, begin, commence,
initiate.

ANT. _Close, shut, cover, conceal; conclude, terminate; misinterpret,
mystify._

=Open=, _a._ Unclosed, uncovered, unprotected, exposed, plain, obvious,
evident, public, artless, candid, free, available, accessible,
undisguised, ingenuous.

ANT. _Closed, barred, inaccessible, unavailable, reserved, shut,
secreted._

=Opening.= Aperture, hole, space, breach, gap, fissure; start,
inauguration, commencement, initiation, beginning; opportunity.

ANT. _Obstruction, stop-gap, termination, enclosure, close, end,
conclusion, inopportunity, unseasonableness._

=Operation.= Agency, action, exercise, production, influence, force,
performance, result, procedure, effect, execution.

ANT. _Failure, uselessness, futility, ineffectiveness, inefficiency,
powerlessness, inaction, cessation, rest._

=Opinion.= Persuasion, idea, sentiment, view, conviction, judgment,
notion, impression, estimation.

ANT. _Evidence, argument, inquiry, speculation, investigation,
pleading._

=Opponent.= Antagonist, foe, adversary, enemy, rival.

ANT. _Helper, assistant, accomplice, ally._

=Opportune.= Timely, seasonable, convenient, ready, suitable,
auspicious, meet, appropriate.

ANT. _Untimely, unseasonable, inopportune, infelicitous._

=Opportunity.= Occasion, convenience, occurrence, turn, opening.

ANT. _Lapse, omission, inopportuneness, contre-temps._

=Oppose.= Combat, withstand, contradict, deny, gainsay, oppugn,
contravene, check, obstruct.

ANT. _Aid, abet, support, advance, expedite._

=Opposite.= Facing, contrary, repugnant, antagonistic, adverse, counter,
contradictory, opposed.

ANT. _Agreeing, coincident, harmonious, conformable, suiting, fitting,
accordant._

=Opposition.= Restraint, defeat, resistance, hostility, obstacle,
obstruction, animosity.

ANT. _Sympathy, harmony, concord, alliance, congeniality._

=Oppress.= Impose, weigh down, burden, grind, persecute, overwhelm,
crush, overpower, subdue.

ANT. _Encourage, assist, support, befriend._

=Oppression.= Cruelty, tyranny, hardship, injustice, severity.

ANT. _Kindness, mercy, justice, clemency, leniency._

=Oppressive.= Heavy, oppressing, rigorous, tyrannical, unjust,
extortionate, grinding.

ANT. _Light, easy, compassionate, just, humane, generous._

=Opprobrium.= Disgrace, infamy, reproach, contempt, scandal, obloquy,
odium.

ANT. _Popularity, welcome, acceptableness._

=Option.= Choice, preference, selection, discretion, wish, election.

ANT. _Compulsion, necessity, obligation._

=Opulence.= Wealth, riches, fortune, affluence, independence.

ANT. _Poverty, impecuniosity, indigence, want._

=Oracle.= Revelation; prophet, angel.

ANT. _Empiricism, pragmatism._

=Oracular.= Prophetic, ominous, portentous; authoritative, positive,
dogmatical; wise, grave, sage; obscure, equivocal, ambiguous.

ANT. _Cautious, modest, vacillating, diffident._

=Oral.= Verbal, unwritten, vocal, spoken, traditional.

ANT. _Documentary, written._

=Oration.= Address, speech, discourse, harangue, lecture, disputation,
declamation, effusion.

ANT. _Reasoning, suggestion, insinuation._

=Oratory.= Eloquence, rhetoric, elocution, declamation.

ANT. _Hesitation, stammering, dulness._

=Orb.= Sphere, globe, ball; circle, orbit, circuit; disk; revolution.

=Orbit.= Revolution, path, circuit, sphere.

ANT. _Deviation, eccentricity, perturbation._

=Ordain.= Set, regulate, establish, appoint, decree, constitute,
institute, prescribe, dictate.

ANT. _Revoke, subvert, cancel, countermand._

=Ordeal.= Test, trial, experiment, probation, proof, scrutiny, assay,
investigation.

ANT. _Result, event; argument, evidence, plea, discussion._

=Order.= Arrangement, system, procedure, method, rule, regulation;
command, mandate, rank, direction, grade, class, character, kind,
management, injunction, prohibition, requirement, instruction.

ANT. _Allowance, consent, leave, permission, permit, liberty, license._

=Orderly.= Regular, obedient, systematic, quiet, peaceable, methodical,
well-regulated.

ANT. _Disorderly, riotous, irregular._

=Ordinance.= Statue, law, edict, decree, rescript, regulation,
institute, rule.

ANT. _Custom, usage, tradition, fashion._

=Ordinary.= Normal, usual, common, customary, settled, frequent, wonted,
habitual, indifferent, mediocre, plain, commonplace.

ANT. _Extraordinary, superior, unusual, uncommon._

=Organic.= Inherent, fundamental, essential, constitutional, radical,
vital; organized, systematized.

ANT. _Non-essential, circumstantial, provisional, contingent, inorganic,
secondary._

=Organization.= Structure, form, construction; organism.

ANT. _Disorganization._

=Organize.= Arrange, constitute, shape, adjust, frame, establish,
construct, systematize.

ANT. _Disorganize, dismember, disband, break up, annul._

=Origin.= Source, rise, commencement, spring, fountain, derivation,
cause, root, foundation.

ANT. _Termination, conclusion, extinction._

=Original.= Primitive, new, primary, pristine, genuine, inventive,
peculiar, initiatory, primordial, ancient, former, first.

ANT. _Subsequent, later, derivative, modern, terminal._

=Originate.= Begin, cause, commence, start, invent, create, spring,
rise.

ANT. _Prosecute, conduct; conclude, finish, end._

=Ornament.= Decoration, embellishment, adornment.

ANT. _Disgrace, brand, disfigurement, detraction._

=Ornate.= Adorned, beautiful, embellished, decorated, elaborate, rich,
ornamented.

ANT. _Bare, bald, nude, plain, naked._

=Orthodox.= Sound, conventional, approved, correct.

ANT. _Heretical, unorthodox, liberal, radical._

=Ostensible.= Exhibited, avowed, professed, apparent, pretended,
declared, manifest, specious, plausible, outward.

ANT. _Real, actual, genuine, veritable, concealed, hidden._

=Ostentation.= Display, boasting, show, boast, vaunting, flourish,
pageant, pomp, parade, pageantry.

ANT. _Diffidence, modesty, reserve, timidity, shrinking, retirement,
quietness, unobtrusiveness._

=Ostracism.= Banishment, exclusion, expulsion, blackball,
excommunication, separation.

ANT. _Admittance, enlistment, enrolment; welcome, fellowship._

=Outbreak.= Outburst, eruption, tumult, commotion, rebellion,
insurrection, riot, conflict.

ANT. _Quiet, order, pacification, subsidence, quelling._

=Outcast.= Exile, vagabond, reprobate, castaway, pariah, vagrant.

=Outcry.= Clamor, tumult, vociferation, alarm, yell, scream, noise.

ANT. _Quiet, silence; acclamation, plaudit._

=Outer.= Outside, outward, external, exterior.

ANT. _Inward, inside, internal, interior._

=Outlaw.= Brigand, bandit, robber, highwayman, marauder, freebooter.

=Outlet.= Egress, exit, vent.

ANT. _Entrance, ingress._

=Outline.= Contour, sketch, delineation, draft, plan.

ANT. _Form, substance, bulk, figure, field, ground, space; object,
subject._

=Outrage.= Outbreak, offense, violence, mischief, abuse, affront,
insult, indignity.

ANT. _Favor; self-restraint, self-control._

=Outrageous.= Violent, furious, excessive, exorbitant, wanton,
atrocious, monstrous, nefarious, heinous.

ANT. _Moderate, reasonable, justifiable._

=Outskirts.= Border, edge, outpost, precincts, environs, suburbs.

ANT. _Interior, center, bulk, mass, body, heart._

=Outstanding.= Uncollected, undischarged, unappropriated, unpaid;
projecting; opposing.

ANT. _Collected, appropriated, gathered, paid; supporting; reëntrant._

=Outward.= Out, outer, external, exterior, public, visible, sensible,
extraneous, superficial, apparent, extrinsic, ostensible.

ANT. _Internal, intrinsic, inward, withdrawn._

=Overcast.= Cloudy, lowering, obscured, murky, darkened, overspread,
eclipsed.

ANT. _Cloudless, clear, luminous._

=Overcome.= Vanquish, conquer, surmount, excel, overthrow, subjugate,
rule, domineer over.

ANT. _Lose, forfeit, surrender, fail, submit, retreat, succumb._

=Overflow=, _n._ Redundancy, inundation, deluge, exuberance,
superabundance.

ANT. _Subsidence, deficiency, exhaustion._

=Overruling.= Governing, controlling, superior, predominant, directing,
prevailing.

ANT. _Governed, controlled, inferior, subordinate._

=Oversight.= Charge, superintendence, management, supervision, command,
care, watchfulness, surveillance, control, inspection, direction, watch;
omission, error, inadvertence.

ANT. _Mismanagement, negligence, disregard, slight; particularity,
attention to minutiæ._

=Overt.= Public, manifest, apparent, deliberate, open, avowed.

ANT. _Covert, secret, furtive, clandestine, implied._

=Overthrow.= Upset, ruin, demolish, destroy, overcome, defeat.

ANT. _Restore, reinstate, revive._

=Overture.= Proposal, proposition, offer, opening, prelude, invitation,
advance, initiation.

ANT. _Inaction, quiescence._

=Overweening.= Rash, arrogant, egoistic, vain, haughty, conceited.

ANT. _Affable, courteous, sociable, condescending, gracious, polite,
approachable._

=Overwhelm.= Submerge, engulf, immerse, overpower, extinguish, bury,
crush, sink, subdue, vanquish, conquer, defeat.

ANT. _Raise, reinstate, reëstablish, rescue, extricate._

=Owe.= Be indebted for, be obliged for, borrow, hypothecate, attribute.

ANT. _Repay, requite, defray, liquidate._

=Own.= Possess, grant, acknowledge, admit, confess, avow.

ANT. _Lose, disown, abandon, forfeit, alienate, disinherit, abjure._




                                   P


=Pacific.= Appeasing, reconciling, tranquil, mild, calm, peaceful,
conciliatory.

ANT. _Harsh, irritating, exasperating, quarrelsome, turbulent,
tumultuous, warlike._

=Pacification.= Conciliation, compromise, reconcilement, adjustment,
reconciliation.

ANT. _Warfare, fighting, hostilities, war._

=Pact.= Agreement, league, compact, covenant, bargain, stipulation,
alliance, bond.

ANT. _Understanding, promise, parole, honor._

=Pæan.= Jubilation.

ANT. _Dirge._

=Pagan=, _a._ Gentile, heathen, idolater.

ANT. _Christian, believer._

=Paganism.= Heathenism, polytheism, pantheism.

ANT. _Christianity, Christendom._

=Pageant.= Spectacle, exhibition, display, show, ceremony, procession,
parade.

ANT. _Illusion, mockery, fantasmagoria, dream._

=Pageantry.= Pomp, parade, display, show, spectacle, splendor,
magnificence.

=Pain=, _n._ Agony, ache, distress, suffering, torture, anguish,
torment, pang, throe, paroxysm, twinge, woe, grief.

ANT. _Ease, peace, rapture, enjoyment, relief, solace, comfort,
delight._

=Pain=, _v._ Hurt, grieve, afflict, disquiet, trouble, distress,
agonize, torment, torture.

ANT. _Please, delight, rejoice, charm, refresh._

=Painful.= Disquieting, troublesome, afflictive, distressing, laborious,
grievous, toilsome, arduous, difficult.

ANT. _Pleasant, pleasurable, acceptable, agreeable, grateful, desirable,
delectable, delicious._

=Painstaking.= Careful, diligent, attentive, faithful, laborious.

ANT. _Neglectful, heedless, unmindful, disregardful, improvident,
thoughtless, careless._

=Paint.= Color, picture, depict, delineate, sketch, draw, portray.

ANT. _Misrepresent, caricature, daub._

=Pair.= Two, couple, span, brace, yoke.

ANT. _One, several, many._

=Pale.= Pallid, white, wan, colorless, dim, sallow.

ANT. _Ruddy, high-colored, conspicuous, brilliant._

=Palliate.= Cover, conceal, extenuate, hide, veil, screen, cloak, gloss
over, apologize for, mitigate.

ANT. _Alleviate; aggravate, heighten, increase, intensify._

=Palm.= Laurels, bays, prize, trophy, crown.

ANT. _Shame, blot, stigma, brand._

=Palpable.= Perceptible, obvious, plain, gross, material, corporeal,
manifest, evident, patent, distinct.

ANT. _Immaterial, intangible, ethereal, impalpable, indistinct, dubious,
imperceptible._

=Paltry.= Contemptible, worthless, mean, vile, pitiful, trifling.

ANT. _Valuable, estimable, admirable, worthy, grand, excellent,
magnificent._

=Panegyric.= Eulogy, encomium, praise, laudation, commendation.

ANT. _Satire, sarcasm, tirade, stricture, invective, philippic._

=Pang.= Agony, anguish, distress, paroxysm, throe.

ANT. _Pleasure, delight, refreshment, enjoyment, gratification._

=Parable.= Fable, allegory, apologue, similitude.

ANT. _History, fact, narrative._

=Parade=, _n._ Ostentation, display, show, pomp, pageant, spectacle,
procession.

ANT. _Modesty, humility, retirement, simplicity, plainness, seclusion,
suppression._

=Paradise.= Bliss, heaven, Eden, ecstasy, Elysium.

ANT. _Purgatory, hell, torture, misery, torment._

=Paradox.= Contradiction, ambiguity, absurdity, enigma, mystery.

ANT. _Axiom, postulate, precept, truism, proposition._

=Parallel.= Correspondent, correlative, analogous, concurrent,
equidistant.

ANT. _Different, opposed, divergent, irrelative, incongruous._

=Paralyze.= Deaden, benumb, unnerve, destroy, impair, enfeeble,
prostrate, debilitate.

ANT. _Nerve, strengthen, restore, invigorate._

=Paramount.= Supreme, preëminent, chief, superior, principal.

ANT. _Minor, inferior, secondary, subordinate._

=Parasite.= Flatterer, sycophant, courtier.

ANT. _Calumniator, traducer, detractor._

=Pardon=, _n._ Absolution, mercy, forgiveness, forbearance, remission,
acquittal, indulgence.

ANT. _Penalty, punishment, vengeance, retribution, retaliation._

=Pardon=, _v._ Condone, forgive, absolve, excuse, overlook, remit, pass
over or by, acquit.

ANT. _Convict, castigate, condemn, chastise, correct, punish, doom,
sentence, scourge, visit upon, recompense, chasten._

=Pardonable.= Excusable, forgivable, venial.

ANT. _Inexcusable, unpardonable._

=Parentage.= Descent, extraction, lineage, birth, stock, pedigree.

=Parsimonious.= Avaricious, frugal, sparing, close, stingy, penurious,
niggardly, illiberal.

ANT. _Liberal, profuse, unsparing, extravagant._

=Part=, _n._ Fraction, fragment, section, atom, segment, element, piece,
portion, instalment, constituent, component, ingredient, member,
particle, share, subdivision.

ANT. _Whole, mass, bulk, entirety, quantity, totality._

=Partake.= Share, participate.

ANT. _Yield, forfeit, forego, relinquish._

=Partial.= Biased, restricted, specific, limited, imperfect, incomplete,
unfair, unjust, warped, interested, inequitable.

ANT. _Unrestricted, universal, general, equitable, just, unbiased,
impartial._

=Particle.= Atom, corpuscle, iota, grain, jot, mite, molecule, element,
whit, tittle, scrap, shred, scintilla.

ANT. _Mass, quantity, sum, entirety, sum total, whole, aggregate,
total._

=Particular=, _n._ Detail, point, feature.

ANT. _Whole, subject, case._

=Particular=, _a._ Sole, single, individual, respective, appropriate,
personal, singular, important, peculiar, especial, specific, precise,
critical, circumstantial.

ANT. _Universal, general, comprehensive, indiscriminate, abstract,
inaccurate, inexact, undiscriminating._

=Parting.= Separation, leave-taking, farewell, dividing, division,
disruption, detachment.

ANT. _Union, attachment._

=Partisan.= Adherent, follower, supporter, disciple.

ANT. _Opponent, antagonist, adversary._

=Partition.= Division, distribution, separation, allotment,
apportionment; compartment, interspace, barrier.

ANT. _Combination, inclusion, comprehension, collection, union._

=Partly.= In part, somewhat, partially, not wholly.

ANT. _Altogether, entirely, completely, to the full extent._

=Partner.= Associate, colleague, coadjutor, confederate, participator,
partaker, comrade, mate, companion.

ANT. _Rival, competitor, opponent, adversary, alien._

=Partnership.= Company, firm, union, connection, society, interest,
house, association, participation.

ANT. _Independence, disconnection, disjunction, disunion, dissociation._

=Pass.= Go, move, proceed, disappear, vanish, depart, take place, occur,
elapse, spend, live, experience; transcend, exceed; send, transmit,
deliver; utter, promise, pledge; finish.

ANT. _Hold up; abide, wait, halt, continue, endure._

=Passable.= Navigable, current, acceptable, tolerable, admissible,
moderate, traversable, mediocre.

ANT. _Impassable, impenetrable, inadmissible, impervious; excellent._

=Passage.= Transit, conveyance, journey, way, road, path, hall, course,
progress, process, vestibule, corridor.

=Passible.= Susceptible, sensitive, sensible, impressible.

ANT. _Impassible, insusceptible, unsensitive._

=Passion.= Feeling, emotion, susceptibility, sentiment, ardor,
excitement, desire, anger, warmth, vehemence.

ANT. _Indifference, apathy, coldness, coolness, frigidity._

=Passive.= Quiescent, unopposing, enduring, submissive, patient,
unresisting, inert, inactive, relaxed, negative.

ANT. _Resistant, positive, impatient, vehement, active, alert._

=Past.= Gone by, elapsed, ended, spent, departed, late, accomplished.

ANT. _Present; future._

=Pastime.= Entertainment, recreation, sport, play, amusement, diversion.

ANT. _Business, work, task, labor, occupation, study._

=Patent.= Open, expanded, evident, apparent, manifest, public.

ANT. _Ambiguous, questionable, dubious._

=Paternal.= Fatherly, tender, careful, hereditary.

ANT. _Careless, rough, harsh; acquired, conferred, won._

=Path.= Footway, track, pathway, route, course, road; method.

=Pathetic.= Affecting, emotional, moving, pitiful, tender, touching,
melting, plaintive.

ANT. _Ludicrous, ridiculous, farcical, unaffecting._

=Pathless.= Untrodden, impenetrable, trackless.

ANT. _Trodden, frequented._

=Patience.= Composure, calmness, leniency, fortitude, sufferance,
submission, endurance, forbearance, resignation, long-suffering.

ANT. _Anger, impatience, ire, passion, fury, frenzy, rage, temper,
vexation, petulance, wrath, fretfulness, peevishness._

=Patient.= Resigned, passive, enduring, unrepining, calm, forbearing,
long-suffering.

ANT. _Impatient, insubmissive, malcontent, vehement, resistant._

=Patrician.= Noble, aristocratic, high-born, well-born.

ANT. _Plebeian, churlish, ordinary, peasant._

=Patrimony.= Heritage, inheritance, estate.

=Pattern.= Archetype, exemplar, specimen, sample, design, mold.

ANT. _Caricature, misrepresentation, monstrosity, perversion._

=Paucity.= Scantiness, deficiency, fewness, lack, want, rarity.

ANT. _Fulness, number, frequency, abundance, quantity._

=Pause=, _n._ Stop, cessation, interruption, suspension, hesitation,
suspense, doubt.

ANT. _Continuance, continuity, perseverance, progress, progression,
advancement._

=Pause=, _v._ Stop, cease, intermit, wait, stay, tarry, demur, hesitate.

ANT. _Continue, proceed, persist, persevere, advance._

=Pay=, _n._ Earnings, stipend, salary, wages, allowance, retainer,
remuneration, payment, compensation, hire, fee, requital, honorarium.

=Pay=, _v._ Recompense, requite, satisfy, compensate, discharge,
remunerate, fulfil, expend, liquidate, disburse.

ANT. _Deprive, defraud, retain, exact, hoard, invest._

=Payment.= Pay, compensation, satisfaction, content, salary, reward,
wages, recompense, requital, return.

=Peace.= Quiet, calm, repose, tranquillity, stillness, silence, harmony,
amity, concord, reconciliation, order, pacification.

ANT. _Noise, disturbance, disorder, war, strife, discord, variance,
tumult, agitation, hostility._

=Peaceable.= Peaceful, pacific, undisturbed, tranquil, quiet, mild,
serene, still.

ANT. _Warlike, quarrelsome, hostile, savage, fierce, violent, restless._

=Peasant.= Countryman, rustic, swain, laborer, villager.

ANT. _Citizen, townsman._

=Peculiar.= Special, especial, individual, particular, appropriate,
unusual, singular, strange, rare.

ANT. _General, universal, ordinary, public, common._

=Peculiarity.= Individuality, singularity, idiosyncrasy,
distinctiveness, specialty, characteristic, particularity.

ANT. _Universality, generality, uniformity, homogeneity, community._

=Pedigree.= Lineage, descent, ancestry, genealogy, birth, parentage.

ANT. _Ancestor, founder, origin; plebeianism; extinction._

=Peer.= Equal, match, mate, comrade, associate; nobleman.

ANT. _Superior; subordinate._

=Peerless.= Unmatched, matchless, unequaled, unique, superlative,
paramount.

ANT. _Ordinary, mediocre, commonplace._

=Peevish.= Querulous, cross, testy, ill-tempered, captious,
discontented, petulant, irritable, ill-natured, irascible.

ANT. _Good-natured, easy, genial, mild, complaisant, gentle._

=Penal.= Punitive, retributive, corrective.

ANT. _Preventive, reparatory; honorary, remunerary._

=Penalty.= Retribution, forfeiture, fine, punishment, amercement, mulct.

ANT. _Reward, wages, guerdon, prize, honorarium, remuneration,
compensation._

=Pendent.= Pendulous, overhanging, hanging, suspended, depending.

ANT. _Supported, sustaining, propped._

=Penetrate.= Enter, pierce, comprehend, discern, understand, perforate,
permeate, fathom.

ANT. _Glance off, be tangent to, find impermeable; misunderstand,
mistake; float._

=Penetration.= Discernment, sagacity, acuteness, discrimination,
sharpness, observation, insight.

ANT. _Obtuseness, shortsightedness; stupidity, shallowness, dulness._

=Penitence.= Repentance, contrition, remorse, sorrow, regret,
compunction.

ANT. _Self-approval, gratulation; obduracy, hardheartedness._

=Penitent=, =Penitential=. Repentant, contrite, doing penance.

ANT. _Impenitent, obdurate, hardhearted._

=Pensive.= Thoughtful, sad, wistful, meditative, dreamy, sober; serious,
mournful, melancholy, solemn, reflective.

ANT. _Joyous, glad, happy, gay, care-free, thoughtless, unreflecting._

=Penurious.= Covetous, parsimonious, stingy, avaricious, niggardly,
sordid.

ANT. _Liberal, bountiful, generous, prodigal._

=Penury.= Want, privation, indigence, poverty, destitution, beggary,
need.

ANT. _Wealth, abundance, affluence, luxury, competence._

=People.= Nation, race, population, state, tribe, community,
commonwealth.

=Perceivable=, =Perceptible=. Discernible, distinguishable, cognizable,
observable.

ANT. _Imperceptible, indistinguishable, insensible, inappreciable._

=Perceive.= Comprehend, apprehend, conceive, understand.

ANT. _Ignore, lose, miss, fail of, overlook, misconceive, misapprehend._

=Perception.= Discernment, apprehension, recognition, understanding,
comprehension, feeling, sensation, sense.

ANT. _Conception, concept, imagination, idea, notion; misunderstanding._

=Percolate.= Filter, strain, exude, drain, ooze.

ANT. _Flow, rush, stream, run, disgorge._

=Percussion.= Shock, clash, collision, concussion, encounter.

ANT. _Recoil, rebound, reverberation._

=Perdition.= Loss, ruin, destruction, overthrow, wreck, demolition.

ANT. _Restoration, recovery, rescue, salvation._

=Peremptory.= Decisive, positive, absolute, final, authoritative,
arbitrary, express, dogmatical, determined, resolute.

ANT. _Hortatory, mild, entreative, expostulatory, suggestive._

=Perennial.= Perpetual, unceasing, never failing, enduring, continual,
constant, permanent, uninterrupted.

ANT. _Occasional, intermittent, periodic, uncertain; perishing,
ephemeral, transient, fleeting._

=Perfect.= Finished, complete, entire, faultless, consummate, accurate,
ideal, finished, absolute, completed, correct, immaculate, sinless,
blameless, holy, undefiled, stainless, spotless, unblemished.

ANT. _Imperfect, bad, deficient, blemished, faulty, corrupt, poor,
inferior, incomplete, perverted, worthless, spoiled, insufficient,
meager, defective, short, scant, marred, defaced, corrupted, deformed,
fallible, ruined._

=Perfection.= Excellence, completeness, faultlessness, maturity,
wholeness, consummation, perfectness.

ANT. _Defect, imperfection, incompleteness, blemish._

=Perfectly.= Thoroughly, exquisitely, completely, faultlessly, entirely,
fully, wholly, exactly, accurately.

ANT. _Imperfectly, faultily, partially, inaccurately._

=Perfidious.= False, treacherous, faithless, disloyal, dishonest,
untrustworthy.

ANT. _True, loyal, stanch, upright, faithful, honest, trustworthy._

=Perform.= Complete, accomplish, execute, do, discharge, fulfil;
represent, act, play, enact, consummate, achieve.

ANT. _Spoil, injure, harm, ruin, mar; fail of, misconduct._

=Performance.= Completion, consummation, execution, accomplishment,
achievement, work, production, act, action, deed, exploit, feat.

ANT. _Failure, defeat, omission, abortion, undoing, nonperformance._

=Perfume.= Odor, redolence, balminess, fragrance, smell, aroma, scent.

ANT. _Stench, stink, fume._

=Perfunctory.= Mechanical, careless, listless, indifferent.

ANT. _Animated, spirited, assiduous, careful, ardent, zealous,
interested._

=Perhaps.= By chance, peradventure, perchance, maybe, haply, possibly.

ANT. _Certainly, inevitably._

=Peril.= Hazard, risk, jeopardy, danger, venture, insecurity, liability.

ANT. _Safety, assurance, certainty, security._

=Period.= Time, cycle, age, epoch, limit, end, conclusion; era,
duration, date, term, continuance, termination, conclusion, bound.

ANT. _Eternity, infinity, perpetuity, endlessness, everlasting._

=Periodical.= Recurring, regular, stated, recurrent, systematic,
calculable, serial.

ANT. _Indeterminate, eccentric, fitful, spasmodic, irregular._

=Permanent.= Enduring, abiding, changeless, constant, durable,
steadfast, unchangeable, immutable, invariable, fixed, unchanging,
stable, lasting, persistent, perpetual.

ANT. _Transient, brief, fleeting, evanescent, passing, transitory,
momentary, temporary, ephemeral._

=Permission.= Authority, allowance, consent, liberty, leave, license,
permit, authorization.

ANT. _Hindrance, opposition, objection, denial, prevention, prohibition,
refusal, resistance._

=Pernicious.= Mischievous, baneful, destructive, noisome, deleterious,
harmful, hurtful, poisonous, noxious, pestilential, unhealthful,
unwholesome, detrimental, deadly, evil, foul, injurious, insalubrious,
pestiferous, perverting, ruinous.

ANT. _Helpful, invigorating, salutary, advantageous, good, favorable,
life-giving, rejuvenating, useful, serviceable, beneficent, wholesome,
beneficial, healthful._

=Perpetual.= Continual, endless, unceasing, unfailing, incessant,
constant, eternal, everlasting, perennial, permanent, enduring.

ANT. _Periodic, transient, recurrent, temporary, occasional, casual,
momentary._

=Perplex.= Entangle, involve, complicate, embarrass, puzzle, bewilder,
confuse, distract, annoy, confound, trouble, worry, disturb, pester,
bother, mystify.

ANT. _Enlighten, clear, explicate, simplify, elucidate, illumine,
unfold, explain, manifest, calm, quiet, control, please, instruct,
solve, illustrate, make intelligible, account for._

=Perplexity.= Confusion, bewilderment, disturbance, distraction, doubt,
embarrassment, astonishment, amazement.

ANT. _Composure, calmness; discernment, insight._

=Perseverance.= Persistency, tenacity, steadfastness, steadiness,
constancy, pertinacity, indefatigableness, resolution.

ANT. _Fitfulness, caprice, instability, variableness, irregularity;
indecision, vacillation, wavering, irresoluteness._

=Perspicacity.= Acuteness, keenness, discernment, penetration,
perspicaciousness, insight, sagacity, astuteness, distinctness,
explicitness.

ANT. _Dulness, stupefaction, obtuseness, hebetude, stolidity,
inobservance, insensibility._

=Perspicuity.= Plainness, lucidity, clearness, explicitness,
intelligibility, transparency, perspicuousness.

ANT. _Obscurity, turbidness, unintelligibility, incomprehensibility,
indefiniteness, doubtfulness, mysticism, confusion._

=Persuade.= Dispose, allure, entice, urge, move, influence, prevail
upon, coax, bring over, incline, convince, lead, induce, incite, win
over, impel.

ANT. _Deter, discourage, restrain, hinder, repel, dissuade, hold back._

=Pertinent.= Apposite, relevant, suitable, appropriate, proper, fit,
adapted.

ANT. _Unrelated, unsuitable, impertinent, incongruous, alien,
unconnected, discordant, inharmonious._

=Pertness.= Impertinence, boldness, forwardness, sauciness, flippancy,
impudence, briskness, liveliness, smartness, sprightliness.

ANT. _Diffidence, humility, modesty, shyness, bashfulness, demureness._

=Perverse.= Obstinate, contrary, fractious, froward, intractable,
petulant, wilful, wayward, ungovernable, stubborn, factious, untoward.

ANT. _Compliant, genial, accommodating, governable, kind, obliging,
complaisant, amenable._

=Petition=, _n._ Prayer, supplication, entreaty; solicitation,
application, suit, appeal, address.

ANT. _Protest, claim, expostulation, demand, injunction, dictation,
exaction, dissension, dissent._

=Philanthropy.= Love, good will, charity, benevolence, humanity,
public-spiritedness.

ANT. _Misanthropy, ill will, selfishness._

=Philosopher.= Student, theorist, speculator, teacher, master, savant,
schoolman, doctor; adept.

ANT. _Learner, pupil, beginner; ignoramus, dunce._

=Philosophical.= Rational, wise, temperate, calm, cool, reasonable,
sound, collected, composed, sedate, tranquil, Platonic.

ANT. _Popular, crude, loose, inaccurate, illogical, irrational, unsound,
unscientific, thoughtless, hotheaded, impulsive._

=Physical.= Material, natural, corporal, sensible, visible, tangible,
bodily, corporeal.

ANT. _Mental, spiritual, immaterial, unsubstantial, hyperphysical,
intangible, moral, unreal, intellectual, invisible._

=Picturesque.= Graphic, vivid, artistic, beautiful, scenic, pictorial,
graceful, comely, seemly.

ANT. _Unseemly, ugly, inartistic, ungraceful, tame, flat, insipid._

=Piety.= Sanctity, godliness, holiness, religion, reverence, devotion,
grace.

ANT. _Impiety, sacrilege, sinfulness, ungodliness, hypocrisy, formalism,
sanctimoniousness._

=Piquant.= Tart, sharp, pungent, stimulating, biting, racy, stinging,
cutting, severe.

ANT. _Flat, tame, dull, insipid._

=Pique.= Resentment, umbrage, irritation, displeasure, grudge, offense.

ANT. _Delight, gratification, pleasure, satisfaction, contentment,
approval, complacency._

=Piteous.= Sorrowful, mournful, affecting, doleful, lamentable, woful,
rueful, sad, pitiable, pitiful.

ANT. _Joyous, glad, merry, happy, cheerful, comfortable, desirable,
pleasant, agreeable, delectable._

=Pitiful.= Lamentable, mournful, base, contemptible, piteous, pathetic,
pitiable, touching, sorrowful, woful, wretched, despicable, moving,
paltry.

ANT. _Exalted, glorious, helpful, great, grand, sublime, superior,
beneficent, commanding, august, dignified, noble, lofty, mighty,
superb._

=Pity.= Sympathy, mercy, tenderness, condolence, compassion,
commiseration.

ANT. _Cruelty, severity, mercilessness, sternness, hardness, rigor,
inhumanity, brutality, barbarity, harshness, pitilessness, ruthlessness,
hardheartedness, ferocity, truculence._

=Placid.= Pleased, contented, unruffled, undisturbed, peaceful, serene,
tranquil, quiet, gentle, collected, calm, composed, passionless.

ANT. _Discontent, disturbed, distressed, anxious, distracted, perplexed,
distrait; vehement, wild, passionate, impulsive, agitated, ruffled,
excited, impassioned._

=Plain.= Artless, undisguised, sincere, frank, honest, ingenuous,
candid, unembellished, simple, downright, blunt, distinct, apparent,
manifest, open, clear, evident, visible, obvious, unmistakable,
conspicuous, level, flat, smooth; easy, natural, homely, ugly; simple,
frugal.

ANT. _Unnatural, pretended, affected, assumed, feigned, artificial,
insincere, vain, pretentious, conceited; ornate, ornamented, decorated,
embellished; involved, obscure, hidden, invisible, inconspicuous,
uneven, undulating, rugged, broken, ambiguous, abrupt, obstructed,
uncertain, enigmatical, abstruse; beautiful, sophisticated, artful._

=Plant=, _v._ Seed, set, sow, seed down, set out.

ANT. _Eradicate, uproot, extirpate, weed out, root up._

=Plausible.= Specious, seeming, pretending, fair-spoken, passable,
pretentious, ostensible, apparent; colorable, feasible.

ANT. _Genuine, transparent, true, sterling, veritable, unmistakable,
authentic, sincere, unaffected._

=Plead.= Advocate, ask, beg, urge, argue, solicit, entreat, implore,
press.

ANT. _Grant, bestow, answer._

=Pleasant.= Kindly, obliging, attractive, pleasing, pleasurable,
agreeable, kind, good-natured.

ANT. _Disagreeable, gloomy, glum, harsh, hateful, repulsive, unpleasant,
repellent, offensive, unkind, forbidding, dreary, arrogant, austere,
grim, ill-natured, ill-humored, repelling._

=Pleasure.= Satisfaction, comfort, solace, joy, gladness, delight, will,
choice, purpose, command, kindness, enjoyment, gratification, happiness,
self-indulgence, voluptuousness.

ANT. _Suffering, affliction, pain, sorrow, sadness, distress, misery,
compulsion, force, coercion; mourning, depression, dejection,
melancholy, misfortune, poverty, want._

=Plenitude.= Fulness, abundance, completeness, plenty, repletion,
plethora; luxury, affluence, exuberance, wealth, richness, profusion,
amplitude, enough, supply, sufficiency.

ANT. _Want, need, scarcity, scantiness, dearth, insufficiency,
restriction, poverty, partiality, stint, reserve, narrowness, penury,
impecuniosity._

=Plentiful.= Bountiful, generous, large, abundant, adequate, copious,
enough, full, profuse, rich, sufficient, complete, exuberant, plenteous,
replete, teeming, affluent, ample, lavish, liberal, luxuriant,
overflowing, abounding.

ANT. _Deficient, drained, impoverished, scanty, insufficient, small,
sparing, stingy, straitened, poor, scant, exhausted, inadequate, mean,
miserly, narrow, niggardly, scarce, short, scrimped._

=Plot.= Intrigue, conspiracy, cabal, contrivance, scheme, stratagem,
project, combination, machination; story.

ANT. _Blunder, botch; misarrangement, miscontrivance._

=Poet.= Bard, author of poems, singer, rimester, rimer, versifier.

=Poetical.= Metrical, rhythmical, lyric, rimed, versified; imaginative,
fictitious, creative.

ANT. _Prosaic, unpoetical, unrimed, unversified, unrhythmic;
commonplace, matter-of-fact, unimaginative, realistic; mathematical,
historical._

=Poetry.= Meter, rime, numbers, poesy, song, verse, poem, metrical
composition.

ANT. _Prose, prosaic speech, prosaic writing._

=Poignant.= Pricking, piercing, sharp, pungent; pointed, keen,
satirical.

ANT. _Blunt, dull, obtuse, insipid, pointless, vapid, inexpressive._

=Poisonous.= Venomous, baneful, corrupting, noxious, pestilential,
malignant, virulent, pestiferous, deleterious, mephitic.

ANT. _Salubrious, wholesome, healthful, beneficial, sanative, genial,
remedial, hygienic._

=Polite.= Courteous, civil, courtly, obliging, gracious, polished,
accomplished, complaisant, cultivated, cultured, elegant, genteel,
urbane, well-behaved, well-mannered, well-bred.

ANT. _Awkward, clownish, unmannerly, uncouth, boorish, blunt,
impertinent, brusk, bluff, impolite, insolent, coarse, ill-bred,
ill-behaved, rude, rustic, impudent, ill-mannered, untutored, uncivil,
untaught, discourteous, unpolished, insulting._

=Politeness.= Courtesy, civility, gentility, refinement, courtliness,
elegance, urbanity, good breeding, decorum, complaisance, affability.

ANT. _Rudeness, arrogance, incivility, churlishness, ungraciousness,
insolence, sauciness, impertinence, effrontery, presumption._

=Poor.= Needy, indigent, destitute; lean, emaciated; feeble, dejected;
shabby, mean; unfavorable, uncomfortable; barren; sterile; inadequate,
insignificant, insufficient; meek.

ANT. _Rich, wealthy, affluent, opulent; splendid, costly, valuable,
estimable; fruitful, abundant, luxuriant, productive, prolific; copious,
abounding, ample, well-supplied, comfortable, favorable; adequate,
sufficient; important, significant, arrogant, self-assertive._

=Popular.= Cheap, common, ordinary, inferior; familiar, plain, easy,
comprehensible; favorite, liked, approved, accepted, accredited;
current, prevalent, general, prevailing; pertaining to the people,
vulgar, plebeian; mediocre.

ANT. _Unpopular, exclusive, aristocratic, snobbish; special, excellent,
unique, superior, eminent; selfish, narrow, illiberal, uncharitable;
sole, only, scientific, restricted, esoteric; odious, detested._

=Position.= Situation, station, assertion, place, posture, locality,
site; attitude; state, condition, circumstances; principle, doctrine,
proposition, dictum, affirmation, thesis; rank.

=Positive.= Real, actual, absolute, explicit, definite, confident,
certain, dogmatic; defined, precise, clear; veritable, substantial,
true; indisputable, incontrovertible; indubitable; decisive,
unconditional, imperative, unequivocal, settled, assured, express.

ANT. _Negative, denying, indirect, disavowing, disclaiming, privative;
relative; unreal, fictitious, imaginative, contingent, dependent,
implied, conditional, dubious, unsubstantial, indefinite, equivocal._

=Possession.= Control, ownership, tenure, retention, management,
occupation; (_pl._) property, estate, wealth, dominion.

ANT. _Dispossession, resignation, surrender, abandoning, renouncing._

=Potent.= Powerful, mighty, puissant, strong, able, efficient,
efficacious, forcible, cogent, influential, effective, active,
energetic.

ANT. _Impotent, powerless, weak, feeble, infirm; inefficient, incapable,
incompetent, incapacitated._

=Potential.= Possible, implicit, undeveloped, virtual, immanent,
inherent, intrinsic.

ANT. _Actual, explicit, real, objective, developed, express,
determinate, positive, clear, definite._

=Poverty.= Distress, beggary, indigence, destitution, pauperism, penury,
privation, want, need, mendicancy.

ANT. _Wealth, riches, affluence, luxury, comfort._

=Power.= Ability, competency, capacity, faculty, aptitude, dexterity,
efficiency, might, talent, energy, skill, strength, readiness,
capability, cleverness, expertness, efficacy, force, qualification,
cogency, susceptibility.

ANT. _Feebleness, weakness, helplessness, impotence, incompetence,
inability, inaptitude, dulness, awkwardness, imbecility, incapacity,
inefficiency, unskilfulness, maladroitness, stupidity._

=Practice=, _n._ Usage, habit, custom; performance, application, system;
manner, method, mode, experience.

ANT. _Theory, speculation, assumption, ideal, conjecture, abstraction._

=Practice=, _v._ Do, perform, exercise, carry out, execute; teach,
train; habituate, try; apply, use; pursue.

ANT. _Abandon, misuse, disuse, neglect, disregard, slight, omit, pass
over._

=Praise=, _n._ Applause, approval, cheering, compliment, acclaim,
adulation, acclamation, approbation, cheers, plaudit, eulogy, encomium,
flattery, laudation, panegyric, sycophancy.

ANT. _Abuse, blame, censure, contempt, reproach, ignominy, slander,
scorn, obloquy, animadversion, condemnation, denunciation,
disapprobation, disparagement, vituperation, reproof, disapproval,
repudiation, hissing, vilification._

=Praise=, _v._ Laud, eulogize, celebrate, magnify, glorify; honor,
commend; applaud, extol, compliment.

ANT. _Decry, blame, censure, reprove, disparage, depreciate, discredit,
traduce, condemn._

=Pray.= Ask, beg, beseech, entreat, implore, invoke, petition,
supplicate, request, importune, bid, plead, call upon, conjure.

=Precarious.= Doubtful, dubious, hazardous, perilous, risky, insecure,
uncertain, unsettled, unsteady, unstable, unassured.

ANT. _Firm, settled, stable, sure, certain, real, undoubted,
unquestionable, actual, assured, immutable, incontestable, undeniable,
infallible, strong, steady._

=Precaution.= Foresight, prudence, forethought, providence, wariness,
care.

ANT. _Thoughtlessness, improvidence, carelessness, imprudence._

=Precedent=, _n._ Example, antecedent, case, instance, pattern,
authority, warrant.

=Precept.= Commandment, law, injunction, mandate, rule, direction,
principle, maxim; doctrine, dogma; order; instruction.

ANT. _Hint, suggestion, allusion, insinuation, prompting, impulse,
instigation._

=Precise.= Accurate, exact, correct, definite, scrupulous, punctilious,
particular, nice, formal; explicit, terse.

ANT. _Inaccurate, inexact, incorrect, heedless, careless, incautious,
implicit, ambiguous, circumlocutory, loose, vague, informal,
unceremonious._

=Predatory.= Plundering, pillaging, ravaging, rapacious, marauding.

ANT. _Protecting, guarding, watching, keeping, sheltering, shielding,
saving._

=Predestination.= Fate, necessity, foreknowledge, foreordination.

ANT. _Choice, freedom, free will, independence, uncertainty, accident,
chance, free agency._

=Prediction.= Prophecy, prognostication, foreboding, divination, augury,
soothsaying, vaticination, foretelling, presage.

ANT. _Reminiscence, recollection, report; history, narration, account._

=Preface.= Introduction, proem, preamble, prologue, exordium, prelude.

ANT. _Sequel, postscript, appendix, peroration, epilogue, conclusion._

=Prefer.= Choose, elect, select, desire, pick out, fancy, single out,
fix upon; elevate, advance, promote; offer, proffer, present, address.

ANT. _Reject, discard, decline, refuse, repudiate; degrade, depress;
postpone, defer, withhold._

=Prejudice.= Bias, partiality, unfairness, preconception, prepossession,
presumption.

ANT. _Certainty, evidence, proof, conviction, conclusion, demonstration,
reason, reasoning._

=Preliminary.= Prior, introductory, preparatory, prefatory, proemial,
previous, precedent, antecedent.

ANT. _Subsequent, following, consequent, appended, succeeding._

=Premium.= Reward, remuneration, recompense, prize, bonus, bounty,
guerdon, meed, bribe, douceur, enhancement, gratuity.

ANT. _Penalty, fine, mulct, amercement, forfeiture, depredation,
decline, fall, loss._

=Preposterous.= Irrational, foolish, monstrous, absurd, perverted,
extravagant, ridiculous, exorbitant.

ANT. _Reasonable, moderate, right, just, due, fair, judicious, mediocre,
commonplace._

=Presence.= Person, personality, individuality, port, mien, appearance,
nearness, immediacy; vicinity, neighborhood.

ANT. _Absence, distance, remoteness, separation; society, world;
temperament, character._

=Preservation.= Security, safety, maintenance, conservation, integrity,
protection, care, guardianship, watch and ward, soundness.

ANT. _Exposure, abandonment, impairment, peril, damage, injury._

=Presumption.= Assumption, arrogance, effrontery, audacity, assurance;
presupposition, hypothesis, guess, conjecture, belief, opinion,
judgment, understanding, concession, condition.

ANT. _Modesty, deference, diffidence, bashfulness, hesitation; proof,
deduction, demonstration, verification, certainty, fact._

=Pretend.= Claim, represent, allege, simulate, feign, profess;
counterfeit.

ANT. _Verify, substantiate, refute, detect, expose, unmask, test._

=Pretense.= Disguise, excuse, affectation, mask, show, pretension,
semblance, wile, trick, subterfuge, simulation, ruse, assumption,
pretext, seeming, dissimulation, air, cloak, color.

ANT. _Candor, sincerity, ingenuousness, frankness, honesty, truth,
openness, reality, simplicity, guilelessness, fact, actuality._

=Prevalence.= Success, superiority, predominance, preponderance;
influence, force, power, strength, efficacy; universality, extension,
acceptation, custom, operation.

ANT. _Decay, desuetude, disappearance, evanescence, subordination,
collapse, destruction, abolition, subsidence, subjection, diminution._

=Previous.= Antecedent, before, earlier, precedent, preliminary,
introductory, prior, preceding, front, forward, former, foregoing,
anterior.

ANT. _After, concluding, following, consequent, later, posterior,
latter, succeeding, subsequent, hindmost, hinder, hind._

=Price.= Expense, outlay, worth, expenditure, value, charge, cost.

=Pride.= Arrogance, insolence, reserve, haughtiness, self-esteem,
presumption, superciliousness, vanity, ostentation, conceit,
self-respect, self-exaltation, disdain, vainglory, self-conceit,
self-complacency.

ANT. _Humility, lowliness, modesty, self-distrust, meekness,
self-abasement._

=Primary.= First, fundamental, primitive, original, preparatory; chief,
principal, pristine; elementary, leading.

ANT. _Secondary, posterior, subsequent, later, following; unimportant,
subordinate, inferior; supplemental, auxiliary._

=Prime=, _n._ Perfection, culmination, apex, zenith; dawn, opening,
youth, spring, beginning; cream, flower.

ANT. _Wane, winter, evening; decadence, decay._

=Primeval.= Immemorial, original, old, primal, patriarchal, native,
primitive, pristine, uncreated, ancient, aboriginal, autochthonic,
indigenous, prime, primary, primordial.

ANT. _Foreign, fresh, late, modern, new, novel, recent, exotic,
adventitious._

=Principal.= Highest, most important, chief, main; leading, foremost,
preëminent, capital, essential; primary, first.

ANT. _Subordinate, inferior, secondary, auxiliary, supplemental, minor,
dependent, subservient, ancillary._

=Principle.= Source, cause, origin; faculty, endowment; postulate,
truth, maxim, axiom; rule, law; element; doctrine, dogma, opinion;
ground, motive, reason; integrity, rectitude, uprightness, probity,
virtue, worth, honor.

ANT. _Result, sequence, development, issue; application, action,
operation, exercise, manifestation, exhibition; iniquity, immorality._

=Prize.= Trophy, honor, reward, premium, guerdon, palm, laurels;
capture; gain, advantage; spoil, plunder, booty.

ANT. _Loss, failure, fine, forfeiture; brand, stigma, infamy._

=Probation.= Examination, trial, ordeal, test, assay, proof, experiment.

ANT. _License, irresponsibility, non-probation._

=Proclaim.= Publish, announce, declare, promulgate, herald, advertise,
enunciate, utter, blaze abroad, report, make known.

ANT. _Silence, repress, suppress, conceal, secrete; retract, recall._

=Prodigal=, _a._ Extravagant, profuse, lavish, bountiful, wasteful,
squandering.

ANT. _Economical, thrifty, saving, frugal; close, miserly, niggardly._

=Profession.= Avowal, declaration, claim; occupation, vocation,
employment; law, theology, or medicine; assertion, acknowledgment;
representation, pretense, protestation.

ANT. _Denial, concealment, suppression; retraction, recantation,
disavowal; leisure, fad, hobby, avocation; trade, business._

=Proficient.= Expert, adept, skilful, skilled, competent, conversant,
qualified, practiced, accomplished, finished, trained.

ANT. _Unskilled, inexpert, awkward, ignorant, backward, inconversant,
incompetent, untrained, unpracticed, inept._

=Profit.= Gain, advantage, benefit, emolument, improvement, proceeds,
utility, usefulness, returns, value, receipts, avail, expediency, good,
service.

ANT. _Damage, destruction, harm, hurt, loss, injury, waste, ruin,
detriment, disadvantage._

=Profitable.= Lucrative, beneficial, useful, advantageous, productive,
desirable, gainful, remunerative.

ANT. _Useless, vain, fruitless, unproductive, unremunerative,
unprofitable, undesirable, disadvantageous, detrimental, unbeneficial._

=Profound.= Deep, descending; thorough; fathomless, abysmal; mysterious,
abstruse, occult, obscure, recondite; complete; penetrating, intimate,
intense, philosophical.

ANT. _Superficial, shallow, commonplace, external, slight, apparent,
obvious, incomplete; surface._

=Progress.= Advance, advancement, attainment, increase, improvement,
proficiency, progression, growth, development.

ANT. _Delay, check, retrogression, stay, stop, stoppage, falling off,
relapse, decline, falling back._

=Prohibit.= Forbid, hinder, inhibit, interdict, preclude, prevent,
debar, disallow.

ANT. _Allow, empower, let, license, order, require, sanction, authorize,
command, direct, enjoin, permit, warrant, suffer, tolerate, put up with,
give permission, give consent, consent to._

=Prolific.= Fertile, fruitful, productive, generating, teeming, active.

ANT. _Barren, sterile, unproductive, unfruitful, effete._

=Prolix.= Long, diffuse, tiresome, prolonged, protracted; wordy,
verbose, prosaic, rambling, discursive; tedious, wearisome.

ANT. _Condensed, terse, concise, brief, laconic, curt, epigrammatic._

=Prominent.= Projecting, manifest, protuberant, conspicuous; eminent,
distinguished, famous, celebrated, important, main, principal, leading,
characteristic.

ANT. _Receding, hollowed, concave, indented, engraved; insignificant,
secondary, unimportant, minor, indistinguishable, indistinct,
subordinate, inconspicuous, trivial, immaterial, unessential._

=Promote.= Encourage, forward, foster, push, advance, aid, assist,
foment, excite, further, help, raise, urge forward, urge on, elevate,
exalt.

ANT. _Abase, allay; hinder, prevent, foil, frustrate._

=Prompt.= Ready, quick, agile, alert, brisk, nimble, expeditious;
willing, hasty, inclined, disposed, responsive, unhesitating.

ANT. _Dilatory, slow, tardy, lingering, loitering, inactive, sluggish,
unready, unresponsive, procrastinating, behindhand, backward._

=Pronounce.= Deliver, speak, utter, articulate, enunciate; declare,
affirm; propound, assert, express.

ANT. _Mispronounce, gabble, mumble; silence, suppress; deny, retract._

=Propagate.= Increase, diffuse, disseminate, promote; spread, extend,
generate, promulgate, circulate.

ANT. _Strangle, stifle, extinguish, suppress, repress, check, hush up;
contract, diminish, reduce; contradict, deny._

=Proper.= Own, individual, peculiar, particular; right, fit, decent;
personal, constitutional, special, specific; suitable, appropriate,
seemly, legitimate; decent, respectable.

ANT. _Common, universal, general; unfitting, inappropriate, unsuitable,
unseemly, indecent, wrong, improper, unbecoming, unbefitting._

=Propitiation.= Expiation, satisfaction, atonement, reconciliation.

ANT. _Reprobation, retribution, vengeance, wrath, alienation,
estrangement, curse, penalty, punishment, offense, condemnation,
chastisement._

=Propitious.= Auspicious, kind, benign, gracious, friendly, benignant,
clement, kindly, favorable, merciful.

ANT. _Adverse, antagonistic, hostile, repellent, unfriendly,
unpropitious, unfavorable, ill-disposed, forbidding, inauspicious._

=Proportion.= Ratio, symmetry, relation, harmony, share, lot; equality,
similarity; adjustment, distribution; arrangement, adaptation.

ANT. _Disproportion, disparity, disorder, incongruity, discrepancy,
absurdity, contrariety._

=Proposal.= Bid, offer, overture, proposition.

ANT. _Acceptance, denial, refusal, rejection, repulse, disapproval._

=Proposition.= Proposal, statement, offer, declaration; overture,
suggestion, proffer, tender; position, thesis, dictum, assertion,
affirmation, doctrine.

ANT. _Withdrawal, recantation, abjuration, disavowal, revocation._

=Prosperity.= Thrift, weal, welfare, happiness, well-being, success,
good fortune.

ANT. _Woe, misfortune, ill luck, failure, adversity, calamity, reverses,
affliction, distress, disaster, misery._

=Protest=, _v._ Assert, aver, attest, testify; affirm, declare;
asseverate, avow, profess; expostulate, remonstrate, repudiate,
deprecate, denounce.

ANT. _Retract, withdraw, abjure, revoke; coincide, sanction, agree,
endorse, subscribe, acquiesce._

=Protract.= Defer, continue, delay, extend, elongate, lengthen,
procrastinate, postpone, prolong, draw out.

ANT. _Abbreviate, contract, conclude, hasten, hurry, reduce, shorten,
abridge, curtail, limit._

=Proud.= Arrogant, haughty, presumptuous, lordly; worthy, admirable,
grand, splendid, magnificent, ostentatious; lofty, supercilious,
imperious, boastful, elated, imposing, vainglorious.

ANT. _Humble, unassuming, unobtrusive, meek, lowly, mild, submissive,
unpretending, deferential, affable, unpresuming, mean._

=Proverb.= Axiom, byword, dictum, adage, aphorism, maxim, motto,
precept, truism, saying, saw, apothegm.

=Provide.= Prepare, supply, afford, contribute, furnish; engage,
bargain, agree; stipulate; procure.

ANT. _Neglect, withhold, refuse, mismanage, appropriate, overlook;
divert, alienate, misuse; fail, disappoint._

=Provocation.= Vexation, incitement, stimulus, incentive; affront,
insult, offense, indignity.

ANT. _Pacification, mitigation, assuagement; deference, compliment,
homage, honor, respect._

=Prowess.= Heroism, valor, gallantry, bravery, courage, intrepidity.

ANT. _Fear, effeminacy, timidity, cowardice, cowardliness,
pusillanimity._

=Prudence.= Discretion, frugality, forethought, judgment, judiciousness,
providence, care, caution, foresight, wisdom, consideration,
carefulness, circumspection.

ANT. _Folly, heedlessness, prodigality, recklessness, indiscretion,
wastefulness, improvidence, imprudence, thoughtlessness, rashness._

=Prudent.= Cautious, considerate, judicious, provident; circumspect,
sagacious, wise, discreet; frugal, economical, thrifty.

ANT. _Reckless, inconsiderate, improvident, wasteful, extravagant,
lavish, prodigal; indiscreet, unwise; foolish, rash, imprudent,
audacious._

=Public.= Common, general, popular, social, open; notorious.

ANT. _Private, individual, secret, domestic, secluded, close, personal._

=Punctilious.= Exact, particular, precise, careful, nice, scrupulous,
conscientious; punctual, ceremonious.

ANT. _Careless, slovenly, unscrupulous; informal, unceremonious._

=Puny.= Small, feeble, inferior, petty; weak, diminutive, undeveloped,
dwarfed, stunted, undersized, tiny.

ANT. _Large, great, robust, developed, fine, vigorous; colossal,
gigantic._

=Pupil.= Learner, disciple, student, novice, ward, tyro.

ANT. _Teacher, master, proficient, scholar, adept; guardian._

=Purchase=, _v._ Buy, obtain, procure, secure, acquire, bargain for,
barter for, get.

ANT. _Exchange, sell, barter, dispose of, put to sale._

=Pure.= Innocent, unsullied, spotless, unspotted, stainless, true,
guiltless, incorrupt, clean, genuine, chaste, guileless, classic,
classical, holy, immaculate, virtuous, real, sheer, mere, simple,
unmixed, unpolluted, unadulterated, unmingled, undefiled, unblemished,
uncorrupted, unstained, untainted, untarnished, upright, perfect.

ANT. _Impure, indecent, polluted, foul, tainted, unchaste, immodest,
lewd, obscene, indelicate, defiled, dirty, filthy, gross, mixed,
stained, sullied, unclean, tarnished, adulterated._

=Purpose=, _n._ Design, end, intention, aim, scope, meaning, object,
plan, intention, purport, effect, project.

ANT. _Lot, chance, accident, haphazard, casualty, fate._

=Put.= Deposit, place, set, lay; cause, produce, propose, state; attach,
attribute, assign; assume, suppose; entice, constrain.

ANT. _Remove, raise, withdraw, displace, transpose, transfer, change._

=Putrid.= Decayed, decomposed, rotten, stinking, putrefied, foul,
offensive.

ANT. _Clean, sweet, wholesome, fragrant, pure, healthful, fresh._




                                   Q


=Quaint.= Odd, antique; curious, fanciful, affected, whimsical; archaic,
singular, unusual; antiquated, extraordinary, droll.

ANT. _Commonplace, usual, ordinary, common; fashionable, modish,
modern._

=Quality.= Property, peculiarity, sort, disposition, temper; character,
attribute, rank, part, position; characteristic; acquisition; nature,
trait, mood, condition, station, capacity, tendency.

ANT. _Negation, heterogeneity, anomalousness, lack of distinction,
nondescript, weakness, ineffectiveness, incapacity, disqualification._

=Quantity.= Greatness, measure, amount, bulk, extent, size, aggregate,
length, duration, content, comprehensiveness.

ANT. _Scantiness, want, deficiency, margin, deterioration, diminution,
waste, wear, loss._

=Queer.= Curious, bizarre, droll, comical, odd, peculiar, quaint,
strange, uncommon, unusual, whimsical, singular, ridiculous, anomalous,
fantastic, funny, erratic, extraordinary, ludicrous, grotesque,
laughable, preposterous, unique, unmatched, eccentric, crotchety.

ANT. _Common, customary, normal, ordinary, usual, regular, familiar,
natural._

=Querimonious=, =Querulous=. Lamenting, complaining, whining, bewailing,
mourning, murmuring, discontented, dissatisfied, malcontent.

ANT. _Contented, easy, uncomplaining, satisfied, complacent, cheerful,
genial, good-tempered._

=Query=, =Question=, _n._ Inquiry, doubt; point, topic, subject;
dispute, discussion, debate; investigation, examination;
experimentation, scrutiny, interrogation.

ANT. _Solution, explanation, answer, reply, response; concession,
admission._

=Question=, _v._ Ask, interrogate, catechize, doubt, controvert,
dispute; examine, converse with; call in question; inquire, investigate,
query, dubitate.

ANT. _Answer, reply, satisfy, respond._

=Quick.= Speedy, expeditious, active, rapid, nimble, fleet, alert,
lively, sprightly; alive, living, animate; agile, brisk, ready; hasty,
swift; impatient, eager, passionate; fresh, bracing, keen, sharp;
sensitive, perceptive, intelligent.

ANT. _Slow, tardy, inactive, inert, sluggish, dull, insensitive,
deliberate, gradual, moderate, late, unready, dilatory, slack,
unresponsive, lingering, heavy, stupid, wearisome._

=Quicken.= Hasten, hurry, accelerate, despatch, drive, expedite,
facilitate, further, speed, urge, promote, advance, make haste, press
forward.

ANT. _Hinder, impede, check, obstruct, retard, clog, delay._

=Quiet=, _n._ Rest, repose, tranquillity, silence, calm, peace,
stillness.

ANT. _Tumult, noise, shouting, action, commotion, activity, storm;
unrest, excitement, agitation, disturbance, turmoil._

=Quiet=, _a._ Tranquil, unruffled, smooth, unmolested, peaceful,
undisturbed, peaceable, calm, patient, contented, hushed, still, placid;
gentle, mild, undemonstrative, meek.

ANT. _Turbulent, tumultuous, uproarious, disturbed, agitated, wild,
excited, violent, uneasy, boisterous, restless, confused, noisy._

=Quote.= Cite, recite, plagiarize, repeat, excerpt, extract, paraphrase.

ANT. _Suppress, ignore, disdain, omit._




                                   R


=Rabble.= Mob, crowd, people, populace; herd, the masses, multitudes,
commonalty; scum, dregs.

ANT. _Aristocracy, nobility, élite, galaxy._

=Racy.= Lively, piquant, pungent, spicy, spirited, forcible, flavorous,
rich.

ANT. _Flat, cold, flavorless, insipid, stale, stupid, tasteless, dull,
prosy, vapid._

=Radiant.= Lustrous, brilliant, splendid, gorgeous, glittering, glaring,
radiating, beaming, resplendent, shining, sparkling, luminous,
effulgent, glorious.

ANT. _Dull, dark, somber, murky, lusterless, non-luminous, sunless,
shadowy, lurid, cloudy, gloomy, obscure, overcast, ebon, black._

=Radical.= Fundamental, innate, essential, native, natural, original,
organic, primitive; entire, complete, extreme, thorough, positive,
perfect, thorough-going, total; ingrained, constitutional.

ANT. _Superficial, tentative, trial; inadequate, incomplete, moderate,
partial, palliative, slight; conservative._

=Raise.= Lift, elevate, heave; exalt, advance, enhance; increase,
excite, aggravate, intensify, heighten, set upright; awaken, arouse,
originate, produce, effect, cause; build, erect; levy, collect;
propagate, breed, rear; bring up, incite, start; utter, summon;
cultivate.

ANT. _Depress, lower, drop, sink, let down; degrade, disgrace; debase,
humble, reduce; lessen, diminish, decrease._

=Ramble.= Rove, roam, wander, range, stroll, saunter, straggle, stray.

ANT. _Speed, hasten, drive, run, proceed, rush, hurry._

=Random=, _a._ Chance, haphazard, fortuitous, casual, wandering, stray,
wild, aimless, purposeless, unpremeditated, accidental, vague.

ANT. _Aimed, intended, controlled, purposed, deliberate, designed,
intentional, regular, systematic, planned._

=Ransom=, _v._ Redeem, liberate, rescue, deliver, release, emancipate,
indemnify.

ANT. _Hold for ransom, kidnap, imprison, hold as hostage, indict, fine,
mulct, prosecute._

=Rapid.= Swift, quick, fast, fleet, hasty, brisk, expeditious, hurried.

ANT. _Slow, deliberate, cumbrous, lazy, retarded, moderate, gradual,
dilatory, lingering, tardy._

=Rapidity.= Rapidness, haste, celerity, speed, velocity, agility,
swiftness, fleetness, quickness, despatch.

ANT. _Slowness, dilatoriness, tardiness, delay, deliberateness,
moderation._

=Rare.= Curious, extraordinary, incomparable, odd, peculiar, remarkable,
precious, scarce, singular, strange, uncommon, unusual, unprecedented,
unique, unparalleled, infrequent.

ANT. _General, usual, normal._

=Rash.= Precipitate, headlong, indiscreet, foolhardy, hasty, heedless,
thoughtless, incautious, careless, inconsiderate, unwary.

ANT. _Cautious, wary, discreet, thoughtful, prudent, calculating; timid,
hesitating, reluctant._

=Rational.= Sane, sound, intelligent, reasonable, sensible, wise,
discreet, judicious; reasoning, intellectual; sagacious, equitable,
enlightened.

ANT. _Irrational, insane, unsound, foolish, absurd, injudicious,
unreasonable, preposterous, unintelligent, extravagant._

=Raw.= Unprepared, uncooked, immature, unripe, unseasoned,
inexperienced, unpracticed, untried, unwrought, unfinished; bare,
galled; chilly, bleak.

ANT. _Cooked, dressed, prepared, developed, mature, ripe, mellow,
seasoned, practiced, experienced, tried, tested, expert, habituated,
familiar, trained; healed; genial, balmy._

=Reach.= Attain, arrive, get to, enter, land, come to, gain.

ANT. _Depart, leave, set out, weigh anchor, embark, start, go, go away,
set sail._

=Ready.= Prompt, expeditious, speedy, unhesitating, dexterous, apt,
skilled, handy, expert, facile, easy, opportune, fitted, prepared,
disposed, free, willing, cheerful.

ANT. _Tardy, slow, inexpeditious, hesitating, clumsy, inept, unskilled,
inexpert, hard, difficult, inopportune, unfit, ill-prepared, unwilling,
reluctant, unresponsive, unaccommodating._

=Real.= Actual, veritable, genuine, demonstrable, substantial,
authentic, certain; developed, essential, positive; true,
unquestionable.

ANT. _Illusory, imaginary, unreal, untrue, supposititious, fictitious,
hypothetical, fabulous, fanciful, conceived, supposed, feigned,
reported, visionary, theoretical._

=Reality.= Verity, actuality, substance, truth, genuineness,
authenticity, fact, substantiality, existence.

ANT. _Fiction, falsehood, untruth, myth, imagination, fabrication,
fancy, supposition, unreality, chimera, vision, hypothesis, hollowness._

=Realm.= Domain, kingdom, region, province, country, department, empire,
state; jurisdiction, sovereignty, dominion.

ANT. _Anarchy, insurrection; independence; democracy._

=Rear.= Lift, elevate, erect, raise, build, establish, exalt, foster,
construct, breed, educate, instruct, train, discipline, cherish.

ANT. _Tear down, degrade, undermine, depress, overthrow; destroy, kill,
demolish, subvert, stifle, extinguish._

=Reason=, _n._ Cause, ground, aim, motive, account, argument, design,
consideration, end, object, purpose, principle.

ANT. _Pretext, pretense, falsification; unreason, unreasonableness,
irrationality, absurdity, fallacy._

=Reason=, _v._ Debate, demonstrate, argue, contend, discuss, prove,
establish, question, controvert, wrangle, dispute.

ANT. _Quibble, pervert, equivocate, evade, mystify; cavil, refine;
misrepresent; dictate, assert._

=Reasoning.= Argument, argumentation, debate, ratiocination.

ANT. _Sophistry, instinct, intuition, presentiment._

=Rebellious.= Intractable, refractory, seditious, unmanageable,
contumacious, disobedient, insubordinate, mutinous, ungovernable,
uncontrollable.

ANT. _Deferential, compliant, docile, manageable, obedient, submissive,
subservient, yielding, tractable, gentle, controllable, dutiful._

=Recant.= Retract, revoke, recall, abjure, disown, disavow, renounce.

ANT. _Profess, confess, assert, declare, enunciate, maintain, hold;
vindicate._

=Reception.= Admission, receipt; entertainment; acceptance, credence;
welcome.

ANT. _Rejection, dismissal, repudiation, denial, protest, renunciation,
disavowal._

=Recite.= Describe, recapitulate, detail, number; repeat, deliver,
rehearse; relate, narrate, recount; quote; count, enumerate, tell.

ANT. _Misquote, garble, falsify, misrepresent, pervert; forget, fail._

=Reckless.= Mindless, negligent, thoughtless, regardless, unconcerned,
inattentive, remiss, improvident, rash, inconsiderate.

ANT. _Circumspect, careful, wary, thoughtful, mindful, attentive,
considerate, provident, prudent, calculating._

=Recognize.= Acknowledge, confess, own, allow, concede, identify, avow.

ANT. _Overlook, repudiate, disown, ignore, disavow, disclaim._

=Reconcile.= Placate, propitiate, pacify, appease; conciliate, reunite,
content, harmonize; adjust, settle, compose.

ANT. _Separate, sever, alienate, estrange, disaffect._

=Reconciliation.= Reconcilement, reunion, pacification, appeasement,
propitiation, atonement, expiation; adjustment, restoration, harmony.

ANT. _Separation, estrangement, alienation, disaffection._

=Record.= Account, entry, enrolment, catalogue, enumeration, inventory,
register, roll; archive, chronicle, document, history, inscription,
instrument, memorandum, memorial, muniment, schedule, scroll.

=Recover.= Cure, heal, retrieve, restore; be cured or healed, recruit,
recuperate, resume; reanimate, repossess.

ANT. _Relapse, sink, die, fail, grow worse._

=Recovery.= Repossession, resumption; recruiting, healing, restoration;
regaining, recuperation, convalescence, retrieval, redemption,
resuscitation, revival; vindication, reinstatement, reëstablishment.

ANT. _Loss, forfeiture, privation, damage, ruin, destruction, waste;
illness, relapse, declension, incurableness, hopelessness._

=Recreation.= Sport, amusement, diversion, refreshment, reanimation;
holiday, pastime, relaxation.

ANT. _Toil, labor, work, industry, employment, fatigue, weariness,
lassitude, exhaustion._

=Rectitude.= Justice, honesty, uprightness, fairness, integrity,
straightforwardness, conscientiousness, equity.

ANT. _Iniquity, wrong, injustice, immorality, corruption, dishonesty,
duplicity, underhandedness._

=Redemption.= Ransom, release, rescue, retrieval, recovery, deliverance,
liberation, salvation; discharge, fulfilment; atonement, compensation.

ANT. _Abandonment, forfeiture, sacrifice, betrayal, deprivation,
desertion._

=Reduce.= Lessen, decrease, curtail, abate, shorten, impair, lower,
subjugate, subject; diminish, attenuate, abridge, contract; subdue.

ANT. _Magnify, augment, expand, amplify, exalt, raise, invigorate,
promote, restore, repair, renovate, transform._

=Redundant.= Exuberant, superabundant, overflowing, pleonastic;
superfluous, excessive, copious, plentiful; unnecessary.

ANT. _Requisite, necessary, sufficient, enough; scanty, deficient,
scarce, wanting, lacking, incomplete, inadequate, insufficient._

=Refinement.= Culture, elegance, cultivation, civilization, politeness.

ANT. _Coarseness, grossness, rudeness, rusticity, barbarism,
boorishness, brutality, clownishness, savagery, vulgarity._

=Reflect.= Consider, think, cogitate, meditate, contemplate, ruminate,
ponder, muse; animadvert.

ANT. _Idle, dream, imagine, fancy, wander, rove; disregard, neglect._

=Reform=, _v._ Amend, correct, rectify, emend, repair, better, improve,
restore, reclaim, mend; remodel.

ANT. _Corrupt, impair, vitiate, deteriorate, deform; spoil, deprave,
pollute, defile, injure, contaminate._

=Refuge.= Shelter, asylum, retreat, covert; protection, sanctuary,
stronghold, defense; hiding-place, harbor.

ANT. _Exposure, peril, snare, menace, pitfall, danger, threat._

=Regard=, _v._ Consider, observe, remark, heed, mind, respect, esteem,
estimate, value; attend, notice; contemplate; revere, reverence.

ANT. _Overlook, disregard, miss, neglect, omit; misprize; dislike, hate,
loathe; contemn._

=Regret=, _n._ Grief, concern, sorrow, lamentation, repentance,
penitence, self-condemnation; compunction, remorse, contrition.

ANT. _Joy, exultation, happiness, delight, self-gratulation,
approbation; praise, commendation; felicitation._

=Regular.= Orderly, methodical; conformable, agreeing; governed,
subject; normal; constituted, selected; customary, systematic, stated,
established, periodical, recognized, formal, recurrent, certain.

ANT. _Unusual, exceptional, rare, irregular, abnormal, eccentric,
capricious, variable, uncertain, erratic._

=Regulation.= Rule, method, principle, precept; adjustment, disposal;
arrangement, ordering, disposition, government, control.

ANT. _Disorder, anarchy, license, misgovernment, misrule,
non-regulation, caprice, maladjustment, derangement._

=Rehearse.= Recapitulate, detail, recount, describe, tell; narrate,
repeat, recite, relate; practice.

ANT. _Misrepresent; act, perform, play._

=Rejoice.= Delight, joy, exult, triumph, please, cheer, exhilarate,
gladden, transport, charm, enliven, gratify, make happy.

ANT. _Mourn, grieve, weep, lament, pain, distress, defeat, sadden,
deaden, vex, annoy, oppress, afflict, trouble, depress, burden, deject._

=Relation.= Recital, rehearsal, account, narration, tale, narrative,
detail, description; kindred, affinity, consanguinity, kinsman,
kinswoman; connection, association, pertinency, relevancy, agreement.

ANT. _Action, happening, occurrence; alien, stranger, foreigner;
absoluteness, disagreement, dissociation, disconnection, irrelevancy._

=Release=, _v._ Discharge, extricate, disengage, quit, acquit; free,
loose, liberate; exempt, indemnify; deliver, remit.

ANT. _Hold, bind, constrain, confine, fetter, shackle, fine, imprison,
sentence, condemn._

=Relief.= Alleviation, mitigation, aid, help, succor, assistance,
redress, remedy, indemnification; exemption, deliverance, refreshment,
support, comfort.

ANT. _Oppression, persecution, aggravation, severity, cruelty;
weariness, discomfort, exhaustion._

=Religion.= Devotion, faith, piety, righteousness, holiness, morality,
godliness, pietism, worship, theology.

ANT. _Irreligion, atheism, unbelief, blasphemy, impiety, godlessness,
profanity, sacrilege, ungodliness, wickedness._

=Relinquish.= Resign, leave, quit, forsake, abandon, renounce, desert,
forbear, forego; surrender, discontinue.

ANT. _Retain, hold, keep, detain, preserve, support, cling to, sustain,
maintain; continue, be constant to, persevere, persist._

=Reluctant.= Loath, slow, disinclined, indisposed, averse, backward,
opposed, unwilling.

ANT. _Eager, favorable, willing, inclined, desirous, disposed._

=Remain.= Wait, tarry, rest, sojourn, last, dwell; stay, abide,
continue, endure; survive, outlive.

ANT. _Leave, abandon, depart, remove, go, disappear, flit; die, pass._

=Remark.= Comment, note, observation, utterance, annotation.

=Remarkable.= Observable, rare, noticeable, extraordinary, unusual,
strange, wonderful, notable, eminent; distinguished, famous, prominent,
conspicuous; singular, peculiar, individual.

ANT. _Ordinary, usual, commonplace, mediocre, everyday, common,
general._

=Remembrance.= Memory, recollection, reminiscence; memento, souvenir,
memorandum, memorial, token.

ANT. _Oblivion, forgetfulness._

=Reminiscence.= Memory, recollection, remembrance; remnant, relic,
trace.

ANT. _Oblivion, forgetfulness; announcement, warning, suggestion,
prognostic._

=Remote.= Removed, far, distant; irrelevant, not related; foreign,
indirect, unconnected, alien, unallied; separate, abstract.

ANT. _Near, close, direct, related, connected, contiguous, immediate;
present, pressing, urgent; proximate; essential, important._

=Rend.= Burst, break, rip, sever, mangle, rupture, sunder, tear,
lacerate, rive, slit.

ANT. _Mend, reunite, secure, unite, weld, heal, join, solder, sew,
stitch._

=Render.= Return, pay back, restore; requite; give up, yield, surrender;
furnish, contribute, deliver; translate, interpret, set forth, exhibit,
try out; apportion, give, present, assign.

ANT. _Keep, withhold, appropriate, retain, refuse, use, apply, employ;
alienate, misapportion._

=Renounce.= Abandon, abjure, deny, disavow, disown, forswear, disclaim,
retract, repudiate, revoke, recall, refuse, reject, discard, recant.

ANT. _Advocate, avow, claim, assert, defend, hold, proclaim, own,
acknowledge, cherish, retain, uphold, vindicate, maintain._

=Renown.= Fame, distinction, notice, repute, name, reputation,
celebrity, honor, glory, eminence.

ANT. _Disgrace, shame, dishonor, disrepute, discredit, degradation,
taint, stain, brand._

=Renunciation.= Denial, disownment, renouncement, disclaimer, rejection,
abjuration, recantation, abandonment.

ANT. _Maintenance, support, vindication, assertion, defense, apology,
justification._

=Repeat.= Reiterate, renew, relate, recapitulate, recite, reproduce,
rehearse, renovate.

ANT. _Discontinue, drop, end, finish, stop, cease, break off,
interrupt._

=Repentance.= Penitence, regret, remorse, sorrow, compunction,
contrition, self-condemnation, contriteness.

ANT. _Impenitence, obstinacy, obduracy; comfort, complacency, approval,
hardness, content, self-approval, self-complacency, self-congratulation;
stubbornness._

=Repletion.= Fulness, superabundance, plethora, abundance, amplitude,
sufficiency, enough.

ANT. _Scarcity, want, lack, insufficiency, need._

=Reply.= Answer, respond, rejoin, replicate.

ANT. _Question, query, ask, inquire; disregard, pass, drop, ignore._

=Report.= Account, description, narration, narrative, recital,
rehearsal, relation, record, tale, rumor, statement, story.

ANT. _Allegory, fabrication, fiction._

=Repose=, _n._ Rest, recumbency, reclination, ease, quiet, quietness,
tranquillity, peace; calmness, quiescence.

ANT. _Unrest, agitation, tumult, movement, restlessness, turmoil,
commotion, distraction._

=Represent.= Present anew, portray, typify, delineate; personate, act;
perform; depict, describe, show, exhibit.

ANT. _Misrepresent; falsify, caricature, distort._

=Reproach=, _n._ Disrepute, opprobrium, discredit, dishonor, invective,
contumely, reviling, vilification, abuse, scurrility, insolence, insult,
scorn, contempt, ignominy, shame, scandal, disgrace, infamy.

ANT. _Approbation, satisfaction, praise, encouragement, exaltation,
commendation, honor, applause, eulogy, assent, acceptance, approval._

=Reproach=, _v._ Chide, rebuke, revile, condemn, vilify; blame, censure,
taunt, upbraid, reprove.

ANT. _Praise, approve, commend, laud, applaud, eulogize._

=Reproof.= Comment, criticism, disapproval, chiding, reproach,
upbraiding, reproval, admonition, animadversion; censure, blame,
condemnation, denunciation, objurgation, reprehension, rebuke,
reprimand; reflection, check.

ANT. _Commendation, panegyric, approbation, applause, approval,
encomium, praise, eulogy._

=Reprove.= Admonish, blame, reproach, censure, condemn, reprimand, warn,
upbraid, chide, check, chasten, find fault with, expostulate with,
rebuke, reprehend, remonstrate with, take to task.

ANT. _Abet, applaud, encourage, cheer, countenance, incite, urge on,
impel, instigate, approve._

=Repugnant.= Opposite, opposed, adverse, contrary, inconsistent,
irreconcilable, hostile, inimical; incompatible, loath; heterogeneous.

ANT. _Harmonious, friendly, amicable, willing, consistent, compatible,
congruous; homogeneous._

=Reputable.= Honorable, respectable, estimable, creditable.

ANT. _Disreputable, disgraceful, dishonorable, discreditable,
despicable._

=Requite.= Avenge, pay off, quit, punish, retaliate, revenge; satisfy,
settle with, reward, return, repay, remunerate, recompense, compensate,
reciprocate.

ANT. _Absolve, acquit, forgive, excuse, neglect, pardon, slight, forget,
overlook, pass over._

=Research.= Inquiry, scrutiny, examination, experimentation,
exploration, discovery, investigation, study, observation.

ANT. _Ignorance, oversight, inobservance; shallowness, superficiality,
sciolism._

=Reserve=, _n._ Reservation, retention, limitation, backwardness,
coldness, shyness, coyness, modesty; taciturnity, restraint, repression,
constraint.

ANT. _Profuseness, prodigality, diffusion; affability, geniality,
cordiality, abandonment, surrender, openness, frankness, transparency,
indiscretion, volubility._

=Resignation.= Relinquishment, forsaking, abandonment, abdication,
renunciation, endurance; patience, long-suffering, forbearance;
acquiescence, submission.

ANT. _Maintenance, grasp, resistance, retention, rebellion,
remonstrance, contention, reservation, holding, keeping, retaining,
detention; murmuring, dissatisfaction, discontent, protestation._

=Resolute.= Determined, decided, fixed, steadfast, constant,
persevering, firm, bold, unshaken, steady; undaunted, unflinching,
stout-hearted.

ANT. _Irresolute, timid, hesitating, doubtful, wavering, vacillating,
capricious, variable, weak, undetermined, undecided._

=Resources.= Expedient, means, resort, contrivance; supplies, devices,
money, wealth, appliances, funds.

ANT. _Destitution, poverty, indigence, bareness, want, exhaustion,
inanition, lack, drain._

=Respectable.= Estimable, honorable, worthy, considerable, reputable,
honest; passable.

ANT. _Unworthy, bad, mean, dishonorable, dishonest, paltry,
inconsiderable._

=Resplendent.= Brilliant, splendid, glorious, luminous, effulgent,
gorgeous, shining, glittering, burnished.

ANT. _Dull, tarnished, lusterless, somber, dimmed, sullied._

=Rest.= Pause, peace, quiet, stillness, tranquillity, intermission,
cessation, ease, calm, peacefulness, calmness, quiescence, stop, repose,
quietude, quietness, recreation, sleep, slumber.

ANT. _Agitation, commotion, disturbance, excitement, restlessness,
strain, stir, tumult, work, unrest, toil, disquiet, motion, movement,
rush._

=Restive.= Restless, restiff, fidgety, fretful, fractious, refractory,
intractable, impatient, rebellious, skittish; resentful, recalcitrant,
balky, vicious, unruly, stubborn, mulish, mutinous, obstinate.

ANT. _Docile, gentle, submissive, passive, quiet, tractable, yielding,
obedient, manageable, peaceable._

=Restore.= Return, replace, refund, repay, reinstate, rebuild, repair,
revive, heal, cure, recover.

ANT. _Remove, steal, appropriate, abstract, destroy, shatter, injure,
dilapidate, impair; deprive; wound, harm._

=Restrain.= Constrain, hold in, check, repress, circumscribe, confine,
curb, hinder, hold, hold back, restrict, suppress, withhold, bridle,
abridge, keep back, keep down, keep in, keep under.

ANT. _Let loose, set free, release, arouse, aid, emancipate, animate,
incite, excite, encourage, free, impel._

=Result.= Consequence, issue, conclusion, effect; end, event,
termination, product, outcome; inference, deduction; resolution,
determination.

ANT. _Cause, beginning, commencement, rise, origin, antecedent,
prognostic, initiation, premonition, indication._

=Retinue.= Attendants, suite, followers, train, retainers, satellites,
escort, cortège.

ANT. _Solitariness, non-attendance._

=Retirement.= Privacy, solitude, loneliness, seclusion.

ANT. _Company, converse, society, fellowship, companionship,
association._

=Retribution.= Requital, retaliation, payment, recompense; repayment,
compensation, reward, return; penalty, punishment, visitation.

ANT. _Remission, reprieve; pardon, condonation, sparing._

=Retrospect.= Review, survey, reconsideration, reëxamination;
recollection, reminiscence, memory.

ANT. _Prospect, prophecy, anticipation, forecasting, prognostication,
speculation._

=Return=, _v._ Turn back, come back; reply, respond; answer; restore,
recompense, remit, render; reappear, recur; revert, retaliate.

ANT. _Depart, vanish, disappear, remove; retain, misappropriate;
withhold._

=Revelation.= Disclosure, manifestation, apocalypse.

ANT. _Concealment, shrouding, veiling, mystery, obscuration, cloud,
cloudiness, hiding._

=Revenge.= Retaliation, retribution, vengeance, avenging, requital.

ANT. _Mercy, pardon, reconciliation, pity, compassion, excuse, grace,
forgiveness._

=Revenue.= Income; taxes, excise, customs, duties, rents, receipts;
produce, return, wealth, proceeds.

ANT. _Outgo, waste, expenditure, expense, deductions, impoverishment._

=Reverse=, _n._ Contrary, opposite, counterpart; change, vicissitude;
inversion, counter-position; derangement, alteration; rear, back;
misfortune, defeat.

ANT. _Obverse, front; order, arrangement, version, position, location;
continuance, perpetuation, identity, stability, regularity, uniformity._

=Revive.= Reanimate, reinvigorate; restore, raise, recover, renew,
recall; awake, revivify, resuscitate.

ANT. _Kill, destroy, extinguish, discourage; decline, die, droop._

=Revolution.= Lawlessness, insurrection, revolt, riot, sedition,
anarchy, insubordination, rebellion, mutiny, confusion, disorder,
tumult, disintegration.

ANT. _Government, submission, obedience, authority, control, command,
dominion, domination, law, empire, rule, sovereignty, loyalty,
supremacy, order._

=Revolve.= Roll, rotate, turn.

ANT. _Bind, grind, stand, slide, slip, stick, chafe._

=Reward=, _n._ Recompense, compensation, remuneration, pay, requital,
retribution, punishment.

=Rich.= Wealthy, opulent, affluent, supplied, abounding; abundant,
copious, bountiful; fertile, productive; valued, sumptuous, precious,
costly; high-seasoned; luscious; vivid.

ANT. _Poor, indigent, needy, impoverished, destitute, impecunious,
penniless; lacking, scanty, scarce, meager; barren, sterile; trivial,
worthless, unproductive, fruitless, paltry, valueless; dull, tame, dry._

=Riches.= Opulence, wealth, affluence, richness, plenty, abundance.

ANT. _Poverty, want, indigence, scarcity, need, lack, impecuniosity._

=Riddle.= Conundrum, paradox, problem, puzzle, enigma.

ANT. _Axiom, answer, explanation, solution, proposition._

=Ridicule.= Derision, raillery, banter, burlesque, irony, satire,
mocking, sarcasm, gibe, jeer, sneer.

ANT. _Respect, homage, veneration, deference, honor._

=Right=, _n._ Claim, liberty, prerogative, license, privilege,
exemption, franchise, immunity, duty, justice, uprightness, integrity;
title, ownership; interest; rectitude, correctness, power; propriety,
fitness, suitableness.

ANT. _Wrong, falsehood, incorrectness, perverseness; liability,
illegitimacy, non-legality, usurpation, injustice, impropriety,
unfitness, encroachment, force, violence._

=Righteous.= Holy, uncorrupt, honest, equitable, rightful, upright,
virtuous, just, good, conscientious.

ANT. _Unholy, corrupt, dishonest, unjust, wicked, evil, unscrupulous,
vicious, false, unprincipled, profligate._

=Ripe.= Mature, complete, finished; perfect, developed, full-grown; fit,
consummate; prepared; full, seasoned, mellow.

ANT. _Raw, unripe, crude, fresh, green, unseasoned, unprepared._

=Rise=, _v._ Arise, issue, flow, proceed, spring, ascend, emanate.

ANT. _Descend, drop, fall, go down, set, settle, sink, decline._

=Rival=, _v._ Emulate, antagonize, compete with, contend, strive,
oppose, equal.

ANT. _Surrender, yield, defer, retire._

=Robber.= Brigand, marauder, pirate, plunderer, thief, burglar, bandit,
highwayman, footpad, despoiler, depredator, raider, buccaneer, forager,
freebooter.

=Robust.= Strong, lusty, sinewy, muscular, hale, hearty, vigorous,
forceful; healthy, sturdy, sound; violent, rude, rough.

ANT. _Puny, weak, delicate, frail, sickly, emaciated, thin, slender,
gentle, mild, considerate, tender._

=Romantic.= Sentimental, fanciful, fantastic, fictitious, wild,
extravagant, chimerical.

ANT. _Unromantic, truthful, unvarnished, unadorned, veritable, actual,
real, realistic, reasonable._

=Root.= Radix, radicle, stock, origin, foundation, base, source, stem,
parent, commencement, beginning, radical, bottom.

ANT. _Branch, ramification, product, issue, progeny, superstructure._

=Rough.= Uneven, uncut, boisterous, unpolished; coarse, disordered,
shaggy, ragged; rude, uncivil, harsh; loud, offensive; tempestuous,
stormy; rugged, knotty, craggy, gruff; incomplete; uncourteous,
churlish, blunt.

ANT. _Smooth, plain, level, polished, flat, glossy, sleek, soft, mild,
quiet, refined, tender, gentle; balmy, zephyrlike._

=Routine.= Practice, custom, procedure, round, course, wont, order;
gradation, rotation, sequence, tenor, system, method; regulation.

=Royal.= August, kinglike, majestic, munificent, princely, regal,
magnificent, kingly.

ANT. _Beggarly, contemptible, mean, poor, servile, slavish, vile._

=Rude.= Rough, uneven, shapeless, unfashioned, rugged, uncouth,
inelegant, rustic, vulgar, raw, clownish, unskilful, untaught,
illiterate, ignorant, uncivil, impolite, saucy, impudent, insolent,
surly, uncivilized, brutal, barbarous, savage, violent, fierce,
tumultuous, impetuous, boisterous, inclement, severe.

ANT. _Polite, urbane, accomplished, cultivated, courteous, refined,
civil, affable, courtly, gracious, elegant, polished, well-bred,
obliging; modest, bashful; considerate, serene, placid, genial, calm;
fashionable, modern, civilized, modish._

=Rugged.= Rough, uneven, rude, wrinkled, cragged, harsh, hard, crabbed;
steep, precipitate; violent, sour, surly, boisterous, tumultuous,
stormy, inclement, tempestuous; austere, severe; ruffled, blunt.

ANT. _Smooth, even, gentle, soft, low; pleasant, kindly; balmy,
soothing; complaisant, mild._

=Rule.= Regulation, law, precept, maxim, canon, order, method,
direction, control, sway, empire; principle, practice; domination,
mastery, government; test, criterion, formula.

ANT. _Exception, deviation, eccentricity, irregularity._

=Run.= Race, hasten, speed, proceed, hurry, scamper, post; go, flow,
glide, move, roll on; melt, fuse; pass, advance; course, fly, rush;
hustle; pursue; cast, shape, mold; drive, force; indicate, mark out;
incur, encounter, venture, risk; conduct, manage, carry on; flee.

ANT. _Delay, walk, halt, stop, saunter, rest, linger, hesitate; harden;
retrograde, slip._

=Rustic.= Rural, sylvan, pastoral, country, countrified, bucolic,
agricultural, verdant; artless, inelegant, plain, rude, unpolished,
untaught, unsophisticated; awkward, boorish, outlandish, clownish,
coarse, hoydenish, uncouth.

ANT. _City-like, urban; accomplished, elegant, cultured, polite, urbane,
polished, well-bred, refined._

=Ruthless.= Cruel, pitiless, harsh, relentless, unsparing.

ANT. _Tender, gentle, pitiful, compassionate, lenient, regretful,
long-suffering._




                                   S


=Sable.= Dark, black, ebon, somber.

ANT. _Light, white, cheerful, bright, ivory._

=Sacrament.= Eucharist, Lord’s Supper, communion; ceremony, rite,
service, solemnity, ordinance, observance.

=Sacred.= Holy, divine, hallowed, consecrated, dedicated, devoted,
religious, venerable, reverend.

ANT. _Secular, profane, common, unconsecrated, human._

=Sacrifice=, _n._ Offering, propitiation, expiation, thanksgiving;
destruction, immolation, devotion, surrender; oblation, atonement.

ANT. _Offense, transgression; retention, reservation; acceptance._

=Sad.= Sorrowful, mournful, dejected, gloomy, depressed, sedate,
cheerless, downcast, grievous; dull, grave, dark, somber; afflicted;
calamitous; serious, staid; melancholy, disconsolate, despondent,
disastrous, deplorable.

ANT. _Cheerful, joyous, glad, mirthful, jubilant, jovial, light-hearted;
exultant, gay, exhilarated, happy, blithe._

=Sagacious.= Sage, sensible, keen, discerning, clear-sighted, apt,
acute, intelligent, sharp, wise, rational, shrewd, able, keen-sighted,
keen-witted, judicious, perspicacious, quick-scented, sharp-witted.

ANT. _Obtuse, senseless, irrational, silly, stupid, simple,
unintelligent, undiscerning, dull, absurd, foolish, futile, sottish,
ignorant._

=Sale.= Bargain, barter, deal, exchange, trade, change.

=Salient.= Leaping, bounding, jumping; projecting; prominent,
conspicuous, noticeable, significant; strategic.

ANT. _Retreating, retiring, low-lying; unimportant, inconspicuous,
unnoticeable, minor, inconsiderable, subordinate, insignificant._

=Salvation.= Saving, preservation, deliverance; redemption; rescue.

ANT. _Perdition, destruction, damnation, condemnation, loss._

=Sample.= Specimen, example, illustration, case, instance,
exemplification.

ANT. _Total, whole, exception, aggregate; abnormality, monstrosity._

=Sanction.= Authorization, authority, countenance; ratification,
confirmation, approbation; approval, support, seal, allowance.

ANT. _Discountenance, disallowance, unauthorization; cancelation,
nullification; disapproval, non-support._

=Sanguine.= Blood-red, crimson; warm, ardent; hopeful, lively, animated,
cheerful; confident, enthusiastic, buoyant; trustful.

ANT. _Pallid, cold, frigid; unresponsive, depressed, lifeless,
despondent, despairing, dejected, anxious, suspicious, misgiving,
distrustful._

=Sanity.= Saneness, soundness, rationality; reasonableness, wisdom;
amenableness.

ANT. _Insanity, aberration, derangement, unsoundness, irrationality,
madness, lunacy, alienation, dementia, folly._

=Sarcasm.= Taunt, gibe; scorn, contempt, satire; irony, sneer, ridicule.

ANT. _Compliment, eulogy, praise, approbation, appreciation, panegyric._

=Satisfy.= Satiate, sate, compensate; cloy, surfeit, suffice, content,
glut, fill, requite; relieve, reassure, convince; please, recompense,
gratify, fulfil.

ANT. _Deprive, deny, starve, stint, refuse; annoy, tantalize; aggravate,
tease; displease._

=Savage.= Wild, uncultivated, untamed, uncivilized, rude, brutish,
brutal, barbarous, cruel, inhuman, fierce, pitiless, merciless,
atrocious, ferocious; murderous, violent.

ANT. _Tame, civilized, cultivated, domesticated, tender, refined,
polished, gentle, humane, considerate, pitiful, merciful, protective,
generous, subdued, chivalrous, clement, self-controlled._

=Save.= Preserve, rescue, deliver; lay up, reserve, keep; spare,
prevent; protect; be economical, hoard, husband; obviate, snatch, catch.

ANT. _Lose, destroy, abandon, imperil, expose, endanger, risk, hazard;
waste, lavish, spend, fling away._

=Say.= Utter, express, tell, speak, declare; repeat, rehearse, recite;
assert; mention, suggest; suppose; answer; respond, reply; state,
pronounce; affirm, deny; allege.

ANT. _Silence, hush, whisper, mumble; be taciturn; suppress, repress;
mispronounce._

=Scarce.= Rare, infrequent, deficient; uncommon; scant, sparing, meager,
insufficient; unusual, unique, singular, wanting, few, precious.

ANT. _Plenty, abundant, frequent, plentiful, common, thick._

=Scheme=, _n._ Plan, project, contrivance, design, purpose, plot,
device; system, outline; machination, intrigue, stratagem, cabal,
conspiracy; theory.

ANT. _Blunder, derangement, misarrangement, bungle, botch._

=Scholar.= Learner, pupil, student, savant, disciple.

ANT. _Dunce, fool, ignoramus, illiterate person, idiot, idler._

=Science.= Literature, art, knowledge; truth, facts; skill, expertness;
comprehension; information, investigation, experimentation, learning,
experience.

ANT. _Ignorance, error, smattering, fallacy, sciolism; inexperience,
unfamiliarity, incomprehension._

=Scorn=, _n._ Disdain, derision, contumely, despite, slight, mockery,
dishonor; contempt, disregard; sneer, opprobrium.

ANT. _Compliment, commendation, deference, approval, esteem, respect,
regard, approbation._

=Scruple=, _n._ Unwillingness, hesitation, doubt; particle; qualm,
reluctance, misgiving.

ANT. _Confidence, assurance, recklessness, heedlessness; daring,
self-complacency._

=Scrupulous.= Cautious, careful, conscientious, hesitating; exact, nice;
questioning, unwilling, punctilious, precise; diffident, dubious.

ANT. _Reckless, confident, careless, unconscientious, self-complacent,
heedless, unwary, incautious, daring._

=Scrutiny.= Examination, inspection, observation, search, sifting,
exploration, inquisition, inquiry.

ANT. _Oversight, misobservance, disregard, slight, inattention._

=Season.= Time, period, term, interval, spell, while; occasion,
opportunity, timeliness, seasonableness.

ANT. _Contretemps, unseasonableness, untimeliness, unsuitableness._

=Seasonable.= Opportune, suitable, timely, fit, convenient, appropriate,
normal; periodical; welcome.

ANT. _Inopportune, unsuitable, unfit, untimely, inconvenient,
inappropriate, unwelcome, unexpected, abnormal._

=Secure=, _a._ Undisturbed, assured, heedless, inattentive; easy,
unanxious, trustful, insured; obtained, acquired; fast, firm; defended,
guarded, protected, certain, sheltered, safe.

ANT. _Disturbed, endangered, imperiled, insecure, hazardous; anxious,
distrustful, suspicious, careful, precarious; loose, drifting, doubtful,
dubious._

=Sedate.= Settled, composed, calm, quiet, tranquil, still, serene,
unruffled, undisturbed, contemplative, sober, serious; passive.

ANT. _Flighty, disturbed, uneasy, restless, excited, discomposed,
agitated, indiscreet; active, moving; frivolous._

=Sedition.= Riot, rebellion, revolt, insurrection, mutiny; outbreak,
uprising, secession, treason; insubordination; tumult, turmoil, anarchy.

ANT. _Peace, pacification, order, quiet, orderliness, obedience,
allegiance, fealty, union, patriotism, fidelity._

=See.= Perceive, behold, descry, view; observe, discern, understand,
comprehend; watch, look after; interview, visit; associate, meet;
accompany, escort; attend, heed, be attentive; gaze, glance at.

ANT. _Be blind; overlook, mistake; misunderstand, miscomprehend; pass,
ignore, neglect; disregard, misconceive._

=Seek.= Search, try for, solicit, inquire for, strive after, hunt,
follow, trace, prosecute, attempt, endeavor, investigate.

ANT. _Shun, elude, ignore, neglect, disregard, avoid, relinquish, drop,
abandon, discard._

=Seldom.= Rarely, not often, infrequently; hardly ever, occasionally.

ANT. _Often, frequently, generally, commonly, regularly, habitually,
invariably, uniformly, systematically._

=Selection.= Choice, pick, preference, election, option.

ANT. _Repudiation, rejection, discarding, refusal; exclusion._

=Self-abnegation.= Self-renunciation, self-sacrifice, self-control,
self-devotion, self-immolation, self-denial.

ANT. _Self-indulgence, self-gratification, self-will, selfishness,
self-seeking._

=Selfish.= Self-seeking, mean, ungenerous, narrow, illiberal, mercenary,
greedy, egoistical, self-indulgent.

ANT. _Generous, liberal, altruistic, philanthropic, beneficent,
self-denying, public-spirited, magnanimous, unselfish, considerate._

=Send.= Sling, throw, fling, hurl, lance, launch, propel, project, cast,
dart, despatch, discharge, drive, emit; forward, transmit, impel,
dismiss, delegate, depute.

ANT. _Receive, keep, retain, hold; bring, carry, hand, get, give,
convey._

=Sensation.= Emotion, sense, feeling, perception.

ANT. _Apathy, non-sensibility, non-perception, indifference._

=Sense.= Understanding, reason; cognition, apprehension; deduction;
perception, feeling; recognition, discernment; reasoning; opinion,
judgment, notion, meaning, import, signification.

ANT. _Nonsense, misunderstanding; stupidity, non-apprehension;
non-comprehension; stolidity, inertness, non-observance; fancy, folly,
unsoundness._

=Sensibility.= Feeling, sensitiveness, susceptibility, impressibility.

ANT. _Coldness, deadness, unconsciousness, hardness, numbness,
insensibility._

=Sentiment.= Thought, opinion, notion, sensibility, feeling;
susceptibility, impressibility, impression, conviction; emotion; maxim,
saying, toast.

ANT. _Nonsense, conjecture, vacuity; assumption, prejudice,
preconception._

=Separate=, _v._ Disunite, divide, sever; come between, part; disjoin,
divorce; disengage, detach; sunder; withdraw, eliminate, remove,
segregate.

ANT. _Unite, consolidate, integrate, connect, join, attach, link, weld,
engage, wed; gather, convene, collect._

=Sequence.= Succession, following, consequence, arrangement, order;
series, progression, continuity.

ANT. _Precedence, introduction, priority; disorder, disconnection;
intermission, irregularity._

=Serious.= Sober, earnest, momentous, grave; thoughtful, sedate, solemn;
important, weighty; dangerous.

ANT. _Gay, thoughtless, frivolous, laughing, joking, jocose, careless,
trifling, trivial, unimportant, light, insignificant._

=Serve.= Obey, minister to, subserve, promote, aid, help, abet, assist,
benefit, succor.

ANT. _Command, order, manage; obstruct, counteract, retard, defeat,
injure, thwart, oppose._

=Set.= Put, seat, place, fix; affix, attach; fasten, make stable or
firm; obstruct, embarrass; determine upon, fix upon; plant; frame;
stiffen, solidify; adjust, regulate, adapt; prepare; replace; spread;
stud, variegate; value at, rate at; establish, furnish, prescribe,
strengthen, stabilitate, ground, confirm, determine, appoint, assign.

ANT. _Remove, uproot, transfer, eradicate, transplant, unsettle, weaken,
soften, destroy, demolish; disperse, discard; denude, disarrange,
divest, strip; misvalue, under- or over-rate; abolish, frustrate._

=Settle.= Regulate, arrange, compose, decide; establish; still, calm;
clear; restore; depress, sink, lower, make compact, harden; determine,
adjust, make up, pacify; liquidate, balance; colonize, people.

ANT. _Disturb, confuse, derange; agitate, unsettle, excite, uproot,
overturn; obstruct; elevate, upheave, break up; discompose, disorder,
rise, ascend, move; misregulate, aggravate._

=Severe.= Stern, strict, austere, hard, relentless, rigorous,
unrelenting, inexorable, harsh, inflexible, rigid, morose, stiff,
uncompromising, unmitigated, unyielding; critical, grave, serious.

ANT. _Lenient, clement, unexacting, mild, easy, gay, cheerful, joyous;
loose, slack, inexact, indulgent, uncritical, moderate, kind,
considerate._

=Shade.= Shadow; darkness, obscurity; screen, shelter, protection; body,
spirit, ghost; umbrage, adumbration; degree, minuteness; seclusion.

ANT. _Light, illumination, sunshine, brightness, daylight; glare,
radiance, exposure; publicity; quantity, amount; defenselessness._

=Shake.= Agitate, fluctuate, flutter, oscillate, quake, quiver, quaver,
rock, shiver, shudder, totter, tremble, waver, wave, sway, swing,
vibrate, thrill, jar.

ANT. _Fasten, fix, set, secure, settle, confirm._

=Shame.= Disgrace, reproach, dishonor, ignominy; degradation, contempt,
infamy; diffidence, modesty, discredit; humiliation, abashment; decency,
decorum.

ANT. _Fame, honor, glory, approval, renown, credit; impudence,
shamelessness, indecency, immodesty, indecorum, impropriety._

=Shape.= Appearance, figure, aspect, form, guise; outline; embodiment;
character, fashion, mold, pattern, cast, model.

ANT. _Imitation, reproduction, copy; deformity, disfigurement._

=Sharp.= Quick, sagacious, witty, discerning, shrewd, ingenious, sour,
acid, tart, acrid, biting, poignant, acrimonious, sarcastic, bitter,
painful, afflictive, violent, fierce, ardent, fiery; acute, keen,
trenchant, astute, subtle, penetrating, discriminating, inventive,
piquant; severe, vigilant, attentive; caustic, cutting; eager, hungry;
thin, emaciated; shrill, high; exacting, close.

ANT. _Dull, blunt, slow, obtuse, undiscerning, unresourceful, sweet,
honeyed, cloying, saccharine, mellow; soft, gentle, mild, tender,
considerate, kindly, lenient, clement; uninventive, indifferent,
sluggish, inactive, tame, characterless, spiritless, careless,
inattentive; thick; generous, unexacting._

=Shelter.= Defend, guard, harbor, protect, shield, screen, ward, cover,
conceal.

ANT. _Expose, betray, imperil, endanger, exhibit, lay bare, discover,
attack._

=Short.= Brief, contracted, inadequate, limited, scanty; insufficient,
incomplete, imperfect; abrupt, petulant, quick; near, direct, straight;
succinct, concise, condensed, compendious; terse, pithy, laconic, curt,
sententious; severe, uncivil; narrow; destitute.

ANT. _Long, protracted, extended, adequate, ample, sufficient,
plentiful, abundant, copious; perfect, complete; civil, suave,
complaisant; circuitous, indirect; tedious, prolix, verbose, extended,
wordy; broad; provided for._

=Show=, _v._ Exhibit, present, display; tell, reveal; direct, conduct;
clear, prove, manifest, explain, evince; bestow, confer; appear, look,
seem; demonstrate, unfold, inform, teach; evidence.

ANT. _Conceal, hide, withhold, suppress, obscure, mystify, cloak, wrap;
contradict, deny, refute, disprove, falsify; misinterpret._

=Shrewd.= Keen, critical, subtle, arch, astute, sagacious, acute,
discerning, penetrating; malicious, evil, vicious; wily, artful,
cunning; clever, sharp, able; discriminating, intelligent.

ANT. _Stolid, stupid, unintelligent, dull, thick, unsagacious,
undiscerning, undiscriminating; plain, blank, blunt, frank; kindly,
sincere, benevolent; fair, open._

=Sick.= Diseased, ill, disordered, distempered, indisposed, weak,
ailing, feeble, morbid; imperfect, impaired, weakened, corrupted;
disgusted, surfeited.

ANT. _Healthy, whole, well, sound, strong, robust, salubrious, vigorous,
hale, wholesome, salutary._

=Side.= Margin, edge, verge, border, boundary; party, sect, faction,
interest, cause, policy, behalf; face, aspect, plane; slope, declivity;
half.

ANT. _Center, interior, body, heart, core; opposition, secession,
neutrality._

=Sight.= Vision, show, representation, exhibition; faculty of seeing,
view; visibility, spectacle; inspection, examination; opinion, judgment;
perception, ken, cognizance; contemplation, survey; insight; appearance.

ANT. _Blindness, non-visibility, obscuration; non-appearance; oversight,
neglect; disappearance; vanishing; impression, prejudice._

=Sign.= Mark, manifestation, indication, presage, symbol, type, token,
emblem, note, omen, signal, prognostic, symptom.

=Significant.= Expressive, suggestive, important; weighty, momentous;
manifest, intimating, declarative, betokening, implying, meaning,
denoting; telling, speaking; forcible; conspicuous.

ANT. _Insignificant, meaningless, inconspicuous, mute, inexpressive,
expressionless, unsuggestive._

=Silence.= Stillness, hush, restfulness, quiet, muteness, noiselessness,
calm, peace, tranquillity; dumbness, taciturnity; obscurity, secrecy,
oblivion.

ANT. _Noise, sound, tumult, clamor, roar, storm, din, unrest, babel,
commotion, reverberation, resonance, agitation, clatter; talkativeness,
loquacity, garrulity; publicity, fame, rumor, repute, celebrity._

=Similar.= Corresponding, like, resembling, uniform, homogeneous;
congruous, harmonious.

ANT. _Dissimilar, unlike, different, alien, discordant, heterogeneous,
incongruous._

=Simple.= Silly; single, uncombined; plain, unadorned; mere; sincere,
artless, unaffected, natural; direct, clear, perspicuous; credulous,
foolish; humble, undistinguished, lowly; innocent; elementary.

ANT. _Complex, double, compound, combined, mixed; ornate, adorned;
blended, fused, multiform; artful, affected, artificial; indirect,
complicated, circuitous, skeptic, pragmatic; proud, haughty,
distinguished, celebrated; various, organized, elaborate; designing,
insincere, double-minded; developed, perfect._

=Sin.= Evil, crime, guilt, offense, wickedness, fault, vice,
criminality, misdeed; viciousness, ungodliness, wrong, wrongdoing,
unrighteousness, iniquity, transgression, immorality, depravity,
delinquency.

ANT. _Virtue, godliness, rectitude, uprightness, sinlessness,
excellence, blamelessness, goodness, holiness, innocence, morality,
integrity, purity, righteousness, right._

=Sing.= Chant, carol, chirp, hum, warble, chirrup.

=Singular.= Unexampled, eminent, unprecedented, extraordinary,
remarkable, uncommon, rare, unusual, peculiar, strange, odd, eccentric,
fantastic; individual, unique; conspicuous, consummate, exceptional,
particular; curious, queer.

ANT. _Common, everyday, ordinary, commonplace, general, universal,
usual, regular, customary, frequent, numerous; unnoticeable, normal,
typical, inconspicuous, humdrum._

=Sink.= Subside, drop, droop, decay, lower, lessen; submerge, immerse,
engulf; depress, degrade, debase, diminish; fall, descend; decline,
dwindle, decrease; weary, flag, abate; reduce; drown; attenuate.

ANT. _Rise, ascend, mount, increase, augment, aggrandize, swell;
flourish, exalt, heighten, promote, enhance; encourage, perpetuate._

=Situation.= Site, station, post, case, plight, state; location,
position; place, office; condition; locality, seat, ground, spot;
circumstance, predicament; category; employment; footing, aspect; birth,
standing.

ANT. _Absence, dislodgment, displacement, non-assignment._

=Skeptic.= Agnostic, doubter, freethinker, infidel, unbeliever, deist,
atheist, disbeliever.

ANT. _Christian, believer._

=Sketch=, _n._ Outline, picture, design, drawing, draft; skeleton, plan,
brief.

=Skilful.= Expert, dexterous, apt, handy, adroit, clever, deft,
proficient, skilled, trained, accomplished, happy, ingenious, practiced;
adept, masterly, cunning.

ANT. _Unskilled, clumsy, inexpert, unskilful, unintelligent, awkward,
incompetent, unprepared, untrained, unable, untaught, bungling,
helpless, maladroit, shiftless._

=Slander=, _v._ Defame, disparage, depreciate, malign, asperse,
calumniate, libel, vilify, revile, traduce, decry, backbite.

ANT. _Extol, eulogize, laud, praise, vindicate, defend._

=Slang.= Vulgarity, cant, colloquialism, vulgarism.

ANT. _Diction, language._

=Slender.= Small, narrow, slim; weak, feeble, slight; moderate, trivial,
inconsiderable, meager; spare, abstemious, frugal.

ANT. _Thick, stout, robust, broad, ample, deep, bulky, considerable,
massive, weighty; giant, colossal._

=Slippery.= Smooth, glib; mutable, uncertain, fickle, inconstant;
unstable, changeable; wanton, loose, unchaste; icy, glassy, insecure,
perilous, unsafe; shifty, elusive; deceptive, evasive; unprincipled.

ANT. _Rough, firm, safe, secure, stable; constant, certain, dependable,
upright, sincere, outright, trustworthy, sound._

=Slow.= Deliberate, dilatory, lingering, gradual, moderate,
procrastinating, tardy; inert, inactive, sluggish, drowsy, dull,
delaying, dawdling.

ANT. _Nimble, active, brisk, alert, lively, prompt, speedy, quick, spry,
swift, agile._

=Small.= Little, diminutive, inconsiderable; inconsequential,
uninfluential, trivial, insignificant; paltry, mean, incapable, unable;
short; weak, slender, gentle, low; tiny, puny; unimportant; scanty,
moderate; sordid, selfish; inferior, unintellectual, ungifted,
unintelligent.

ANT. _Large, great, big, extensive, enormous, bulky, massive, weighty,
ample, spacious, broad, strong, stout, generous, liberal, munificent;
important, significant, notable, influential, distinguished, gifted,
magnanimous, intelligent, intellectual, superior, competent._

=Smart.= Acute, quick, lively, brisk, clever, dashy, showy; pungent,
pricking; keen, severe, poignant; vigorous, sharp; active, shrewd;
efficient, witty; pretentious, spruce; fresh.

ANT. _Dull, heavy, blunt, obtuse, dense, stupid; aching; slow, inactive,
sluggish, inefficient, shabby, dowdy, boorish, clownish._

=Sneer.= Jeer, mock, gibe, taunt, fling, scoff.

ANT. _Smile, laugh; flatter, compliment; cheer._

=Sober.= Abstinent, abstemious, moderate, regular; steady, collected,
quiet, cool, staid, somber; temperate; dispassionate, self-controlled,
calm, self-possessed, solemn, sedate.

ANT. _Intemperate, intoxicated, drunk, impassioned, excited, heated,
furious, passionate; unreasonable, immoderate, uncontrolled, agitated,
extravagant; erratic, eccentric._

=Socialism.= Communism, collectivism, fabianism.

=Society.= Companionship, fellowship, company; participation,
connection; association, partnership; community, sodality, communion,
intercourse.

ANT. _Solitude, solitariness, privacy, separation, segregation;
individuality, personality; disconnection, dissociation, unsociability._

=Soft.= Yielding, impressible, malleable; smooth, delicate; agreeable,
gentle, flowing; flexible; mild, tender, conciliatory, kind; effeminate,
weak; easy; quiet, peaceful, tranquil.

ANT. _Hard, unyielding, impervious, tough, stubborn, impermeable;
non-resilient; disagreeable, harsh, brusk, gruff, unkind; strong, manly;
virile; rough, coarse, rigid, rigorous, abrupt; resolute, determined._

=Solemnity.= Gravity, formality, ritual, ceremonial, sobriety,
seriousness, reverence, devotion; celebration, observance; sanctity,
awfulness, sacredness; impressiveness.

ANT. _Levity, triviality, gaiety, vulgarity; secularity, desecration,
profanity; meaning, unimpressiveness, unimposingness; simplicity._

=Solid.= Hard, sound, real, valid, weighty, profound; compact,
resistant, dense; heavy; strong, firm, stable; substantial;
impenetrable; cubic.

ANT. _Hollow, yielding, soft, resilient, malleable, fluid, flexible,
impressible, liquid; brittle, frail; light, trifling, frivolous;
invalid, weak, fallacious, unsound._

=Solitude.= Loneliness, solitariness, loneness, recluseness,
retiredness; withdrawal, remoteness, destitution, absence; seclusion,
retirement; desertion, retreat, wilderness, desert, privacy, isolation.

ANT. _Populousness, society, popularity, throng, crowd, intercourse,
meeting, convening, populace, multitude._

=Solution.= Disruption, separation, breach; disentanglement,
explanation, clearing up; resolution, disintegration; release,
discharge; solvency; disconnection, discontinuance; key, answer,
elucidation.

ANT. _Union, amalgamation, conjunction, connection, combination,
entanglement, complication; continuity; integration; obscurity,
confusion, perplexity, mystification._

=Soothe.= Soften, allay, compose, tranquilize, pacify; humor, flatter,
please; assuage, calm, mollify, comfort; lull; mitigate, relieve.

ANT. _Rouse, excite, disturb, disquiet; aggravate, displease, scold,
irritate, exasperate, annoy, infuriate; dissatisfy._

=Sordid.= Vile, base, gross; mean, avaricious, covetous, niggardly;
greedy; low, degraded; stingy, close, ungenerous, penurious; illiberal.

ANT. _Pure, noble, honorable, refined; generous, unselfish, liberal,
broad, munificent, uncovetous; prodigal, profuse, lavish; high-minded._

=Soul.= Spirit, life, courage, fire, ardor; vitality, animus; leader,
inspirer; passion, fervor, affection; person; reason, intellect,
emotions; ghost, specter.

ANT. _Lifelessness, soullessness; body; coldness, spiritlessness;
irrationality, unintellectuality._

=Sound=, _n._ Noise, note, tone, report; impulse, vibration.

ANT. _Silence; taciturnity; stillness, hush, lull, muteness._

=Sound=, _a._ Whole, unbroken, unharmed, free, perfect, healthy; firm,
strong, solid, safe; correct, true, orthodox; deep, profound,
undisturbed; right; legal, valid, undefective; entire, thorough,
substantial, irrefutable.

ANT. _Unsound, broken, partial, harmed; imperfect, soft, diseased; weak,
mellow, unsafe; incorrect, untrue, heterodox; light, trivial, fragile;
illegal, illegitimate, invalid, defective; insubstantial, fallacious,
hollow, unfounded._

=Sovereign=, _n._ King, prince, potentate, monarch, emperor; ruler.

ANT. _Subject, peasant, serf._

=Sovereign=, _a._ Supreme, paramount, superior, chief; independent,
unlimited, absolute; controlling, efficacious; princely, royal; primary,
principal, regal, imperial; predominant.

ANT. _Inferior, subordinate, subservient, ministerial, secondary,
subject; popular, menial; inefficient, unefficacious, uncertain, weak._

=Space.= Extension, room; interval, duration, time; capacity, distance,
measure, quantity; boundlessness, illimitableness; immeasurableness,
immensity.

ANT. _Confinement, proximity, limitation, restriction, contiguity,
continuity._

=Spare=, _a._ Scanty, sparing, frugal, wanting, lacking, parsimonious,
needed, chary; superfluous; lean, meager, thin, gaunt.

ANT. _Ample, abundant, profuse, plentiful, liberal, bountiful,
unsparing, unstinted, unrestricted, generous; plump, fat, corpulent,
portly._

=Sparse.= Scattered, sprinkled, infrequent, thin, scanty, meager, few.

ANT. _Dense, thick, plentiful, many, populous, crowded, numerous,
frequent, multitudinous._

=Speak.= Say, talk, tell, utter, discourse, articulate, converse,
express, chat, chatter, enunciate, pronounce; announce, declaim,
declare, deliver.

ANT. _Be mute or dumb; keep silence, be taciturn; suppress; recall._

=Speculation.= Venture; theory, view, notion, conjecture; consideration,
meditation, contemplation, thought, weighing; hypothesis, scheme.

ANT. _Certainty, fact, verity, proof, realization, verification._

=Speech.= Address, discourse, language, speaking, talk, oration,
utterance, sermon, harangue, dissertation, oratory, disquisition.

ANT. _Hush, silence, stillness, taciturnity, speechlessness._

=Spirit.= Life, soul; ghost, specter; fairy, sprite; energy, vivacity,
ardor, courage, enthusiasm; intellectuality; meaning, intent; vapor;
distilled liquid; air, breath; intelligence, immateriality, essence,
disembodiment, apparition; activity, earnestness, zeal; temper,
disposition; principle, motive.

ANT. _Substance, body, corporeity, flesh, frame, materiality,
embodiment, organization; spiritlessness, timidity, lifelessness,
soullessness, deadness, torpor, dejection, slowness._

=Spiritual.= Immaterial, incorporeal, mental, intellectual; holy,
divine, heavenly-minded; ecclesiastical, sacred; moral; religious,
ethical.

ANT. _Carnal, fleshly, material, sensuous; gross; unspiritual._

=Splendid.= Shining, showy, magnificent, sumptuous, pompous;
illustrious, brilliant, famous; gorgeous, grand, glorious; imposing;
superb, heroic, noble.

ANT. _Dull, tame, obscure, tarnished, tawdry, somber, beggarly, gloomy,
poor, ordinary, ineffective, inglorious, insignificant, mean, low._

=Spontaneous.= Free, intentional, voluntary, willing, unbidden,
impulsive, automatic, instinctive, deliberate.

ANT. _Forced, compelled, coerced, unwilling, reluctant._

=Spread=, _v._ Open, unfurl, disperse, distribute, scatter, circulate,
disseminate, dispense; extend, stretch, expand, amplify; divulge,
propagate, publish, diffuse.

ANT. _Collect, condense, contract, furl, gather, close, shut; confine,
suppress, restrict, recall, conceal, hush, localize._

=Spring=, _v._ Leap, bound, jump; shoot, fly, dart, start; emerge; bend,
warp; proceed, issue, result; burst, emanate, flow; rise, originate,
germinate.

ANT. _Settle, alight, arrive, land, drop; end, terminate, debouch,
finish, eventuate._

=Spy.= Scout, emissary, detective.

=Stable=, _a._ Steady, abiding, firm, strong, durable; fixed,
established; constant, resolute, unwavering; secure, stanch, permanent;
solid, lasting, perpetual; immobile, rigid, unmovable.

ANT. _Vacillating, wavering, unsteady, toppling, weak, tottering,
infirm, insecure, precarious, frail, unstable; transient, ephemeral,
evanescent, vanishing, non-durable._

=Stain=, _v._ Blot, spot, sully, tarnish, tinge, tint, color, discolor,
disgrace, dishonor, dye, soil.

ANT. _Preserve inviolate or unspotted._

=Stand=, _v._ Rest, continue upright or erect, be situated or located;
cease, stop, pause, halt; endure, last; maintain, be fixed or steady;
be, consist; agree, accord; endure, sustain, bear; withstand; submit to.

ANT. _Advance, move, proceed, progress; fail, fall, die, depart, run,
yield, succumb, drop; give up, surrender; retaliate, avenge, resent._

=Standard=, _n._ Flag, colors, banner, ensign; criterion, test; support,
frame; model, type, norm; gage, measure, scale; upright; exemplar.

ANT. _Misrule, mismeasurement, misadjustment, misfit, non-criterion._

=State=, _v._ Declare, tell, assert, affirm, asseverate, allege,
testify, assure, swear, set forth, protest, predicate, pronounce,
specify, propound, maintain, inform, express, depose, claim, avow,
avouch, aver, certify.

ANT. _Deny, contradict, controvert, disprove, refute, repudiate, waive,
contravene, dispute, gainsay, oppose, retract._

=Station.= Depot; place, spot, position, stand; office, sphere; state,
rank, condition, occupation, business.

ANT. _Removal, departure; dislodgment, ejection, displacement;
locomotion._

=Stay=, _v._ Stop; prop, hold up, support, sustain; hold, restrain; hold
back, hinder, delay; check; fasten, secure; continue, abide, remain;
dwell, tarry, linger, wait; forbear; rest, depend, rely.

ANT. _Loose, liberate, free; fail, let fall; expedite, speed,
accelerate; proceed, advance, progress, go on; move, depart; oppress,
burden; overthrow._

=Steadfast.= Established, firm; constant, resolute; grounded, rooted,
placed; resolved, unwavering, stanch.

ANT. _Unsteady, unattached; vacillating, wavering, weak, insecure,
irresolute, inconstant, unreliable._

=Steep.= Sharp, sheer, high, precipitous, abrupt.

ANT. _Gradual, level, slight, flat, easy, gentle, horizontal, low._

=Stiff.= Rigid, inflexible, strong, obstinate, pertinacious, rigorous,
constrained, affected; unbending, unpliant; starched; formal,
ceremonious, difficult, punctilious, stately; austere, peremptory,
inexorable, uncompromising.

ANT. _Flexible, pliant, unaffected, amenable, easy, yielding, affable,
genial, unceremonious, informal; pliable, malleable; considerate,
compromising._

=Still.= Noiseless; inert, stagnant, serene; motionless, restful, quiet;
silent, calm, soundless, low; hushed, mute, placid, quiescent;
stationary; gentle, soft, mild, pacific, peaceful.

ANT. _Disturbed, agitated, moved, restless; noisy, moving, loud,
resonant, turbulent; unquiet, rough, harsh._

=Stop.= Suppress, discontinue, delay, interrupt; close, obstruct;
arrest, impede; restrain, hinder, repress; cease, halt, stay, tarry;
bar, seal; suspend, end, terminate.

ANT. _Assist, advance, continue, expedite, speed, hasten, promote;
clear, open; improve, push, benefit; progress; facilitate; initiate,
commence, begin._

=Storm.= Agitation, disturbance, tempest.

ANT. _Calm, hush, peace, serenity, stillness, tranquillity, fair
weather._

=Story.= Narrative, legend, anecdote, account, tale, record, recital,
incident, myth, narration, novel, relation.

ANT. _Annals, chronicle, biography, history, memoir._

=Stout.= Corpulent; portly; vigorous, strong, lusty, robust; firm,
resolute, bold; tough; large, bulky; brawny; valiant, courageous,
redoubtable.

ANT. _Thin, slender, weak, lean, frail, feeble, attenuated, emaciated;
timid, irresolute, cowardly._

=Strange.= Outlandish, wonderful, astonishing, marvelous, uncommon,
irregular, queer, odd, eccentric; foreign, new, novel, unusual;
reserved, distant; unfamiliar, unaccustomed, inexperienced.

ANT. _Familiar, usual, common, general, universal, accustomed, ordinary,
home, domestic, regular, customary, habitual, commonplace._

=Strength.= Robustness, toughness, hardness, stoutness, spirit,
lustiness, puissance, authority; force, vigor, power; endurance,
resistance; security, validity; firmness; intensity; virtue; energy,
nerve, sinew, fiber; soundness.

ANT. _Weakness, thinness, frailty, softness, delicacy; imbecility,
feebleness; spiritlessness, impotence, inability; insecurity,
invalidity; wavering._

=Strenuous.= Eager, pressing, urgent; zealous, ardent, earnest; bold,
intrepid; strong, determined, resolute; vigorous, energetic, vehement,
forceful.

ANT. _Weak, irresolute, vacillating, wavering, enervated, undetermined._

=Strong.= Powerful, cogent, muscular; robust, lusty, sinewy, hale,
hearty, vigorous, forceful; enduring, resistant; violent, forcible;
ardent, zealous, vehement, earnest, solid, nourishing; firm; capable,
potent, effective, influential, sound; pungent; hardy, tenacious.

ANT. _Weak, feeble, infirm, sickly, exhausted, debilitated, wanting,
pliant, frail, soft; low, faint; spiritless, foolish; wavering,
impotent, powerless, defenseless, insecure, delicate; unefficacious,
unconvincing, unsatisfactory, unavailing, flaccid, nerveless._

=Stubborn.= Obstinate, inflexible, obdurate, headstrong, harsh,
intractable, firm, contumacious, heady; unbending, unyielding,
persistent, refractory.

ANT. _Yielding, pliant, mild, gentle, docile, tractable, manageable,
flexible, pliable; vacillating, wavering, irresolute, undecided._

=Studious.= Contemplative, observant; sedulous, earnest, diligent;
studied; absorbed, meditative, thoughtful, attentive, pondering,
devoted, musing, cogitative; careful, literary, reflective, assiduous.

ANT. _Illiterate, unliterary, idle, indulgent, careless, inattentive,
thoughtless, negligent, regardless, indifferent._

=Study=, _n._ Application, learning, acquisition, meditation,
contemplation; diligence, consideration, thought, research, endeavor,
knowledge, purpose, intention, attention, concentration.

ANT. _Idleness, dawdling, illiteracy, ease, indifference, indiligence,
negligence, carelessness, unstudiousness, thoughtlessness._

=Stupid.= Simple, insensible, sottish, sluggish, senseless, doltish,
heavy, dull; stolid, insensate, obtuse, prosy.

ANT. _Quick, bright, sharp, intelligent, responsive, clever, sensible,
eager, animated, penetrating._

=Stupidity.= Slowness, dulness, obtuseness, insensibility, sluggishness,
stupor, apathy.

ANT. _Intelligence, animation, brilliancy, acuteness, sensibility,
cleverness, sense, sagacity, quickness, readiness, alertness, keenness._

=Stupor.= Apathy, swoon, torpor, lethargy, coma, fainting,
unconsciousness, stupefaction, asphyxia, swooning, insensibility,
syncope.

=Sublime.= Exalted, lofty, noble, majestic, grand, stately, magnificent,
dignified, elevated, august, pompous, high, eminent, glorious.

ANT. _Low, ignoble, debased, degraded, inglorious, ordinary, mean,
undignified, inconspicuous, unimposing, ridiculous._

=Submissive.= Obedient, compliant, yielding, obsequious, subservient,
humble, modest, passive, docile, acquiescent.

ANT. _Disobedient, haughty, proud, arrogant, unyielding, conceited,
active, rebellious, reluctant, defiant, refractory, resistant._

=Subsidy.= Aid, allowance, gift, bounty, reward, tribute, support,
subvention, pension, bonus, premium, grant, indemnity.

=Substantial.= Real, solid, true, existing, essential; corporeal,
material; strong, stout, resourceful, massive, tangible, bulky;
sensuous.

ANT. _Imaginary, unreal, insubstantial, fictitious, supposititious,
immaterial, weak, chimerical, visionary, spiritual, disembodied,
ghostly._

=Subtle.= Artful, crafty, cunning, shrewd, sly, wily; astute, guileful,
discriminating, insinuating, sophistical.

ANT. _Frank, honest, open, sincere, artless, undiscriminating,
undiscerning, simple, direct, blunt, unsophisticated._

=Subvert.= Destroy, ruin, supplant, suppress, supersede, extinguish,
overthrow, overturn.

ANT. _Conserve, preserve, uphold, sustain, keep, perpetuate._

=Succeed.= Follow, pursue; ensue, result, be subsequent; descend,
devolve; gain, acquire, attain, obtain, achieve, accomplish; supervene;
flourish, prosper, thrive.

ANT. _Precede, anticipate, antecede; fail, deteriorate, be lacking,
lose, miss, disappoint, be deficient in; decline, wane, decay._

=Succession.= Succeeding, series, sequence, order; lineage, descent;
following, continuity, consecution, rotation, regularity.

ANT. _Antecedence, precedence, anticipation, forerunning, prevention;
disorder, irregularity, non-sequence, intermission, gap, failure,
inconsecutiveness._

=Sudden.= Unexpected, unusual, abrupt, unlooked for, hasty,
unanticipated, unforeseen, unprovided for; rash, quick, heedless,
reckless.

ANT. _Anticipated, foreseen, expected; slow, gradual, transitional,
moderate; wary, cautious, careful, provident._

=Suffer.= Support, sustain, tolerate, permit; allow, let, grant, consent
to; endure, bear, submit to, undergo, be affected by, experience.

ANT. _Resist, rebel, repel, withstand; forbid, disallow, refuse, reject,
expel, repudiate; fight, antagonize, challenge._

=Sufficient.= Competent, satisfactory, full, ample; equal, adequate,
enough; qualified, capable, responsible; efficient; adapted, fitted.

ANT. _Inadequate, incompetent, unsatisfactory, lacking, wanting,
unequal, unfit, incapable, unqualified, insufficient, unsuited, meager,
short, deficient, scanty._

=Suggestion.= Hint, innuendo, intimation, insinuation, implication.

=Suitable.= Proper, competent, correspondent, consonant, compatible,
congruous, consistent; fitting, accordant, becoming, adapted; seemly,
appropriate, agreeable, convenient; harmonious, uniform; homogeneous.

ANT. _Improper, divergent, incompetent, incompatible, dissonant,
incongruous, inconsistent, unfit, discordant, unbecoming; unseemly,
inappropriate, inconvenient; unharmonious, different, heterogeneous._

=Sum.= Aggregate, quantity, magnitude, amount; compendium, substance,
gist; height, completion; total, whole, computation; example, problem;
collection; drift, bearing.

ANT. _Part, portion, half, fraction, item, particular; incompleteness,
imperfection, discrepancy; article, detail, fragment, component,
constituent, element._

=Superb.= Grand, magnificent, august, stately; rich, elegant; showy,
excellent; princely, gorgeous, splendid; proud.

ANT. _Mean, shabby, poor, undignified, dingy; meager; tawdry,
impoverished; ordinary, common; humble, plain, unimposing._

=Superior.= Elevated, higher, upper; surpassing, greater; preëminent,
excellent, ascendent, predominant, prevalent, advantageous, beneficial.

ANT. _Inferior, lower, worse, deeper, meaner, subordinate, lesser,
mediocre, ordinary, average, common, unremarkable, inconspicuous,
detrimental, disadvantageous; declining, deteriorating._

=Supernatural.= Miraculous, preternatural, superhuman.

ANT. _Common, natural, ordinary, commonplace, everyday, usual._

=Supple.= Pliant, flexible, bending; fawning, soft; yielding, compliant,
submissive; flattering, obsequious, subservient, servile, cringing,
adulatory; lithe, limber, elastic.

ANT. _Firm, stiff, unyielding, obstinate, inflexible, hard, dominant,
domineering; abusive, scolding, tyrannous; unbending, stubborn,
independent, self-assertive, supercilious, arrogant, haughty._

=Support.= Maintain, sustain, uphold, cherish, keep, bear, prop, carry,
tolerate, hold up, keep up.

ANT. _Demolish, abandon, betray, destroy, drop, desert, wreck, break
down, cast down, overthrow, let go, throw down._

=Suppose.= Deem, guess, imagine, think, conjecture, surmise.

ANT. _Conclude, ascertain, discover, prove, know, be sure._

=Suppress.= Repress, subdue, restrain, overthrow, quell, overwhelm,
conceal, stifle, smother, stop; overpower, extinguish, destroy.

ANT. _Excite, fan, increase, augment, strengthen, raise, aggravate;
publish, promulgate, advertise, spread, disseminate; intensify._

=Sure.= Unfailing, infallible, permanent, steady, stable, strong,
indisputable, confident, positive, firm; certain, safe, secure, assured,
believing, trusting, unquestioning; abiding, fast.

ANT. _Insecure, fallible, unsteady, inconstant, wavering, indeterminate,
dubitable, uncertain, questionable, impermanent, doubtful, hesitating,
distrustful, precarious, disputable, loose._

=Surrender.= Abandon, give over, relinquish, resign, waive, yield,
alienate, capitulate, cede, let go, sacrifice, give one’s self up.

ANT. _Resist, withstand, oppose, thwart, baffle; die._

=Suspense.= Uncertainty, expectation, apprehension, anxiety,
indetermination, indecision; solicitude, intermission, protraction,
abeyance, doubt; pause, stop.

ANT. _Decision, settlement, determination, finality, execution;
achievement, termination, accomplishment, end; uninterruption,
continuance, continuity, regularity, sequence._

=Sustenance.= Subsistence, food, provision, maintenance, support;
supplies, aliment, nutriment, nourishment; livelihood, living,
nutrition, sustentation.

ANT. _Starvation, want, indigence, poverty, hunger, lack, thirst,
inanition, exhaustion; non-subsistence, non-support._

=Sweet.= Sugary, saccharine, dulcet, luscious; agreeable, pleasing,
fragrant, soft, melodious; beautiful, mild, fair; fresh; amiable,
winning; wholesome.

ANT. _Sour, bitter, sharp, acid; discordant, inharmonious, dissonant;
disagreeable, displeasing; fetid, malodorous; plain, homely; stale,
unwholesome, spoiled; offensive, repulsive, unlovely._

=Swift.= Quick, fleet, speedy, expeditious, rapid, prompt; accelerated,
nimble, alert, ready, headlong, eager, fast.

ANT. _Slow, tardy, delaying, late, unready, laggard, deliberate, sedate,
reluctant, lingering, lazy, loitering, inactive, sluggish,
inexpeditious._

=Symmetry.= Proportion, grace, conformity, uniformity, similarity,
regularity, shapeliness, harmony, agreement; comeliness.

ANT. _Disproportion, disharmony, incongruity, irregularity,
disagreement, disparity, shapelessness; interdisparity._

=Sympathy.= Pity, compassion, commiseration, tenderness, condolence;
fellow-feeling; agreement, conformity, reciprocity; congeniality.

ANT. _Antipathy, harshness, antagonism, unkindness, coldness,
mercilessness, pitilessness._

=Synonymous.= Similar, correspondent, like, identical, interchangeable,
alike, same, corresponding, synonymic, equivalent.

ANT. _Antonymic._

=System.= Order, mode, method, regularity, rule, manner.

ANT. _Confusion, chaos, disorder, derangement, irregularity,
disarrangement._




                                   T


=Tacit.= Silent, implied, granted, unexpressed, understood, implicit.

ANT. _Mentioned, expressed, explicit, declared._

=Taciturn.= Mute, silent, speechless, reserved, close, dumb,
uncommunicative, reticent.

ANT. _Communicative, free, garrulous, loquacious, talkative,
unreserved._

=Take.= Lay hold, seize, grasp, obtain; capture, fasten on; attack;
gain, captivate, charm; choose, turn to; employ, use, demand, require;
copy, delineate; assume, adopt; acquire; engage in, indulge in; carry,
convey, conduct; remove, withdraw, deduct; acknowledge, accept; receive,
admit; partake of, swallow; undertake, clear; tolerate, endure;
consider, interpret, suppose; receive, submit to, bear.

ANT. _Drop, reject, abandon, surrender, miss, lose, repel, refuse,
decline, repulse, spurn._

=Talent.= Ability, gift, endowment, genius, faculty; capacity,
cleverness, aptitude, forte.

ANT. _Inability, ineptitude, incompetence, imbecility, stupidity._

=Tangible.= Perceptible, tactile, palpable; apprehensible, evident,
manifest, clear; material, substantial, sensible, obvious.

ANT. _Impalpable, spiritual, intangible, incorporeal, immaterial,
incomprehensible._

=Tart.= Sharp, acid, sour; keen, severe; harsh, caustic, petulant,
acrimonious.

ANT. _Gentle, mild, genial, kindly, polite; mellow, sweet._

=Taste=, _n._ Savor, relish, flavor, sensibility, judgment; discernment,
nicety, perception, zest, choice, elegancy, refinement.

ANT. _Disrelish, insipidity, ill-savor, coarseness, indelicacy,
non-perception, indiscrimination._

=Tasteful.= Delicate, artistic, elegant, dainty, esthetic, exquisite,
fastidious, fine, chaste, nice, tasty, delicious, esthetical.

ANT. _Coarse, rough, rude, harsh, hideous, clumsy, disgusting, deformed,
displeasing, fulsome, gaudy, grotesque, distasteful, horrid, inartistic,
inharmonious, meretricious, offensive, ragged, tawdry._

=Taunt=, _v._ Ridicule, mock, jeer, deride, revile, flout, scoff, scorn,
insult; reproach, rebuke, censure.

ANT. _Compliment, flatter, approve of, congratulate._

=Teach.= Discipline, instruct, tutor, school, train, educate, enlighten,
drill, inculcate, give lessons, give instructions, indoctrinate, inform,
initiate, instill, nurture.

ANT. _Learn, study, practice, investigate, experiment, try, develop,
receive, drink in, acquire, attain, imbibe, understand, glean, gather,
collect._

=Tedious.= Wearisome, fatiguing, irksome, tiresome; prolix, dull, slow,
monotonous, tiring, trying.

ANT. _Interesting, exciting, amusing, charming, delightful, stirring,
bright, entertaining._

=Tell.= Enumerate, communicate, impart, reveal, disclose, report,
acquaint, repeat, rehearse, discover; count, number, reckon, recount;
narrate, divulge; inform, teach; order, command, request.

=Temerity.= Audacity, foolhardiness, rashness, presumption,
recklessness, hardihood, hastiness, heedlessness, precipitation,
overconfidence, precipitancy, venturesomeness.

ANT. _Care, caution, hesitation, cowardice, timidity, wariness,
circumspection._

=Temporal.= Transient, fleeting, transitory, temporary; terrestrial,
worldly, secular, mundane.

ANT. _Eternal, permanent, everlasting; religious, spiritual._

=Tendency.= Proneness, drift, aim, disposition; direction, course;
influence; inclination, leaning, bent, bias; proclivity, aptitude,
propensity, liability.

ANT. _Aversion, repulsion, repugnance; opposition, reluctance,
divergence, tangency, deviation._

=Tender.= Effeminate, soft, sensitive, compassionate, humane, kind,
merciful, pitiful, dear, delicate; gentle, mild, susceptible.

ANT. _Hard, pitiless, callous, careless, heedless, rough, coarse,
unkind, inhuman, unmerciful, unfeeling; hardy, strong, sturdy._

=Tension.= Strain, stretch, effort, stretching, tensity, tenseness,
rigor, severity, harshness, stiffness, tightness.

ANT. _Relaxation, release, relief, laxity, slackness, looseness._

=Term.= Boundary, limit; expression, phrase, word, name; member,
condition, denomination.

=Termination.= Limit, end, conclusion, bound, result; completion,
consequence, effect; fulfilment, consummation, accomplishment,
achievement, finis, finality, exit, issue.

ANT. _Beginning, initiation, inception, commencement, rise, start,
origin, source, cause, process, course._

=Terrible.= Terrific, fearful, horrible, shocking, awful; dreadful,
formidable, frightful; tremendous; astounding, startling.

ANT. _Insignificant, amusing, pleasing; unastonishing._

=Terse.= Concise, pithy, succinct, short, brief, laconic, compact,
sententious, condensed, compendious, neat.

ANT. _Long, lengthy, tedious, wordy, diffuse, prolix, verbose._

=Testimony.= Affirmation, certification, deposition, proof, evidence,
witness, affidavit, attestation, oath.

ANT. _Demonstration._

=Theory.= Hypothesis, speculation; doctrine, conjecture, explanation;
assumption, scheme, postulate, plan; science, philosophy; exposition,
rationale; supposition.

ANT. _Fact, truth, verity, actuality._

=Therefore.= Consequently, then, hence, thence, whence, wherefore,
accordingly.

ANT. _Because, as for, inasmuch as, since._

=Thick.= Dense, close, compact, solid, coarse, gross; muddy, turbid,
misty; crowded, abundant; indistinct; dull; numerous; inarticulate.

ANT. _Thin, rare, sparse, infrequent; pure, limpid, crystalline, clear,
distinct, incompact, shallow, articulate._

=Think.= Cogitate, contemplate; remember, reflect, muse, meditate,
ponder, consider, deliberate, judge, conclude, believe; purpose, intend,
design, mean; presume, venture; imagine, apprehend.

ANT. _Guess, hazard; dream, idle, stargaze, wander, rove._

=Thought.= Imagination, fancy, conceit, notion, consideration,
supposition, contemplation, deliberation; reflection, cogitation,
meditation, conception, solicitude, care, concern; reasoning; idea,
opinion, concept, judgment, purpose, intention, provision.

ANT. _Thoughtlessness, giddiness, carelessness, inconsideration,
dreaminess, dulness, stupidity, rashness, impulsiveness; vacuity, dream,
hallucination, aberration._

=Threat.= Menace, denunciation, threatening, intimidation.

ANT. _Promise, encouragement, allurement, enticement; anticipation._

=Thrifty.= Economical, saving, careful; sparing, frugal, industrious,
prosperous, thriving; provident, foresighted.

ANT. _Wasteful, prodigal, uneconomical, lavish, spendthrift,
extravagant; slack, lazy; improvident, unprepared._

=Throng.= Concourse, crowd, host, jam, mass, multitude, press.

ANT. _Solitude; wilderness, desert, waste._

=Tidings.= Message, information, intelligence, news, rumor, report,
advices, announcement.

ANT. _Suppression, censorship, misinformation, canard._

=Time.= Epoch, era, period, date, age, eon, season, term, while,
succession, sequence, duration.

=Timid.= Fearful, timorous, cowardly, afraid, pusillanimous,
faint-hearted, shrinking, retiring, shy; diffident, bashful.

ANT. _Bold, confident, venturesome, courageous, adventurous, heedless._

=Tip.= Incline, lean, list, slant, slope, tilt, cant, careen, dip, heel
over.

=Tire.= Exhaust, fag, weary, fatigue, jade, harass, wear out.

ANT. _Refresh, recreate, rest, relax, relieve, repose, restore,
invigorate._

=Title.= Epithet, name, appellation, designation, cognomen,
denomination; address, inscription, heading, style.

ANT. _Nondescript, namelessness._

=Together.= With, in company, associated, conjoined, unitedly,
simultaneously, contemporaneously, coincidently.

ANT. _Separately, variously, independently._

=Toil.= Labor, drudgery, work, exertion, employment, occupation, task,
travail.

ANT. _Rest, relaxation, recreation, ease; amusement, pleasure,
enjoyment, fun._

=Tolerable.= Endurable, bearable, supportable; passable, medium,
ordinary, mediocre, indifferent.

ANT. _Intolerable, unendurable, insufferable, unbearable,
insupportable._

=Tool.= Appliance, implement, apparatus, mechanism, utensil, machine,
weapon.

=Topic.= Head, division, motion, point, proposition, question, issue,
subject, theme, matter.

=Torment.= Pain, misery, agony, anguish, torture, distress.

ANT. _Enjoyment, pleasure, comfort, ease, gratification, delight._

=Total=, _a._ Whole, entire, full, absolute, complete, undivided.

ANT. _Partial, imperfect, incomplete, divided, fractional, sectional._

=Trace.= Mark, remains, sign, vestige, track, token, trail, footmark,
footprint, footstep, impression, memorial, remnant.

=Trade.= Profession, occupation, office, calling, avocation, employment,
commerce, dealing, traffic.

ANT. _Stagnation, inactivity, dulness, embargo; leisure, vacation,
idleness, vacancy._

=Tragedy.= Mournful drama; catastrophe, calamity, adversity, disaster,
affliction.

ANT. _Comedy, happiness, mirthful drama, prosperity, luck, good
fortune._

=Traitor.= Betrayer, turncoat, renegade, rebel, deceiver, apostate;
insurgent, deserter, mutineer.

ANT. _Patriot, adherent, defender, supporter._

=Tranquil.= Quiet, calm, undisturbed, peaceful, unagitated; unruffled,
composed, poised, collected, cool.

ANT. _Agitated, excited, uneasy, anxious, troubled, restless._

=Transact.= Conduct, carry on, perform, act, accomplish, do, negotiate,
treat.

ANT. _Leave alone, rest, stop, refrain, desist, cease._

=Transaction.= Business, action, deed, proceeding, doing, affair, act,
negotiation, performance.

ANT. _Inactivity, quiescence, rest, neglect, inaction, passivity._

=Transgression.= Infringement, misdemeanor, misdeed, affront; violation,
breach, fault, crime, offense, sin.

ANT. _Innocence, guiltlessness; purity, righteousness; observance,
obedience, fulfilment._

=Transient.= Fleeting, temporary, transitory, ephemeral, evanescent,
brief, flitting, flying, momentary, passing, fugitive, short.

ANT. _Permanent, perpetual, lasting, enduring, abiding, immortal,
everlasting, unfading, undying, persistent, eternal, imperishable._

=Transparent.= Translucent, pellucid, clear, lucid; diaphanous; open,
porous; crystalline, limpid, bright; perspicuous.

ANT. _Opaque, thick, turbid; mysterious, questionable, dubious._

=Travel.= Go, pass, journey, migrate, move, traverse, wander, roam.

ANT. _Dwell, reside, stay, remain, settle._

=Treasure.= Wealth, abundance, plenty; money, jewels, cash, valuables,
hoard, riches, bullion; reserve.

ANT. _Refuse, trash, offal; dregs, trifles._

=Treaty.= Negotiation, compact, agreement, covenant, alliance,
convention, contract.

ANT. _Neutrality, non-interference, non-intervention._

=Tremendous.= Frightful, terrific, horrible, awful; fearful, appalling,
alarming, horrifying, dreadful.

ANT. _Unappalling, inconsiderable, unimposing._

=Trial.= Attempt, endeavor, essay; effort, exertion; experience, proof,
test; examination, experiment; criterion, ordeal, assay; temptation,
trouble, affliction, distress, grief, suffering, tribulation.

ANT. _Non-attempt; ease, facility; acceptance; oversight, disregard;
trifle, triviality._

=Trick.= Stratagem, wile, fraud, cheat, juggle, finesse, sleight;
deception, imposture, delusion, imposition; artifice, machination,
contrivance, legerdemain.

ANT. _Exposure, revelation, examination; blunder, botch, bungling,
fumbling, maladroitness, mishap; genuineness, artlessness,
openhandedness._

=Triumph.= Success, conquest, victory; ovation, celebration, jubilee,
jubilation, exultation; achievement, attainment.

ANT. _Defeat, failure, disappointment, discomfiture, abortion,
baffling._

=Trouble.= Affliction, sorrow, disturbance, perplexity, vexation,
molestation, annoyance, inconvenience, calamity, misfortune, adversity,
misery; tribulation, distress, disaster, torment, difficulty, anxiety.

ANT. _Blessing, peace, composure, alleviation, appeasement, pleasure,
fortune, boon, affluence, happiness, joy, success, gladness, ease,
facility, amusement, recreation._

=True.= Correct, accurate, precise, exact; unwavering, faithful, loyal;
actual, pure, real, genuine; veritable.

ANT. _Untrue, false, fictitious, unreliable, incorrect, inaccurate,
inexact; vacillating, disloyal, faithless; counterfeit, impure, unreal,
factitious, untrustworthy, adulterated, spurious, fickle, treacherous._

=Trust=, _n._ Confidence, belief, expectation, faith, hope; reliance.

ANT. _Doubt, misgiving, distrust, skepticism, suspense; despair._

=Truth.= Fact, reality, fidelity, conformity, exactness; steadfastness;
veracity, verity; accuracy, precision, faithfulness.

ANT. _Falsehood, falsity, lie, untruth, fabrication, fiction; fallacy,
mistake, sophism._

=Tumult.= Ferment, disturbance, turbulence, disorder, bluster, hubbub,
bustle, brawl, riot; excitement, distraction, confusion, turmoil, noise.

ANT. _Peace, order, orderliness, pacification, quiet, subsidence._

=Turn=, _n._ Revolution; alteration, vicissitude; winding, bending,
meandering; stroll; succession, alternation; chance, occasion;
convenience, purpose, exigence; form, cast, shape, manner, fashion;
rotation, recurrence; opportunity; deed, office, treatment, act;
tendency, talent, gift; crisis.

ANT. _Fixity, unchangeableness, immobility, uniformity, stability,
continuity; independence; malformation, shapelessness._

=Turn=, _v._ Revolve, reverse, deflect, change; divert, transfer, use,
employ, apply, devote; alter, metamorphose, transform, convert; shape,
mold, adapt; whirl; hinge, depend; eventuate, issue, terminate.

ANT. _Stick, stop, remain; adhere, hold to; persist, continue;
stabilitate, perpetuate, arrest, stereotype._

=Tutor.= Teacher, instructor, professor, preceptor, master, savant,
guardian, governor.

ANT. _Pupil, student, novice, disciple, scholar, ward, learner._

=Twist=, _v._ Contort, writhe, convolve; pervert, distort; wind,
wreathe; insinuate; encircle.

ANT. _Straighten, untwist, rectify, unwind, disentangle, unravel;
verify, substantiate._

=Type.= Mark, stamp, sign, emblem; style, semblance; representation,
similitude, figure, symbol, token; character, pattern, archetype, model,
norm; cast, mold, fashion.

ANT. _Caricature, monstrosity, abnormity; falsification, deviation;
misrepresentation._




                                   U


=Ubiquity.= Omnipresence; universal presence, all-pervasiveness.

ANT. _Localization, limitation._

=Ugly.= Loathsome, unsightly, repulsive; ill-natured, quarrelsome;
unpleasant; plain, ordinary, homely, hideous, frightful; cross, vicious.

ANT. _Attractive, handsome, fair, pleasant, agreeable, beautiful,
shapely, comely; lovely, kindly, good-natured, gentle._

=Ultimate.= Final, last, conclusive, farthest, extreme, most remote;
elemental.

ANT. _Initial, nearest, beginning, primary._

=Un-.= A prefix meaning _not_ or _without_, or simply intensive, which
is prefixed to nouns, adjectives, adverbs, and the participles of verbs.
Words whose meaning is simply that of the root word with negative or
intensive emphasis are omitted here, and their synonyms and antonyms may
be formed from those of the root word.

=Unction.= Anointing, ointment; power, fervor, animation, fervency,
ardor, enthusiasm, energy, spirit, emotion.

ANT. _Tameness, perfunctoriness, coldness, lifelessness._

=Unctuous.= Fatty, oily, greasy; bland, suave, tender, fervid;
obsequious, fawning, servile, sycophantic.

ANT. _Blunt, brush, abrupt; cynical, sarcastic; harsh, unmannerly,
uncomplimentary._

=Under-.= A prefix meaning _beneath_ or _below_. Words whose meaning is
simply that of the root word with the meaning of the prefix added are
omitted in this place, and their synonyms and antonyms may be formed in
many cases from those of the root word.

=Under=, _prep._ Below, beneath, underneath.

ANT. _Above, upon, over._

=Understand.= Know, comprehend; learn, be informed, hear; recognize,
interpret; imply, assume; apprehend, discern, see, perceive, conceive,
penetrate.

ANT. _Misunderstand, miscomprehend, misinterpret; declare, state;
express, inform._

=Understanding.= Sense, intelligence, conception, perception,
discernment, knowledge, intuition, cognition, reason; interpretation;
mind, brains.

ANT. _Insensibility, stupidity, dulness, obtuseness, senselessness,
slowness, irrationality, sluggishness, ignorance, unintelligence._

=Undertake.= Engage, enter, set about, attempt; covenant, contract;
guarantee, promise, affirm; project, commence; stipulate.

ANT. _Abandon, drop, desist, discontinue, decline; complete, finish,
end, terminate._

=Undertaking.= Enterprise, engagement, attempt, adventure, business,
effort, endeavor; experiment, venture, interest, affair, matter,
concern.

ANT. _Leisure, inactivity; recreation._

=Undulation.= Waving motion; vibration; wavy outline; pulsation;
oscillation, swelling; wave, ripple.

ANT. _Equilibrium; arrestation, standing; plain, tableland._

=Uniform.= Unchanging, equable, consistent, homogeneous; consonant;
regular, constant, invariable, steady; similar, unvaried, alike.

ANT. _Heterogeneous, variable, varying, diverse; irregular,
inconsistent, erratic, eccentric, unsymmetrical._

=Union.= Unity, connection, concord, combination, confederacy, alliance;
coalition, conjunction; harmony, concert, agreement; league,
confederation, consolidation; oneness, juncture, unification.

ANT. _Disconnection, separation, disjunction, disunion, divorce,
severance, analysis, dissociation, contrariety, decomposition, division,
schism, partition, discord, disagreement, secession, disruption;
multiplication, diversification._

=Unique.= Sole, only, unmatched, unequalled, unparalleled, singular,
peculiar, exceptional, rare.

ANT. _Common, universal, everyday, commonplace, ordinary, familiar,
vulgar, mean._

=Unison.= Harmony, agreement, concord, union, accordance.

ANT. _Discord, variance, disagreement, divergence._

=Unit.= Oneness, unity; one; integral; item, individual.

ANT. _Sum, mass, total, aggregate, whole, collection._

=Unite.= Add, join, attach, annex; combine, connect; agree, harmonize,
associate, coalesce; incorporate, consolidate, amalgamate, blend,
embody, merge, concur, coöperate, league, confederate.

ANT. _Disjoin, sever, separate, divide, resolve, disconnect;
disintegrate, dissociate, sunder, diverge; multiply, split, disrupt._

=Unity.= Oneness, concord, conjunction, agreement, junction, uniformity,
harmony, union; singleness, unanimity.

ANT. _Separation, disunion, disconnection, division, disagreement,
divorce._

=Universal.= General, unlimited, all-reaching; total, whole, entire;
catholic, common; comprehensive, exhaustive, complete.

ANT. _Specific, special, individual, particular, limited, local,
partial, exclusive, exceptional._

=Up-.= A prefix giving the idea of elevation or an intensive value.
Words whose meaning is derived quite simply from that of the root plus
that of the prefix are omitted here. Their synonyms and antonyms may be
readily formed from those of the root word.

=Upbraid.= Reproach, censure, blame, condemn; taunt, chide, reprove.

ANT. _Approve, commend, praise, eulogize, compliment, applaud._

=Upon.= On; about, concerning; with, immediately after, forthwith.

ANT. _Under, beneath, below; before, after, without._

=Upper.= Higher, superior, on top.

ANT. _Lower, inferior, below, beneath._

=Upright.= Erect, perpendicular, vertical; honest, just, honorable,
conscientious, virtuous, good, faithful, true, trustworthy.

ANT. _Inclined, slanted; inverted; unprincipled, dishonest,
unscrupulous, corrupt, unconscientious._

=Uproar.= Tumult, disturbance, confusion, bustle, clamor, commotion,
turmoil, racket, noise, din.

ANT. _Peace, calm, quiet, silence, order, tranquillity._

=Urbane.= Courteous, polite, refined, suave, elegant; civil, polished.

ANT. _Discourteous, uncivil, unrefined, impolite, rude, boorish._

=Urge.= Animate, instigate, stimulate, encourage, arouse; impel, press,
drive; beseech, entreat, importune; goad, spur, incite; hasten,
accelerate, expedite.

ANT. _Hold back, hinder, obstruct, prevent, retard, inhibit, restrain;
defy, challenge, dare; oppose, object._

=Urgent.= Urging, pressing, importunate, immediate, important,
imperative, grave, momentous, serious, cogent, solicitous, critical,
emergency, necessitous.

ANT. _Trivial, insignificant, unimportant, immaterial, inconsiderable._

=Usage.= Custom, wont, habit, use; mode, method, manners, behavior;
practice, procedure; fashion.

=Use.= Employment, application, occasion, necessity, usefulness,
utility; practice, usage, custom, manner, habit; service, advantage;
profit, avail, need; benefit.

ANT. _Uselessness, misapplication, superfluousness, worthlessness,
disuse, non-observance, desuetude._

=Useful.= Advantageous, profitable, serviceable, beneficial; fruitful,
effectual, suitable, effective, adapted, helpful, good, convenient,
valuable, available.

ANT. _Useless, profitless, unprofitable, valueless, unserviceable,
fruitless, inconducive, ineffectual, unavailing, retarding, hindering,
preventive, obstructive, cumbersome, burdensome, unusable._

=Usual.= Familiar, frequent, ordinary, regular, wonted, prevalent,
accustomed, common, customary, everyday, general, normal, habitual,
prevailing, public.

ANT. _Exceptional, infrequent, extraordinary, strange, uncommon,
unparalleled, unusual, out-of-the-way, singular, rare._

=Usurp.= Arrogate, assume, appropriate, seize.

ANT. _Inherit, accept, receive._

=Utility.= Profit, expediency, use, usefulness, avail, benefit,
advantage, service, usableness.

ANT. _Futility, inutility, inadequacy, inexpediency, uselessness, folly,
impolicy, disadvantage, worthlessness, unprofitableness._

=Utmost.= Farthest, extreme, remotest, last, most distant; uttermost;
greatest.

ANT. _Nearest, next; least._

=Utter=, _v._ Issue, deliver, liberate, discharge; circulate, pass;
express, publish, disclose, speak, pronounce; promulgate.

ANT. _Suppress, recall, check, stifle, hush, repress; retract, disavow._

=Utter=, _a._ Complete, perfect, total, entire, absolute; peremptory,
unconditional, unqualified; thorough.

ANT. _Imperfect, incomplete; conditioned, qualified; partial._

=Utterly.= Fully, totally, thoroughly.

ANT. _Partially, imperfectly, specifically._




                                   V


=Vacancy.= Emptiness; leisure, intermission, idleness; vacuum; chasm,
gap; interval; vacuity, space, void.

ANT. _Fulness, plethora, repletion; business, occupation, employment._

=Vacant.= Blank, empty, void, unoccupied, waste, unemployed, untenanted,
vacuous, unfilled, devoid, unencumbered, disengaged, idle, uncrowded;
inane, silly; free; thoughtless, unreflective; abandoned; inane;
leisure; unmeaning.

ANT. _Full, filled, occupied, replenished, diligent, busy, engaged,
employed; reflective, thoughtful, meaningful; brimful, busy, crammed,
inhabited, packed, replete, brimmed, overflowing, brimming, jammed,
gorged, crowded._

=Vacate.= Empty, make vacant, quit, resign, surrender; annul, abrogate,
cancel, invalidate, abscind, abolish, overrule, neutralize.

ANT. _Fill, occupy, employ, hold, retain, substantiate._

=Vacation.= Interval, intermission, holidays, rest, leisure.

ANT. _Worktime, term, business._

=Vacillate.= Fluctuate, waver, be unsteady, stagger, reel, sway, rock,
hesitate, be inconstant, dubitate.

ANT. _Adhere, abide, determine, be steadfast, stay._

=Vacillation.= Wavering, fluctuating, swaying, reeling, rocking,
fluctuation, hesitation, inconstancy, unsteadiness.

ANT. _Steadiness, firmness, inflexibility, determination._

=Vacuity.= Emptiness, vacancy, void, vacuum; inanity, nihility,
inanition, unreality; space.

ANT. _Fulness, bulk, matter, substance; occupation, actuality, reality;
contents._

=Vagabond.= Wanderer, vagrant, tramp, rascal; outcast, loafer, nomad,
idler, beggar, rogue.

ANT. _Worker, laborer._

=Vagary.= Whim, freak, crotchet, whimsicality, caprice, fancy.

ANT. _Purpose, idea, determination, judgment, seriousness, conviction._

=Vagrant=, _a._ Wandering, erratic, unsettled, strolling, itinerant,
roving, sauntering, nomadic.

ANT. _Domestic, local, established, resident, abiding, dwelling._

=Vague.= Unsettled, undetermined, indefinite, ambiguous, lax, uncertain,
dim, doubtful, obscure, indistinct, unfixed, general, intangible,
equivocal, pointless; unwarranted, unauthorized.

ANT. _Determined, limited, strict, specific, pointed, definite,
distinct, scientific, settled, clear, fixed, manifest, perspicuous._

=Vain.= Futile, trivial, vapid, visionary, worthless, abortive,
unsatisfying, fruitless, empty, deceitful, baseless, delusive, bootless,
idle, ineffectual, shadowy, trifling, unserviceable, unsubstantial,
profitless, inconstant, unprofitable, null, nugatory, unavailing,
unimportant, unreal; showy, useless; conceited, arrogant, ostentatious.

ANT. _Adequate, solid, useful, effective, powerful, worthy, important,
sufficient, serviceable, potent, competent, advantageous, beneficial,
efficient, expedient, profitable, real, sound, substantial, valid,
valuable, essential, cogent, availing, satisfactory, modest._

=Valediction.= Farewell, valedictory, leave-taking, adieu.

ANT. _Salutation, welcome, hail, reception, recognition._

=Valiant.= Strong, powerful, intrepid, courageous, brave, valorous,
heroic, gallant, chivalrous, daring, dauntless, bold, fearless,
redoubtable, undaunted, stout-hearted.

ANT. _Timid, cowardly, fearful, timorous, recreant, craven._

=Valid.= Sound, good, justified, trustworthy, well-grounded,
efficacious, weighty, powerful, efficient, conclusive, logical, solid,
cogent, important, grave, substantial, sufficient.

ANT. _Weak, invalid, null, void, unsound, baseless, fallacious,
unfounded, untrue; unavailable, inoperative, superseded._

=Validity.= Soundness, justness, efficacy, force, weight, cogency,
importance.

ANT. _Weakness, impotency, ineffectiveness, lightness, futility._

=Valor.= Bravery, courage, prowess, intrepidity, heroism, boldness,
daring.

ANT. _Timidity, fearfulness, cowardice, pusillanimity._

=Valuable.= Worthy, estimable, costly, precious, expensive, useful,
dear, serviceable.

ANT. _Worthless, valueless, cheap, inexpensive, silly, useless,
trifling, trivial._

=Value=, _n._ Worth, utility, desirability, importance, power; import,
signification; esteem, regard, excellence; price, cost, equivalent.

ANT. _Cheapness, reduction, depreciation._

=Value=, _v._ Compute, esteem, respect, regard; be worth, rate,
appraise, estimate; appreciate, prize, treasure, account.

ANT. _Cheapen, reduce, contemn, despise, undervalue, underestimate;
disregard, disesteem, misprize._

=Vanish.= Disappear, fade, pass away, dissolve, melt away, be
annihilated.

ANT. _Appear, approach, be manifest, loom up, arrive._

=Vanity.= Pride, conceit; unreality, worthlessness, emptiness;
hollowness, triviality, futility, unsubstantiality, falsity; egoism,
self-sufficiency; show, ostentation.

ANT. _Reality, truth, worth; simplicity; modesty, humility,
self-distrust; substance, solidity._

=Vanquish.= Conquer, overcome, subdue, defeat, surmount, confute,
silence; subjugate, overthrow, master, foil, discomfit, quell; disprove,
confound.

ANT. _Succumb, yield, fail._

=Vapid.= Dead, spiritless, flat, insipid, dull, unanimated; tasteless,
stale, tame; languid, prosaic, feeble, prosy.

ANT. _Pungent, spirited, animated, pithy, trenchant._

=Vapor=, _n._ Fume, steam, reek, exhalation, smoke, fog, mist; vagary,
phantom, whim, dream, vision; flatulence; fantasy.

ANT. _Inhalation, absorption._

=Variable.= Changeable, fickle, inconstant, mutable, shifting, unsteady,
vacillating, wavering, fluctuating, versatile, capricious.

ANT. _Unchanging, immutable, constant, firm, unwavering, steady,
invariable, unalterable._

=Variance.= Variation, dissension, disagreement, discord, difference,
alteration, strife; hostility, antagonism, discrepancy, estrangement.

ANT. _Harmony, agreement, assimilation, reconciliation, accommodation,
peace._

=Variation.= Modification, alteration, mutation, change, diversity,
vicissitude, variety, deviation; departure, difference, discrepancy.

ANT. _Fixity, harmony, continuance, uniformity, rule, law, agreement._

=Variegated.= Streaked, dappled, particolored, diversified, varied,
checkered, figured, mottled.

ANT. _Unspotted, spotless, speckless._

=Variety.= Diversity, difference, assortment, species, class,
multifariousness, medley, miscellany, multiplicity, kind.

ANT. _Type, species, specimen, uniformity._

=Various.= Different, diverse, several, manifold, changeable, uncertain,
inconstant, variable, variegated, sundry, diversified.

ANT. _Identical, few, same, uniform, similar, single._

=Varnish=, _v._ Gloss, palliate, conceal, cover, embellish, disguise,
lacquer, extenuate, excuse, mitigate, glaze over.

ANT. _Simplify, divest; reveal, bare, manifest._

=Vary.= Alter, change, modify, alternate, diversify, variegate, differ,
deviate, depart, be diverse, swerve, disagree, transform, metamorphose.

ANT. _Stereotype, perpetuate; conform, assimilate, harmonize._

=Vast.= Spacious, huge, immense, great, mighty, transcendent,
measureless, boundless, colossal, enormous, stupendous, prodigious,
gigantic, monstrous, remarkable, extraordinary.

ANT. _Moderate, limited, confined, circumscribed, narrow, close, small._

=Vaticination.= Prediction, divination, prophecy, prognostication,
augury.

ANT. _Fulfilment, ratification, realization, verification,
accomplishment._

=Vault.= Jump, spring, bound, leap; tumble, turn.

ANT. _Crawl, creep, grovel._

=Vaunt.= Boast, brag, display, show off; advertise, flourish, parade.

ANT. _Conceal, disparage, decry, detract, repress, suppress._

=Veer.= Shift, turn, change, trim, vacillate.

ANT. _Stand, stick, adhere, persist, remain._

=Vegetate.= Sprout, grow, germinate; bask, idle, hibernate.

ANT. _Decay, fade, wither, pine; bustle, energize, work, stir._

=Vehemence.= Impetuosity, violence, fury, frenzy, ardor, fervor,
fervency, warmth, zeal, enthusiasm, passion, force, intensity.

ANT. _Passivity, inertia, quiescence, coldness, stoicism, indifference,
unconcern, apathy, inattention._

=Vehement.= Raging, hot, ardent, fervid, burning, passionate, eager,
violent, impetuous, furious, urgent, mighty, forcible, powerful,
sanguine, enthusiastic.

ANT. _Cool, impassive, indifferent, feeble, mild, controlled, subdued,
cold, stoical, passionless, weak, inanimate._

=Veil=, _v._ Cover, invest, hide, conceal, screen, mask, shroud,
envelop.

ANT. _Expose, disclose, strip, denude, unveil, make manifest._

=Velocity.= Celerity, fleetness, rapidity, speed, swiftness; impetus,
momentum.

ANT. _Inertia, sluggishness, inertness; resistance; passivity, languor,
inactivity._

=Venal.= Mercenary, hireling, sordid, purchasable, salable, prostitute.

ANT. _Honest, honorable, incorruptible, public-spirited, patriotic,
unpurchasable, generous, disinterested._

=Vend.= Barter, trade, sell, hawk, retail.

ANT. _Buy, purchase, bribe, subsidize._

=Venerable.= Worthy, honorable, estimable; dread, awful; sage, wise,
grave.

ANT. _Despicable, dishonored; informal, free, intimate, easy; foolish,
silly._

=Venerate.= Honor, respect, revere, reverence, adore, admire, worship.

ANT. _Dishonor, disregard, scorn, scoff at, slight, spurn, detest,
disdain, despise, contemn, abhor, execrate._

=Veneration.= Reverence, adoration, respect, awe, worship, esteem,
dread.

ANT. _Irreverence, loathing, disrespect, contempt, disdain, dishonor,
scorn._

=Vengeance.= Punishment, retribution, revenge, retaliation.

ANT. _Forgiveness, pardon, reprieve, indulgence, amnesty, remission,
absolution._

=Venial.= Excusable, justifiable, pardonable, slight, trivial.

ANT. _Inexcusable, heinous, unpardonable, flagrant, mortal, infamous,
unjustifiable, inexpiable._

=Venom.= Virus, bane, poison; spite, malice, malignity, hate, ill will,
maliciousness, rancor, grudge, bitterness, acrimony.

ANT. _Medicine, remedy; benevolence, kindness, good will._

=Venomous.= Poisonous, malignant, noxious, mischievous, virulent,
spiteful.

ANT. _Wholesome, remedial, salubrious; kindly, compassionate, genial._

=Vent.= Outlet, escape, emission, utterance, discharge, opening, hole,
passage; market, sale.

ANT. _Close, stop-gap, end, termination, obstruction, stoppage._

=Venture=, _n._ Chance, risk, hazard, speculation; accident,
contingency; stake, adventure, experiment; luck, hap; danger, jeopardy.

ANT. _Certainty, surety, security, inevitableness, assurance; safety,
protection; law, method; caution, calculation._

=Venture=, _v._ Dare, hazard, adventure, risk, jeopardize, imperil,
chance.

ANT. _Calculate, warrant, secure, guarantee, protect._

=Venturesome.= Bold, daring, adventurous, hardy, courageous, intrepid,
enterprising, doughty, fearless.

ANT. _Fearsome, timid, reluctant, averse, loath, unwilling._

=Venturous.= Bold, daring, fearless, venturesome.

ANT. _Timid, fearful, diffident, shy._

=Veracious.= True, truthful, reliable, trustworthy, straightforward,
honest, credible.

ANT. _False, deceitful, mendacious, lying, dishonest, perfidious._

=Veracity.= Honesty, truthfulness, reality, candor, truth,
ingenuousness, frankness, verity, exactness, correctness, accuracy.

ANT. _Deception, duplicity, falsehood, fiction, guile, mendacity,
untruth, lie, delusion, fabrication, deceit, error, falseness, falsity,
imposture._

=Verbal.= Spoken, oral, literal, parole, vocal, unwritten, unrecorded.

ANT. _Written, recorded, epistolary, documentary._

=Verbose.= Wordy, prolix, diffuse, prosy, tedious.

ANT. _Laconic, terse, concise, succinct, curt._

=Verdict.= Decision, judgment, opinion, pronouncement, finding,
sentence.

ANT. _Indecision, indetermination._

=Verge=, _n._ Border, limit, boundary, edge, margin, brink;
circumference, circle, ring; rim, brim, confine, skirt.

ANT. _Center, midst, heart, depth._

=Verge=, _v._ Tend, incline, slope, lean, trend, bear, border, approach,
approximate.

ANT. _Deviate, recede, revert, return, depart, retrocede._

=Verify.= Prove, correct, establish, confirm, authenticate, affirm;
corroborate, attest, substantiate; fulfil, demonstrate, warrant.

ANT. _Falsify, misrepresent, subvert, misstate, fail, disestablish,
mistake._

=Verisimilitude.= Likelihood, probability, consistency.

ANT. _Improbability, inconsistency, unlikelihood._

=Veritable.= Actual, real, genuine, true; positive, absolute; original,
authentic.

ANT. _False, fictitious, sham, spurious, untrue, feigned,
supposititious._

=Verity.= Fact, truth, reality, actuality, existence, truthfulness.

ANT. _Falsity, unreality, delusion, fancy, dream, conjecture,
hypothesis._

=Vernal.= Spring, balmy, genial, youthful.

ANT. _Wintry, aged, autumnal, decadent, brumal, harsh, cutting._

=Versatile.= Changeable, inconsistent, variable, many-sided, capricious,
erratic, fickle, unstable; mobile, plastic, ready.

ANT. _Fixed, uniform, one-sided, immobile, immutable, unvaried._

=Versed.= Experienced, studied, practiced, skilled, acquainted,
conversant, proficient, familiar, clever, indoctrinated.

ANT. _Unskilled, ignorant, unpracticed, untaught, uninitiated._

=Version.= Account, description, translation, rendering, interpretation,
reading; statement.

ANT. _Text, problem, difficulty; misinterpretation._

=Vertical.= Perpendicular, plumb, upright.

ANT. _Inclined, slanting, sloping._

=Vestige.= Trace, mark, footstep, track, sign, remains, trail, token,
remnant, record.

ANT. _Misindication; obliteration, effacement._

=Veteran.= Old soldier; expert, adept, proficient; habitué.

ANT. _Novice, recruit, tyro._

=Veto.= Prohibit, forbid, negative, withhold assent to.

ANT. _Pass, approve, assent to, promulgate, endorse._

=Vex.= Agitate, disquiet, harass, afflict, tease, weary, jade; torment,
worry, hector, distress, annoy, trouble, perplex, bother, persecute,
fret, irritate, offend, provoke, affront, disturb, tantalize.

ANT. _Please, soothe, quiet, allay, appease._

=Vexation.= Chagrin, agitation, mortification, uneasiness, grief,
trouble, sorrow, distress, irritation, displeasure, affliction, plague,
torment.

ANT. _Pleasure, enjoyment, gratification, satisfaction._

=Vibrate.= Swing, oscillate, fluctuate, quiver, waver, undulate, quake.

ANT. _Rest, be still._

=Vice.= Crime, sin, fault, iniquity; defect, error, blemish,
imperfection, immorality, depravity, wickedness; evil, corruption.

ANT. _Virtue, goodness, perfection, righteousness, nobility, honor._

=Vicinity.= Neighborhood, vicinage, nearness, proximity, propinquity.

ANT. _Distance, remoteness, separation, removal._

=Vicious.= Faulty, wicked, corrupt, depraved; foul, noxious, defective,
unruly, refractory, spiteful, malignant, mischievous, immoral.

ANT. _Virtuous, pure, good, upright, noble, moral, perfect._

=Vicissitude.= Change, alternation, mutation, interchange, variation,
revolution.

ANT. _Fixity, changelessness, stability, perpetuity, immutability._

=Victorious.= Conquering, triumphant, winning, successful, exultant,
elated, boastful, vanquishing, subduing, prevailing, overcoming,
mastering, subjugating.

ANT. _Defeated, worsted, humiliated, beaten, baffled, discomfited,
conquered, overcome, vanquished, routed, repulsed, foiled,
disconcerted._

=Victory.= Success, supremacy, triumph, achievement, advantage,
conquest, mastery.

ANT. _Defeat, disaster, destruction, overthrow, miscarriage, retreat,
rout, failure, disappointment, frustration._

=Victuals.= Food, provisions, viands, sustenance, meat.

=View=, _n._ Sight, look, survey, inspection; perception, examination;
reach, range; scene, prospect; sketch; conception, judgment, opinion;
object, aim, purpose, design; vista, perspective; picture, intention,
scope, drift; estimate; apprehension.

ANT. _Blindness, darkness, obscuration, mistiness; prejudice,
misconception, misrepresentation, deception, error, delusion,
aimlessness, non-intention, occultation._

=View=, _v._ See, behold, look at, survey, examine, inspect, explore,
consider, contemplate, regard, scan, witness, study, reflect upon,
reconnoiter.

ANT. _Overlook, neglect, pass by, miss, slight, ignore; misestimate,
misjudge._

=Vigilance.= Sleeplessness, wakefulness, watchfulness, circumspection,
attentiveness, wariness, cautiousness, caution, activity, lookout,
alertness, observation.

ANT. _Torpor, dulness, inattention, somnolence, carelessness,
drowsiness, indifference, apathy._

=Vigilant.= Alert, awake, careful, on the alert, on the lookout, wary,
watchful, wakeful, wide-awake, sleepless, cautious, circumspect.

ANT. _Negligent, thoughtless, unwary, oblivious, drowsy, inattentive,
careless, dull, heedless, inconsiderate, neglectful, incautious._

=Vigorous.= Full of vigor, strong, lusty, robust; forcible, energetic,
powerful, sturdy, hearty, thrifty, flourishing, spirited, lively.

ANT. _Weak, impotent, incapacitated, feeble, inactive, debilitated,
powerless, effete, enervated, indolent._

=Vile.= Low, base, worthless, despicable, mean, depraved, impure,
sinful, wicked, bad, dishonorable, ignoble, degraded, sordid, infamous,
low-minded.

ANT. _Noble, exalted, honorable, upright, estimable, great, worthy,
eminent, liberal, free, generous, superior, dignified, sublime,
stately._

=Villain.= Scoundrel, knave, rascal, scamp, ruffian, rogue; malefactor.

ANT. _Gentleman, man of refinement, polish, delicacy, and honor._

=Villainous.= Base, vile, mean, depraved; sorry, mischievous, infamous,
knavish; heinous, sinful, outrageous, atrocious.

ANT. _Gentlemanly, noble, refined, honorable, worthy, upright._

=Vindicate.= Maintain, defend, justify; assert, protest, pronounce,
declare, asseverate; uphold, claim, substantiate, support, advocate.

ANT. _Surrender, yield, give up, resign; abandon, forego, waive;
destroy, annul, vitiate; accuse, charge, impute, tax, slur._

=Vindictive.= Revengeful, unforgiving, implacable, spiteful,
unrelenting, malicious.

ANT. _Forgiving, generous, merciful, long-suffering, magnanimous._

=Violate.= Injure, disturb, interrupt, transgress, desecrate, debauch,
dishonor, outrage, profane, abuse, infringe, ravish.

ANT. _Respect, protect, reverence, honor, value, prize, foster,
shelter._

=Violence.= Vehemence, impetuosity, fierceness, force, violation,
infraction, infringement, transgression, profanation, assault, outrage.

ANT. _Preservation, defense, protection; mildness, self-control,
gentleness, respect, obedience, conservation._

=Violent.= Fierce, vehement, outrageous, boisterous, turbulent,
impetuous, passionate, severe, extreme.

ANT. _Sane, sober, calm, collected, unruffled, composed, cool._

=Virgin=, _n._ Maid, maiden, girl, damsel.

ANT. _Wife, mother, married woman; prostitute, whore._

=Virgin=, _a._ Chaste, maidenly, modest; pure, undefiled, fresh, new.

ANT. _Married, matronly, motherly; defiled, polluted._

=Virile.= Mature, masculine; masterful, forceful; robust, vigorous.

ANT. _Feminine; feeble, effeminate, puerile, emasculate._

=Virtual.= Potential, efficacious, energizing, implicit, indirect,
practical, essential, equivalent.

ANT. _Stated, direct, definite, expressed, explicit, emphatic,
categorical._

=Virtue.= Energy, strength, potency, efficacy; value, merit, excellence;
worth, meritoriousness; integrity, purity, virginity, chastity;
goodness, morality, uprightness, rectitude, probity, righteousness;
force, power, capacity; honor, worthiness, honesty, truth, duty,
virtuousness, faithfulness, justice.

ANT. _Inability, weakness, impotency, inefficacy; badness, corruption,
impurity, unchastity, depravity, wickedness, laxity, dishonesty._

=Virtuous.= Excellent, upright, righteous, pure, chaste; good, honest,
exemplary, blameless, worthy, modest.

ANT. _Wicked, bad, wrong, unrighteous, impure, dishonest, worthless,
immodest, blameworthy._

=Virulence.= Malignancy, virus, contagion, poison, venom; bitterness,
malevolence, acrimony.

ANT. _Mildness, blandness, salubriousness, abatement, assuagement;
potency; benevolence, virtue._

=Visible.= Perceptible, noticeable, apparent, open, conspicuous,
obvious, manifest, evident, clear, plain, observable, palpable,
discernible.

ANT. _Invisible, unseen, imperceptible, concealed, eclipsed,
indistinguishable, impalpable, microscopic, indiscernible._

=Vision.= Sight; apparition, creation, phantom, fancy, specter,
appearance, chimera, illusion, phantasm.

ANT. _Material, substance; reality, fact, actuality._

=Visionary.= Fanciful, fantastic, unreal, imaginary, ideal, chimerical,
fantastical, wild, whimsical, capricious, illusory, romantic, shadowy,
dreamy, unsubstantial, fabulous.

ANT. _Actual, real, true, substantial, genuine, palpable, authentic,
veritable._

=Vital.= Living; mortal; important, necessary, essential; animate;
indispensable, material, paramount.

ANT. _Mortal, lifeless, inanimate, secondary, separable, unessential,
unimportant, immaterial._

=Vitiate.= Impair, contaminate, annul, spoil, void, destroy, injure;
cause to deteriorate, taint; invalidate.

ANT. _Adhere to, corroborate, support, confirm, substantiate, justify,
sanction, vindicate; refresh, improve, remedy._

=Vivacious.= Animated, sportive, gay, jocund, light-hearted; merry,
sprightly; brisk, frolicsome, spirited, cheerful, mirthful.

ANT. _Inanimate, dead, lifeless, spiritless, heavy, somber, melancholy,
mournful, sad, inert, dull, stolid._

=Vivid.= Clear, lucid, striking, active, lively, quick; fresh, intense,
animated, bright, strong, spirited, sprightly; brilliant, lustrous,
radiant, glowing, scintillant, sunny.

ANT. _Dull, opaque, lurid, obscure, rayless, somber, cloudy, dark,
colorless, dim, pale, wan, dusky, non-luminous._

=Vocation.= Call, summons, citation; business, profession, employment,
calling, occupation, trade; function, mission, office.

ANT. _Leisure, non-employment; avocation, hobby._

=Vogue.= Mode, custom, way, use, fashion, practice, usage.

ANT. _Disfavor, desuetude, disuse, unfashionableness, abolition._

=Voice=, _n._ Sound, utterance, tone; language, words, speech, judgment,
expression, vote; command, precept; opinion.

ANT. _Dumbness, silence, inexpression, muteness, inarticulation,
obtumescence._

=Void=, _a._ Empty, vacant, devoid, wanting, ineffectual, destitute,
lacking; unoccupied, unused, unfilled; null, invalid, nugatory; vain,
unreal, imaginary, unsubstantial.

ANT. _Occupied, solid, substantial, possessed, endued; effectual, valid,
operative, good, efficacious, furnished._

=Volatile.= Light-hearted, airy; changeable, fickle; lively,
evaporating, vaporable, vivacious, buoyant, jocund; inconstant, flighty,
whimsical, capricious, unsteady, reckless.

ANT. _Fixed, steady, established, determined, solid, settled;
persistent, resolute; involatile; somber, demure._

=Volition.= Will, choice, preference, determination, purpose;
discretion, free will, election, deliberation.

ANT. _Necessity, force, predestination, fate, coercion, foreordination._

=Voluble.= Rotating; nimble, glib; active; fluent, loquacious,
talkative, rapid, running, coursing.

ANT. _Direct; slow, deliberate, hesitating, stuttering, torpid,
stammering, creeping, lazy._

=Volume.= Book, tome; convolution, coil; dimension, mass, capacity,
bulk, size.

ANT. _Minuteness, smallness._

=Voluntary.= Spontaneous, willing, uncompelled; free, impulsive;
unconstrained, deliberate, intentional, optional, gratuitous, by choice;
discretional.

ANT. _Coerced, forced, involuntary, compulsory, necessitated,
constrained._

=Volunteer=, _v._ Offer, bestow, or act freely, proffer, tender,
present.

ANT. _Levy, draft, requisition, request, demand, suborn, confiscate._

=Voluptuous.= Sensual, sensuous, epicurean, luxurious, pleasurable,
licentious, self-indulgent.

ANT. _Self-sacrificing, abstinent, ascetic, self-denying, austere,
puritanical, renunciatory._

=Voracious.= Hungry, greedy, rapacious, eager, ravenous, gluttonous,
insatiate, omnivorous.

ANT. _Fastidious, dainty, refined, delicate, nice._

=Vouch.= Declare, affirm, attest, support, asseverate, aver, protest,
assure, promise, warrant, guarantee.

ANT. _Repudiate, abjure, renounce, protest against, demur, decline,
abnegate._

=Vouchsafe.= Grant, concede, bestow; condescend, deign, stoop, descend,
yield.

ANT. _Deny, refuse, withhold._

=Vow=, _n._ Promise, pledge; oath, asseveration.

=Vow=, _v._ Devote, promise, consecrate, dedicate; assert, asseverate,
swear.

ANT. _Release, absolve, free; pollute, defile, profane._

=Vulgar.= Common, general, ordinary, public; vernacular; plebeian;
popular; rustic, boorish, low, coarse, base, underbred.

ANT. _Noble, aristocratic, patrician, high-born, refined, polite,
high-bred, stylish, select, choice, cultivated; strict, scientific,
philosophical, technical, accurate._

=Vulnerable.= Susceptible, liable, subject, assailable, weak, tender,
exposed.

ANT. _Impregnable, unassailable, unexposed, concealed, fortified,
defended._




                                   W


=Waft.= Bear, convey, transmit, carry, transport, make to float on waves
(_of air or water_).

ANT. _Sink, weigh down, depress._

=Wages.= Salary, stipend, allowance, remuneration, fruit, hire, pay,
compensation; earnings; reward, emolument.

ANT. _Gratuity, bonus, premium, grace, douceur, gift, boon._

=Wait.= Stay, tarry, delay, stop, abide, remain, linger; rest; expect,
watch, await, look for.

ANT. _Hasten, hurry, speed, press on; go, depart._

=Waive.= Relinquish, forbear, refuse, forego; throw away, cast off,
reject, desert; abandon, remit, quit claim, cancel, drop, renounce,
surrender.

ANT. _Urge, assert, press, enforce, claim, defend, vindicate._

=Wake.= Be awake, watch; excite, arouse, stir; reanimate, revive; call,
evoke, summon, provoke.

ANT. _Soothe, hush, tranquilize, quiet; mesmerize; allay, appease,
calm._

=Wakeful.= Vigilant, awake, sleepless; watchful, observant, wary.

ANT. _Drowsy, sleepy; heedless, careless, incautious, unwary._

=Walk.= Move on foot, proceed; be stirring, be abroad; behave, pursue,
conduct one’s self; perambulate, pass, traverse; step, stride, march,
stalk, tramp, plod, trudge, tread.

ANT. _Halt, stop, stand still; ride, drive._

=Wan.= Pale, sickly, languid, pallid; ashen, colorless, haggard,
cadaverous; livid, bloodless.

ANT. _Fresh-colored, bright, rosy, lively, sanguine, incarnadine._

=Wander.= Straggle, stroll, range; turn aside; be delirious, rave; be
crazed; expatiate; depart, saunter; navigate, travel; deviate, diverge,
err, ramble, go astray, rove, stray, veer, roam, swerve, digress.

ANT. _Remain, stay, settle, rest, stop, pause, moor, anchor, perch,
bivouac, halt, alight, repose._

=Wane.= Be diminished, decrease; decline, fail, sink; fade, pale; ebb;
pine, droop, deteriorate, attenuate, contract, recede.

ANT. _Wax, increase, rally, improve, brighten, expand, develop,
advance._

=Want=, _n._ Defect, failure, dearth, indigence, absence, scarcity,
deficiency, lack; destitution, poverty, need, shortness, insufficiency,
scantiness.

ANT. _Supply, sufficiency, allowance, provision, abundance, production,
adequacy, supplement._

=Ward=, _n._ Watch, guardianship, guard; garrison, defender, protector;
defense, protection; custody; keeper, guardian, warden; pupil, minor;
division; apartment.

=Ward=, _v._ Watch, guard; defend, protect; repel, turn aside; be
vigilant; keep guard, avert, repel, parry, fend.

ANT. _Betray, surrender, admit._

=Warfare.= Hostilities, war; contest, struggle; strife, discord;
belligerence, antagonism; campaign, battle, skirmish, engagement.

ANT. _Peace, truce, armistice; amity, pacification; neutrality;
reconciliation; tranquillity, friendliness, harmony, order, quiet,
concord._

=Warlike.= Military, martial, hostile, soldierly, inimical, bellicose,
unfriendly, belligerent.

ANT. _Peaceful, civil, unmilitary, friendly, pacific, amicable._

=Warm.= Ardent, zealous, fervent, cordial, hot, glowing; violent,
vehement, furious, excited, passionate; warm-blooded, warm-hearted;
sunny, mild, genial, pleasant; close, oppressive; fervid, earnest,
eager, enthusiastic, hearty; lively, interested; irascible.

ANT. _Cool, cold; dispassionate, collected, composed, calm, unruffled,
placid, sedate, quiet, staid; unconcerned, frigid, apathetic, chilling;
repellent._

=Warmth.= Fervency, glow, earnestness, cordiality, animation, eagerness,
excitement, vehemence; interest, zeal, ardor, enthusiasm, passion,
fervor, heat, intensity, spirit; emotion, life.

ANT. _Coolness, calmness, indifference, frigidity, torpidity, apathy,
impassiveness; calm, chill, obtuseness, frost, iciness._

=Warn.= Make ware, notify, admonish, caution; advise, mention to,
inform, apprise; dissuade, deter, alarm, premonish.

ANT. _Encourage, embolden, inspirit, hearten, induce, instigate, prompt,
impel._

=Warrant=, _n._ Guaranty, security, voucher; commission, credentials.

=Warrant=, _v._ Secure, guarantee, support, justify, sanction, assure;
empower, engage, undertake, authorize.

ANT. _Invalidate, nullify, repudiate, cancel, make void; endanger,
imperil._

=Wary.= Circumspect, watchful, cautious, vigilant, prudent, discreet,
heedful, thoughtful, careful, guarded, scrupulous, chary.

ANT. _Unsuspecting, unwary, incautious, negligent, heedless,
inattentive, indifferent, remiss._

=Wash=, _v._ Cleanse, wet, scrub, moisten, bathe, lave; overflow, fall
on; waste, abrade; stain, tint, color; overlay, cover; cleanse, rinse.

ANT. _Soil, stain, pollute, defile, contaminate, bemire._

=Waste=, _n._ Squandering, devastation, loss, decrease; void, desert,
wilderness; refuse; prodigality, diminution, dissipation, destruction,
havoc, desolation, ravage; solitude, expanse; consumption, expenditure,
extravagance.

ANT. _Restoration, renovation, reimbursement, renewal, recovery,
restitution, reparation; accumulation, frugality, economy, thrift,
hoard, store, accretion._

=Waste=, _v._ Squander, dissipate, lavish, desolate; ruin, devastate,
destroy; wear away, impair, use up, consume, spend; damage, injure.

ANT. _Restore, renovate, repair, renew; develop, multiply, augment;
economize, hoard, accumulate, treasure, husband, protect._

=Waste=, _a._ Desolate, devastated, stripped, bare, dreary, dismal,
gloomy, cheerless; worthless, valueless, refuse, rejected, unused,
superfluous.

ANT. _Populated, occupied, cheerful, lively; valuable, useful,
essential, necessary._

=Wasteful.= Destructive, ruinous; lavish, prodigal, profuse,
extravagant.

ANT. _Careful, economical, frugal, protective._

=Watch=, _v._ Be awake, keep vigil, be on guard, tend; heed, observe,
expect.

ANT. _Sleep, drowse, slumber; be careless, neglect, overlook._

=Watchful.= Circumspect, wakeful, heedful; vigilant, awake, attentive,
wary, cautious, observant.

ANT. _Drowsy, slumbrous, inobservant, careless, heedless, inattentive,
unwary, incautious, remiss, distracted, inadvertent._

=Waver.= Reel, totter, vacillate, fluctuate, hesitate, dubitate, be
undetermined, alternate, be perplexed, scruple.

ANT. _Decide, choose, settle, determine, dispose of, be steadfast._

=Wavering=, _n._ Fluctuation, hesitancy, indecision, vacillation;
uncertainty, irresolution.

ANT. _Decision, determination, resolution, promptness._

=Way.= Path, road, route, street, track, alley, avenue, channel, course,
highway, pathway, highroad, driveway, lane, pass, passageway, passage,
thoroughfare, roadway; distance, interval; motion, progression, journey;
means, scheme, device, plan; manner, method, mode, fashion, style;
practice, habit, habitude, custom, wont.

ANT. _Deviation, error, discursion; deflection, divergence, rambling,
wandering; exception, variation._

=Wayward.= Disobedient, headstrong, froward, perverse, wilful,
obstinate, stubborn, unruly, capricious, contrary.

ANT. _Amenable, docile, manageable, compliant, obedient._

=Weak.= Feeble, infirm, sickly, exhausted, unable; deficient; soft,
pliant, frail; low, faint; spiritless; foolish, wavering, lacking;
debilitated, unsound, invalid, fragile, delicate, tender; exposed,
unguarded, defenseless; pliable, irresolute; simple, silly, witless,
shallow, imbecile, childish; injudicious, unwise; insipid, tasteless,
thin, diluted, watery; imprudent, indiscreet, erring; flimsy, slight,
frivolous; unsafe, unsubstantial, untrustworthy; ineffectual.

ANT. _Strong, sturdy, vigorous, hardy, robust, powerful; sound, hale,
healthy, stout, able; efficient, capable, potent, mighty; firm, compact,
secure, impregnable; forcible, intense, energetic; biting, sharp, racy,
pungent; rank; tough, tenacious, cohesive, resisting; strenuous, ardent,
eager, zealous, hearty; vivid, brilliant; solid, substantial; valid,
confirmed, binding._

=Weaken.= Debilitate, enfeeble, enervate; invalidate; depress, impair,
reduce, lower, sap, dilute, attenuate.

ANT. _Strengthen, empower, invigorate; confirm, corroborate,
substantiate; augment, increase, mend, improve; enhance._

=Weakness.= Feebleness, debility, languor, imbecility, infirmity,
decrepitude, faintness, frailty.

ANT. _Strength, vigor, tone, health, power, efficiency, nerve, spirit._

=Wealth.= Riches, affluence, opulence, abundance, plenty, fortune,
competence, estate, treasure, money, funds, cash, property; luxury,
satiety.

ANT. _Poverty, scarcity, indigence, lack, want, need, impecuniosity._

=Wear.= Carry, bear, have on; use up; impair, waste, diminish, consume;
last; don, exhibit, sport.

ANT. _Doff, abandon; renew, renovate, repair; increase, augment, swell._

=Weariness.= Fatigue, languor, exhaustion, lassitude, prostration,
depression.

ANT. _Strength, vigor, force, energy, restedness._

=Wearisome.= Tiresome, tedious, irksome, vexatious, fatiguing; trying,
wearing; prosy, monotonous, annoying, uninteresting; toilsome,
laborious.

ANT. _Easy, pleasing, comfortable; invigorating; facile; interesting,
exciting, fascinating, delightful, amusing, stirring._

=Weary=, _a._ Fatigued, tiresome, irksome, wearisome; tired, sick,
exhausted.

ANT. _Energetic, strong, refreshed, invigorated; pleased, interested._

=Weave.= Interlace, unite; compose, fabricate; intwine, plait, braid,
plat.

ANT. _Disentangle, unravel, untwist, disunite, untwine; extricate,
simplify._

=Wed.= Marry, espouse; unite, attach.

ANT. _Separate, divorce._

=Wedding.= Marriage, bridal, espousals, nuptials, nuptial ceremony.

ANT. _Celibacy, bachelorhood, virginity._

=Wedlock.= Marriage, matrimony, nuptial state.

ANT. _Celibacy, bachelorhood, virginity._

=Weep.= Cry, shed tears, lament, complain; drip, be soaked; sob, bewail,
bemoan; droop.

ANT. _Laugh, smile; rejoice, be cheerful, enjoy._

=Weight.= Heaviness; pressure, burden; importance, influence,
consequence, moment; ponderousness, gravity, load, power; efficacy,
impressiveness.

ANT. _Lightness, levity, volatility; insignificance, triviality,
weakness, inefficacy, worthlessness; portableness, ease, facility._

=Weighty.= Heavy, ponderous, burdensome, onerous; forcible, momentous;
efficacious, impressive, cogent.

ANT. _Easy, light, unencumbered; active, swift; slight, unimportant;
frivolous, volatile, unsettled, giddy._

=Welcome=, _n._ Greeting, salutation, reception.

ANT. _Farewell, adieu, parting, good-by, leave-taking; repulse,
repudiation._

=Welcome=, _a._ Grateful, pleasing, gladly entertained, acceptable,
agreeable, gratifying; gratuitous, free.

ANT. _Unwelcome, unpleasant, disagreeable, unacceptable._

=Welfare.= Prosperity, happiness, well-being, enjoyment, success, weal,
advantage, benefit, profit, luck, thrift.

ANT. _Adversity, misfortune, reverses, failure, ill luck, unhappiness._

=Well=, _a._ Good, desirable, fortunate, advantageous; healthy; favored,
lucky; hale, sound.

ANT. _Ill, sickly, diseased, unwell, poorly; unlucky, unfortunate._

=Well=, _adv._ Justly, rightly, abundantly, fully, adequately,
thoroughly, satisfactorily, advantageously, conveniently, properly.

ANT. _Ill, wrongly, poorly, imperfectly, improperly, badly._

=Wet.= Damp, moist, rainy, humid; nasty; dank; showery; lively,
interesting.

ANT. _Dry, parched, thirsty, arid; plain, unvarnished; shrewd, sharp,
quaint._

=Wheedle.= Cajole, flatter, entice, coax, inveigle, fawn upon.

ANT. _Deter, undeceive, detract, decry; chide, scold, rebuke, blame._

=Whereas.= Since, considering; when in fact, while, although; seeing
that; inasmuch as.

=Whimsical.= Capricious, fanciful, queer, strange, freakish, quaint,
fantastic.

ANT. _Staid, serious, sober, matter-of-fact, steady, sedate._

=White.= Snowy, pale, pallid; unblemished, innocent, pure; gray, hoary;
fortunate, happy, favorable.

ANT. _Black, dark, colorless, negro, sooty, coallike; dismal, gloomy,
forbidding, threatening, sullen, foreboding; impure, sullied._

=Whole.= All, total, complete, entire, undivided, uninjured, unbroken;
unimpaired, integral; sound, perfect, faultless, strong, well, healthy.

ANT. _Partial, imperfect, unsound, ill, sick; divided, fractional._

=Wholesome.= Salubrious, salutary, healthy, healthful, nourishing,
nutritious, strengthening, invigorating; beneficial, good; fresh, sound,
uncorrupt.

ANT. _Detrimental, deleterious, prejudicial, hurtful, pernicious,
noxious._

=Wholly.= Entirely, completely, perfectly, totally, fully, altogether,
utterly.

ANT. _Partially, imperfectly, incompletely, separately, in part._

=Wicked.= Sinful, criminal, guilty, immoral, ungodly, profane,
unrighteous, atrocious, unholy, vicious, nefarious, heinous, abandoned,
iniquitous, depraved, unprincipled, irreverent, vile, abandoned, bad,
evil, unjust, ill, outrageous, monstrous, villainous.

ANT. _Good, righteous, just, godly, virtuous, fair, honorable,
unsullied, pious, benevolent, upright, reputable, true, excellent._

=Wickedness.= Crime, sin, vice, iniquity, evil, depravity, immorality,
enormity; badness, vileness, corruption.

ANT. _Goodness, piety, godliness, righteousness, honor, virtue,
benevolence._

=Wide.= Broad, spacious, vast, extensive, comprehensive, liberal;
remote, distant, far; ample, expanded.

ANT. _Narrow, contracted, confined, cramped, constricted, limited;
bigoted, parsimonious; close, near._

=Wife.= Married woman, consort, spouse, helpmate.

ANT. _Sweetheart, maiden; widow._

=Wild=, _a._ Untamed, uncultivated, undomesticated; savage, uncivilized,
rude, ferocious; violent, turbulent; disorderly, crazy, ungoverned;
visionary; unsheltered, exposed.

ANT. _Tame, domesticated, cultivated, civilized; populated, frequented;
polite, gentle, refined; rational, orderly, sane, controlled, sober,
collected._

=Wile.= Trick, snare, artifice, beguilement, allurement, stratagem,
cheat, fraud, imposture, deceit, deception, contrivance, device.

ANT. _Artlessness, openness, candor, straightforwardness._

=Wilful.= Self-determined, voluntary; obstinate, perverse, stubborn,
refractory; self-willed, headstrong; wayward; intentional, prepense,
preconceived, premeditated, designed, deliberate, purposed.

ANT. _Concessive, compliant, amenable, obedient, docile, manageable;
adventitious, accidental._

=Will=, _n._ Choice, determination, preference, volition; decree,
desire, command, purpose; control, disposal; testament; resolution,
decision, self-reliance, force; inclination, pleasure, disposition;
behest, order, direction.

ANT. _Indecision, vacillation, indeterminateness, indifference;
sensibility, perception._

=Will=, _v._ Bequeath, devise, direct; choose, decide, determine,
decree; wish, desire, incline to have; be willing.

ANT. _Die intestate; be indifferent._

=Willing.= Inclined, consenting, ready, complying; chosen, desired;
disposed, minded, desirous; voluntary.

ANT. _Loath, disinclined, reluctant, averse, backward._

=Win.= Gain, get, procure, earn; be victorious, prevail; obtain;
acquire, achieve; conquer; succeed, accomplish.

ANT. _Lose, fail of, miss, forfeit, be deprived or bereaved of._

=Wind=, _v._ Coil, twine, wreathe, twist, turn; enfold, encircle;
direct; insinuate.

ANT. _Straighten, unravel, untwist._

=Winding.= Twisting, circuitous, bending, curving, meandering, flexuous,
serpentine, sinuous.

ANT. _Straight, rectilinear, direct, undeviating, unswerving._

=Winning.= Charming, attractive, alluring, pleasing, bewitching,
winsome, fascinating, delightful, lovely, captivating, prepossessing,
enchanting.

ANT. _Repulsive, unpleasing, repellent, disagreeable, offensive,
repugnant, revolting, disgusting, odious._

=Wisdom.= Judgment, prudence, reason, understanding, sense, skill,
sagacity, attainment, discernment, depth, discretion, information,
foresight, learning, profundity, reasonableness, prescience, knowledge,
insight, judiciousness, erudition, enlightenment.

ANT. _Folly, imbecility, stupidity, error, foolishness, fatuity, idiocy,
absurdity, imprudence, indiscretion, miscalculation, nonsense,
misjudgment, silliness, senselessness._

=Wise.= Knowing, erudite, wary, learned, sagacious; crafty; judicious,
discreet; skilled, intelligent, rational; sage, sensible; logical; deep,
discerning, profound, philosophical.

ANT. _Senseless, idiotic, irrational; nonsensical, imprudent,
irrational, indiscreet, ridiculous, preposterous, insensate._

=Wish=, _v._ Long for, hanker after, desire; invoke, imprecate.

ANT. _Despise, dislike; disrelish, be averse to, displease._

=Wit.= Ingenuity, humor, satire, sarcasm, irony, burlesque; intellect,
mind, understanding, sense; man of genius or humor; penetration,
discernment, insight, acumen; facetiousness, drollery, waggery,
jocularity, sparkle, repartee, joke, playfulness, fun, witticism,
pleasantry, banter, jest, raillery.

ANT. _Stupidity, inanity, obtuseness, vapidity, dulness, commonplace,
matter-of-fact; irrationality, platitude; dolt, dullard; sobriety,
solemnity, seriousness, gravity, stolidity._

=Witchcraft.= Sorcery, enchantment, magic, necromancy, conjuration,
incantation, charm, spell, thaumaturgy.

=Witchery.= Sorcery, witchcraft; fascination, enchantment, spell,
entrancement, ravishment.

ANT. _Reality, actuality, disillusionment, bald facts._

=With.= By, on the side of, by the help of; attending, accompanying,
close; against; according to; in contrast with; upon, immediately after.

=Withdraw.= Take back, recall, retire; draw back, remove; recede,
depart.

ANT. _Offer, afford; produce; repeat, reiterate, confirm; renew;
furnish, propose, give._

=Withhold.= Hold back, restrain, impede, hamper; retain, refuse;
suppress, check, rein in, inhibit, stint, forbear; detain.

ANT. _Let go, give, bestow, confer; admit, yield; furnish, allow,
provide, permit; encourage, embolden, cheer, hearten, animate._

=Within=, _a._ Inside, inwardly, internally, indoors, in the limits of.

ANT. _Without, outside, outwardly, externally, outdoors._

=Without=, _prep._ Out of, beyond, out of the limits of, in the absence
of, in separation from; independently of; exclusive of, omitting.

ANT. _Within, inside of, in the limits of, including, embracing._

=Without=, _conj._ Unless, except.

=Withstand.= Oppose, resist, confront, thwart, combat, prevent,
contradict.

ANT. _Concede, grant, assist, submit, acquiesce, abet, countenance,
encourage, support._

=Witness=, _n._ Attestation, testimony, evidence, proof; one who attests
or is directly cognizant of; eye-witness; deponent, corroborator;
spectator, auditor, voucher.

ANT. _Belief, hearsay, rumor, report; invalidation, refutation._

=Witty.= Acute, sharp, smart, facetious, arch, keen, amusing, humorous,
satirical, taunting, ironical.

ANT. _Dull, stupid, obtuse, dry, prosaic, prosy, tiresome, tedious,
serious._

=Woe.= Grief, sorrow, misery, calamity; curse, malediction;
disconsolateness, tribulation, melancholy, agony, depression,
unhappiness.

ANT. _Joy, delight, pleasure, prosperity, enjoyment, bliss, felicity,
welfare, cheerfulness, merriment._

=Woful.= Sorrowful, distressed, wretched, afflicted, unhappy, sad;
paltry, poor, piteous, disconsolate, miserable, burdened, troubled.

ANT. _Joyous, light-hearted, cheerful, merry, rejoiced, glad, delighted,
gay, blessed._

=Womanhood.= Muliebrity, maturity in woman, feminality; womanliness;
woman, womankind.

ANT. _Manhood, manliness, masculinity; man, mankind._

=Womanish.= Effeminate, weak, foolishly feminine.

ANT. _Mannish, aping a man, foolishly masculine._

=Womanly.= Becoming a woman, feminine, delicate, refined.

ANT. _Manly, strong, virile, becoming a man._

=Wonder=, _n._ Astonishment, admiration, amazement, surprise, awe,
bewilderment, curiosity; portent, miracle, prodigy, marvel; phenomenon,
sight, rarity, spectacle.

ANT. _Expectation, anticipation; familiarity, apathy, indifference;
foreknowledge, prescience; ennui; satiety; platitude, truism,
commonplace._

=Wonderful.= Amazing, astonishing, marvelous, surprising, improbable,
strange, incredulous; startling, awesome, portentous, extraordinary,
prodigious, wondrous.

ANT. _Commonplace, familiar, expected, ordinary, wonted, hackneyed,
customary, habitual._

=Wonted.= Accustomed, usual, habitual, customary, habituated, used,
conventional, regular, frequent, common.

ANT. _Exceptional, unusual, unused, unconventional, infrequent,
irregular._

=Wood.= Forest, grove, thicket; timber, trees; copse, woodland,
forestland.

ANT. _Open, prairie, clearing._

=Word.= Term, expression, accents, tongue, vocable; account, tidings,
message; statement, declaration, affirmation, promise; (_pl._)
contention, dispute, wrangling, altercation; speech, talk, discourse,
language.

ANT. _Idea, conception, suggestion; sentence, unit of composition,
paragraph._

=Work=, _n._ Exertion, activity, effort, toil, employment, labor;
business, duty; product, fabric, production, performance, manufacture;
act, deed, service, result, effect, achievement, feat; composition,
structure; management, treatment, operation, issue, fruit; occupation;
action, drudgery.

ANT. _Frustration, abortion, hodge-podge; failure, deficiency, defect,
fault; miscarriage; rest, inertia, fruitlessness, inoperativeness;
inefficiency, futility; repose, relaxation, ease, vacation, idleness,
leisure, recreation._

=Work=, _v._ Exert one’s self, labor, be engaged, toil; operate, act,
perform; effect, affect, conduce, influence; strain; use, utilize;
produce, accomplish; prevail upon, manage, lead; ferment.

ANT. _Rest, recreate, stop, repose, halt, relax, be at ease, lie,
recline, sleep, slumber; fail, miscarry, be wanting, lapse._

=Workman.= Worker, artificer, laborer, artisan, mechanic, operative,
craftsman; toiler, hand; master.

ANT. _Employer, superintendent, inspector, supervisor, director,
overseer._

=Workmanship.= Handicraft, execution, skill, art, manipulation,
handiwork.

ANT. _Bungling, botching._

=World.= Earth, universe, creation; affairs, interests, life, action,
occupation; inhabitants, people, mankind; globe, cosmos, planet, nature;
public, society, human race.

ANT. _Heaven; atom, individual._

=Worldly.= Human, common; secular, temporal; mundane, terrestrial,
earthly; fleshly, carnal; universal; sublunary; sordid, selfish,
ambitious, earthborn, groveling.

ANT. _Spiritual, ethereal, celestial, heavenly, lunar, solar;
incorporeal, ghostly; ideal, abstract, mental, intellectual; sacred,
holy, pure._

=Worry=, _n._ Care, anxiety, fret, solicitude, torment, vexation,
trouble, annoyance, plague, disquiet; perplexity, concern, fear,
apprehension, uneasiness, misgiving.

ANT. _Trust, calm, courage, serenity, tranquillity, placidity, quiet,
ease of mind, resolution, dauntlessness._

=Worship=, _n._ Reverence, homage, adoration, submission,
obsequiousness, honor, abjectness.

ANT. _Detestation, hatred, abhorrence, loathing, disgust, antipathy,
assertion, defiance, challenge._

=Worship=, _v._ Adore, reverence, revere, idolize, respect, defer,
venerate, deify, honor, exalt.

ANT. _Defy, dare; abhor, detest, hate, disdain, abominate, contemn,
loathe._

=Worth.= Desert, merit, excellence; price, rate; value, quality,
equivalence; virtue, character, worthiness, integrity; credit, cost,
estimate.

ANT. _Demerit, worthlessness, cheapness, uselessness, futility,
poverty._

=Worthless.= Undeserving, useless, valueless, vile, mean, miserable,
poor, wretched, abject, unworthy, ignoble, abandoned, depraved; refuse,
waste.

ANT. _Costly, valuable, dear, high-priced, expensive; sumptuous,
splendid, rich, precious; useful, excellent, estimable, virtuous,
worthy._

=Worthy.= Valuable, deserving, estimable, virtuous; suitable, adapted,
meritorious, exemplary, upright, righteous, honest, honorable.

ANT. _Worthless, valueless, ignoble, defective, unsuitable._

=Wound=, _v._ Hurt, injure, damage, harm, cut, stab, rend, lacerate,
pain; annoy, mortify, offend.

ANT. _Heal, allay, cure, remedy, soothe, repair; appease, assuage,
comfort, harmonize._

=Wrap=, _v._ Wind, fold, cover, envelop, enfold, involve, conceal, hide,
muffle.

ANT. _Unwind, unfold, lay bare, reveal, develop, expose._

=Wrath.= Fury, ire, resentment, passion, anger, rage, exasperation,
indignation, choler, irritation.

ANT. _Calmness, control, restraint, composure, placidity, serenity._

=Wrathful.= Furious, raging, indignant, passionate, choleric, ireful,
angry, exasperated, incensed, irate, wroth, mad, provoked, resentful.

ANT. _Calm, collected, controlled, repressed, masterly, restrained,
good-tempered._

=Wreath.= Garland, chaplet, festoon, crown, bays, diadem.

=Wreck=, _n._ Ruins, remains, rubbish, wreckage, débris; havoc,
destruction, shipwreck, ruin, desolation, perdition, demolition.

ANT. _Preservation, conservation, saving, protection, security._

=Wrench=, _v._ Pull, twist, wrest, force, strain, sprain; pervert,
distort, wring.

ANT. _Straighten, untwist; rectify._

=Wretched.= Miserable, calamitous, afflicted, unhappy, degraded, woful;
worthless, paltry; forlorn, wobegone, comfortless, distressed; shocking,
deplorable, depressing, sad; contemptible, mean, pitiful, debased,
humiliated.

ANT. _Prosperous, flourishing, fortunate, happy, enviable, felicitous,
successful, thriving; valuable; honored, noble, exalted._

=Wrong=, _a._ Injurious, unjust, faulty, detrimental, unfit; improper,
incorrect; mistaken, erroneous; illegal, immoral.

ANT. _Right, upright, lawful, equitable, fair, just, becoming, proper,
suitable, appropriate, fit; correct, true, actual, real._

=Wrought.= Worked, elaborated; performed, done, effected, executed,
produced, manufactured.

ANT. _Rough, crude, coarse, raw, unpolished._

=Wry.= Twisted, distorted; misdirected, perverted, wrested; askew,
contorted, deformed, deranged; crooked, awry.

ANT. _Straight, rectilinear, direct, upright, erect; perpendicular,
shapely, comely, symmetrical, proper, well-formed._




                                   Y


=Yawn.= Open wide, gape; desire, be eager.

ANT. _Close, shut, engulf._

=Yearly.= Annual, happening each year, per annum, every year, year by
year.

ANT. _Perennial, everlasting, evergreen._

=Yearn.= Long, desire, be eager, covet, crave, hanker.

ANT. _Loathe, revolt, recoil, shudder at, despise._

=Yell=, _v._ Cry out, shriek, scream, holler.

ANT. _Keep silence, subdue, silence._

=Yet.= Besides, nevertheless, notwithstanding, however, still,
eventually, ultimately, at last, so far, thus far, hitherto, at present;
over and above; further; now.

=Yield.= Furnish, produce, afford, bear, render; relinquish, give in,
let go, forego; accede, acquiesce; resign, surrender, concede, allow,
grant, submit, succumb; comply, consent, agree.

ANT. _Withdraw, withhold, retain, deny, refuse, vindicate, assert,
claim, disallow, appropriate, resist, dissent, protest, struggle,
strive._

=Yielding.= Conceding, producing, surrendering, supple, pliant,
submissive, unresisting, obsequious, attentive, flexible, compliant,
accommodating.

ANT. _Defiant, resisting, obstinate, firm, stiff, hard, perverse._

=Yoke=, _n._ Bond, chain, link, tie; servitude, bondage, vassalage,
service, thraldom, subjection, subservience.

ANT. _Freedom, liberty; authority, command._

=Yoke=, _v._ Couple, conjoin, connect, link; enslave, subjugate.

ANT. _Dissever, divorce, disconnect, liberate, release, manumit,
enfranchise._

=Young.= Juvenile, immature; inexperienced, innocent, ignorant;
youthful, boyish, girlish, childlike.

ANT. _Old, mature, adult; experienced, knowing; senile, aged, decrepit,
venerable; antique, antiquated, obsolete; superannuated._

=Youth.= Adolescence, childhood, infancy; youthfulness, juvenility;
minority; lad, boy, girl, youngster.

ANT. _Age, senility, maturity._

=Youthful.= Puerile, juvenile, immature, young, fresh, vigorous, unripe,
callow, childish, boyish, childlike, girlish, adolescent.

ANT. _Mature, adult, full-grown, ripe, ripened._




                                   Z


=Zeal.= Ardor, eagerness, earnestness, fervor, enthusiasm, energy,
feeling, devotion, intensity, passion, spirit.

ANT. _Apathy, indifference, coldness, carelessness, sluggishness,
torpor._

=Zealot.= Partisan, bigot, enthusiast, fanatic, devotee, visionary,
dreamer.

ANT. _Renegade, traitor, deserter; lukewarm person._

=Zealous.= Ardent, anxious, earnest, enthusiastic, fervid, eager,
steadfast, keen, fervent, devoted, prompt, ready, fiery, passionate.

ANT. _Lukewarm, indifferent, cold, apathetic, passionless, phlegmatic._

=Zenith.= Height, pinnacle, acme, summit, culmination, maximum, apex,
top.

ANT. _Nadir, lowest point, depth, minimum._

=Zephyr.= West wind, breeze, gentle wind.

ANT. _Gale, furious wind._

=Zero.= Naught, cipher, nothing.

ANT. _Something, existence, creation; infinity._

=Zest.= Flavor, appetizer, pleasure, gusto, gust, enjoyment, relish,
sharpener, enhancement, savor, taste, smack, sauce, appetite.

ANT. _Distaste, disrelish, detriment._

=Zone.= Girdle, belt, girth, cincture, band, baldric; region, climate,
clime; circuit, circumference; zodiac; orbit.

ANT. _Sphere, universe._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 2. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 3. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SYNONYMS AND ANTONYMS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


