The Project Gutenberg eBook of The reader's guide to the Encyclopaedia Britannica
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The reader's guide to the Encyclopaedia Britannica
        A handbook containing sixty-six courses of systematic study or occasional reading

Creator: Inc. Encyclopaedia Britannica

Release date: July 14, 2024 [eBook #74039]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1913

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE READER'S GUIDE TO THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA ***





                           THE READER’S GUIDE
                                 TO THE
                        ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA


     A HANDBOOK CONTAINING SIXTY-SIX COURSES OF SYSTEMATIC STUDY OR
                           OCCASIONAL READING


             THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA COMPANY, Limited
                                 London

                  THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA COMPANY
                                New York




            Copyright in the United States of America, 1913,
                                   by
                  The Encyclopaedia Britannica Company




                              INTRODUCTION


In your ordinary use of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, you give your
attention to the _one_ article that will answer the _one_ question you
have in your mind. The aim of this Guide is to enable you to use the
Britannica for an altogether different purpose, namely, for systematic
study or occasional reading on any subject.

The volumes of the Encyclopaedia Britannica contain forty-four million
words—as much matter as 440 books of the ordinary octavo size. And the
subjects treated—in other words, the whole sum of human knowledge—may be
divided into 289 separate classes, each one completely covering the
field of some one art, science, industry or other department of
knowledge. By the mere use of scissors and paste the alphabetical
arrangement of the articles could be done away with, and the Britannica
could be reshaped into 289 different books containing, on the average,
about half as much again as an ordinary octavo volume. It would
misrepresent the Britannica to say that you would then have 289
_text-books_, because there is an essential difference in tone and
purpose. A text-book is really a book intended to be used under the
direction and with the assistance of a teacher, who explains it and
comments upon it. The Britannica, on the other hand, owes the position
it has enjoyed since the first edition appeared in 1768 to the fact that
it has succeeded, as no other book has succeeded, in teaching without
the interposition of a teacher.

It is not, of course, claimed that the idea of reading certain groups of
Britannica articles in the order in which they will combine themselves
into complete books is a novel invention. Thousands of men owe the
greater part of their educational equipment to a previous edition of the
Britannica. And not only did they lay out their own courses of reading
without the aid of such a Guide as this, but the material at their
disposal was by no means so complete as is the 11th Edition. Every
edition of the Britannica before this one, and every other book of
comparable size previously published, appeared volume by volume. In the
case of the last complete edition before the present, no less than 14
years elapsed between the publication of the first volume and the last.
It is obvious that when editors have to deal with one volume at a time,
and are unable to deal with the work as a whole, there cannot be that
exact fitting of the edges of one article to the edges of another which
is so conspicuously a merit of the 11th Edition. All the articles in
this edition were completed before a single volume was printed, and the
work stood, at one stage of its preparation, in precisely the form
which, as has already been said, might be given to it by merely
rearranging the articles according to their subjects.

In this Guide, the principal articles dealing with the subject of each
chapter are named in the order in which you may most profitably study
them, and the summaries of the larger articles afford such a preliminary
survey as may assist you in making your choice among the courses.
Besides, where it seems necessary, there is added to the chapter a
fairly complete list of all articles in the Britannica on the subject,
so that the reader may make his study exhaustive.


A brief review of the six parts into which the Guide is divided will
show the general features of its plan, of which a more detailed analysis
is given in the Table of Contents.

Part 1 contains 30 chapters, each designed for readers engaged in, or
preparing for, some specific occupation. To the beginner, who still has
everything to learn, the advantages derived from such a course of study
may well be so great as to make the difference between success and
failure in life, and to those who have already overcome the first
difficulties, to whom the only question is how marked a success awaits
them, the Britannica can render invaluable service of another kind. No
amount of technical training and of actual experience will lead a man of
sound judgment to believe that he alone knows everything that all his
competitors put together know; or that his knowledge and theirs is all
that ever will be known. The 1500 contributors in 21 different countries
who wrote the articles in the Britannica include the men who have made
the latest advances in every department of knowledge, and who can
forecast most authoritatively the results to be expected from the new
methods which are now being experimentally applied in every field of
activity. The experienced merchant, manufacturer, or engineer, or the
man who is already firmly established in any other profession or
business, will naturally find in some of the articles facts and figures
which are not new to him, but he can profit by the opportunity to
review, confirm, reconsider and “brush up” his previous knowledge.

Part 2 contains 30 chapters, each devoted to a course of systematic
study designed to supplement, or to take the place of, some part of the
usual school and college curriculum. The educational articles in the
Britannica are the work of 704 professors in 146 universities and
colleges in 21 different countries. No institution of learning in the
world has a faculty so numerous, so authoritative, or so highly
specialized. Nor has any system of home study ever been devised by which
the student is brought into contact with teachers so trustworthy and so
stimulating. The fascination of first-hand knowledge and the pleasure of
studying pages intended not for reluctant drudges submitting themselves
to a routine, but for students eager to make rapid progress, are factors
in the educational value of the Britannica that cannot be overestimated,
and the elasticity with which any selected course of study can be
enlarged and varied is in full accordance with the modern theories of
higher education.

Part 3 is devoted to the interests of children. The first of its
chapters describes Britannica articles of the utmost practical value to
parents, dealing with the care of children’s health, with their mental
and bodily training, and with the intelligent direction of their
pastimes. The second chapter indicates varied readings in the Britannica
for children themselves, showing how their work at school can be made
more interesting and profitable to them by entertaining reading on
subjects allied to those included in their studies. The third chapter in
this Part gives a number of specific questions such as children are
prone to ask, as well as questions which may be put to them in order to
guide their natural inquisitiveness to good purpose. The references to
pages in the Britannica show where these questions are clearly and
instructively answered.

Part 4 suggests readings on questions of the day which relate to
American citizenship and to current politics. A study of the articles
indicated in this section of the Guide will aid the reader not only to
form sound opinions for himself, but also to exercise in private or
public life the influence for good which arises from a clear view of the
arguments on both sides of controverted questions. It is no exaggeration
to say that the Britannica is the only existing work in which such
subjects as tariffs, trusts, immigration, labour and the relation
between legislative and judiciary powers are treated without partisan
bias and with adequate fulness.

Part 5, especially for women, deals with their legal and political
status in various parts of the world, their achievements in scholarship,
art and science, as well as with home-making, domestic science and
kindred subjects. The important part which women, both among the
contributors and on the editorial staff of the Britannica, took in the
preparation of the work sufficiently indicates that the editor-in-chief
made ample provision for the subjects peculiarly within their sphere.

Part 6 is an analysis of the many departments of the Britannica which
relate to recreation and vacations, travel at home and abroad,
photography, motoring, out-door and indoor games and other forms of
relaxation and of exercise. The extent to which the work can be used in
planning motoring tours, and the superiority, in such a connection, of
its articles to the scant information found in ordinary guide books, are
shown in the extracts, included in this Part 6, relating to a trip from
New York through the Berkshire Hills to the White Mountains.


It will be seen from this brief survey of the field covered by the Guide
that provision has been made for every purpose which can dictate the
choice of a course of reading. But as you proceed to examine its
contents for yourself, you should remember that the lists it gives name
only a fraction of the articles in the Britannica, and that for a fuller
summary of the work as a whole you should turn to the Table on pp.
881–947 of Vol. 29.

Finally, the form in which this Guide is printed may call for a word of
justification. It is inevitable that chapters, of an analytical
character, bespattered with references to the numbers of volumes and of
pages, and terminating with lists of the titles of articles, should bear
a certain air of formality. There is no danger that the possessor of the
Britannica, familiar with the fascination of its pages and the beauty of
the illustrations which enhance their charm would permit his impression
of the work itself to be affected by the bleak appearance of the Guide.
But he may feel that because a list has a forbidding aspect the pleasure
he has derived from browsing at will in the Britannica would give place
to a sense of constraint if he rigidly pursued a course of reading. It
may easily be shown that such a fear would be groundless, for the
Britannica articles are all the better reading when one carries forward
the interest which one of them has excited to others of related
attraction. But to anyone who is firmly determined that he shall not be
persuaded to read systematically, the Guide will none the less be
useful, for he may flit from one chapter to another, selecting here and
there an article merely because the account which is given of it pleases
him. Or, better yet, he may find, in one portion only of a selected
course, a series of only three or four articles which will, in
combination, make the best of occasional reading.

                                                            THE EDITORS.




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                 PART I

    COURSES OF READING ESPECIALLY USEFUL TO THOSE ENGAGED IN CERTAIN
                   OCCUPATIONS, OR PREPARING FOR THEM
                                                                    Page
 Chapter  1. For Farmers                                               3
    „     2. For Stock-Raisers                                        10
    „     3. For Dairy Farmers                                        14
    „     4. For Merchants and Manufacturers, General and
               Introductory                                           19
    „     5.        Textiles                                          21
    „     6.        Machinery                                         28
    „     7.        Metals, Hardware, Glass and China                 33
    „     8.        Furniture                                         39
    „     9.        Leather and Leather Goods                         44
    „    10.        Jewelry, Clocks and Watches                       48
    „    11.        Electrical Machinery and Supplies                 55
    „    12.        Chemicals and Drugs                               58
    „    13.        Food Products                                     63
    „    14. For Insurance Men                                        69
    „    15. For Architects                                           71
    „    16. For Builders and Contractors                             79
    „    17. For Decorators and Designers                             83
    „    18. For Railroad Men                                         90
    „    19. For Marine Transportation Men                            94
    „    20. For Engineers                                           100
    „    21. For Printers, Binders, Paper-makers and All who Love
               Books                                                 109
    „    22. For Journalists and Authors                             117
    „    23. For Teachers                                            122
    „    24. For Ministers                                           127
    „    25. For Physicians, Surgeons and Dentists                   135
    „    26. For Lawyers                                             143
    „    27. For Bankers and Financiers                              151
    „    28. For Civil Service Men                                   156
    „    29. For Army Officers                                       158
    „    30. For Naval Officers                                      168


                                 PART II

    COURSES OF EDUCATIONAL READING TO SUPPLEMENT OR TAKE THE PLACE OF
                      SCHOOL OR UNIVERSITY STUDIES

 Chapter 31. Music                                                   175
    „    32. The Fine Arts, Introductory and General                 187
    „    33. Painting, Drawing, Etc.                                 189
    „    34. Sculpture                                               198
    „    35. Language and Writing                                    207
    „    36. Literature, Introductory and General                    214
    „    37.        American                                         218
    „    38.        English                                          224
    „    39.        German                                           230
    „    40.        Greek                                            234
    „    41. Bible Study                                             237
    „    42. History, Introductory and General                       246
    „    43.        American                                         248
    „    44.        Canadian                                         270
    „    45.        English, Scotch and Irish                        272
    „    46.        French                                           278
    „    47.        The Far East: India, China, Japan                281
    „    48. Economics and Social Science                            288
    „    49. Health and Disease                                      294
    „    50. Geography and Exploration                               300
    „    51. Anthropology and Ethnology                              308
    „    52. Mathematics                                             316
    „    53. Astronomy                                               322
    „    54. Physics                                                 329
    „    55. Chemistry                                               334
    „    56. Geology                                                 338
    „    57. Biology, General and Introductory                       344
    „    58.        Botany                                           347
    „    59.        Zoology                                          353
    „    60. Philosophy and Psychology                               361


                                PART III

                  DEVOTED TO THE INTERESTS OF CHILDREN

 Chapter 61. Readings for Parents                                    371
    „    62. Readings for School Children                            379
    „    63. Questions Children sometimes ask, and Some Questions
               to ask Children                                       387


                                 PART IV

                    READINGS ON QUESTIONS OF THE DAY

 Chapter 64.                                                         393
             Education, Training of Defectives, Psychology
             Crime, Juvenile Courts, Alcoholism
             Heredity and Eugenics
             Wages and Labour, Labour Organization
             Immigration, The Negro Problem
             Trusts, Finance, Tariff, Banking, Insurance
             Socialism and its Tendencies
             Initiative, Referendum and Recall, Government by
               Commission
             Suffrage and the Suffrage Question
             International Relations, Peace Arbitration
             The Greater United States


                                 PART V

                                FOR WOMEN

 Chapter 65.                                                         411
             The many subjects on which Women contributed to the
               Britannica
             Accomplishments of Women in Scholarship, Art and
               Science
             Women’s Legal Position in the United States and
               elsewhere
             Their Disabilities in Great Britain
             Home-making, Domestic Science, the Table
             Food Preservation and Food Values
             Costume and Ornament
             Women famous in History and Literature, and on the
               Stage


                                 PART VI

                  READINGS FOR RECREATION AND VACATION

 Chapter 66.                                                         425
             Motoring, a Specimen Trip: New York to the White
               Mountains
             Photography
             Out-door Games and Athletic Sports
             Hunting, Fishing and Taxidermy
             Sailing, Canoeing and Boating
             Mountaineering and Winter Sports
             Driving, Riding, Polo and Horse-racing
             Gardening and Plants
             In-door Games and Pastimes, Bridge, Needlework
             Dancing, the Stage
             Travel at Home and Abroad




                                 PART I
    COURSES OF READING ESPECIALLY USEFUL TO THOSE ENGAGED IN CERTAIN
                   OCCUPATIONS OR PREPARING FOR THEM




                               CHAPTER I
                              FOR FARMERS

 SEE ALSO CHAPTER II, FOR STOCK-RAISERS, CHAPTER III, FOR DAIRY FARMERS


Every farmer in the United States knows that farming is to-day an
industry which calls for study of the world’s agricultural products,
processes, and markets as well as for scientific knowledge of soils,
crops, and animals. Fifty years ago the farmer sold for consumption in
his immediate neighborhood the small surplus of his crops that was not
needed for his own household and live stock. To-day he competes, in all
the world’s great markets, with all the world’s farmers, and is the
chief among American exporters. The Russian wheat fields and the
Argentine cattle ranches are really nearer to him than a farm in the
next township was to his grandfather. He lives better, does more for his
children and pays higher wages than do farmers in other parts of the
world, and yet he can successfully compete with them, because, as the
article on Agriculture in the Encyclopædia Britannica says, in speaking
of the United States, “there is no other considerable country where as
much mental activity and alertness has been applied to the cultivation
of the soil as to trade and manufactures.” American farmers “have been
the same kind of men, out of precisely the same houses, generally with
the same training, as those who filled the learned professions or who
were engaged in manufacturing or commercial pursuits”; and their
competitors abroad have been, for the most part, ignorant peasants. The
course of reading indicated here is designed for wide-awake farmers who
intend to be large farmers—by whom the latest information and the
broadest outlook are recognized as essential to their calling. _If you
think the articles named here cover a great deal of ground, remember
that the Massachusetts Agricultural College provides no less than
sixty-four distinct courses of instruction, and that the subjects
included in all the sixty-four are treated in the Britannica._


                     GETTING “GROUNDWORK” KNOWLEDGE

You may think, as you look at the titles of articles mentioned in these
pages, that there are some which you need not read because you have
already read bulletins of the United States Department of Agriculture or
of your State Experiment Station. These official publications are most
valuable, but naturally, they do not attempt to cover the whole range of
agricultural subjects as the Britannica does—they are not intended for
that purpose. Their arrangement and the way in which they are issued
shows that they are designed to meet only certain special needs, not to
give a general view of all the branches of farming. One subject may for
example be discussed in three different bulletins, published in three
different years, and the first may be out of print before the third
appears. In the Britannica you get information that forms the very
foundation of a thorough knowledge of farming and that also extends over
the widest field. Of course it would be absurd to say that merely
reading these articles will make any man a successful farmer as to say
that a medical student who works hard at his books will always develop
the tact and the sound judgment that a doctor needs. But unless the
medical student has studied those text books he will never make a
successful doctor; and similarly the information in the Britannica will
give the farmer new advantages, no matter how much practical experience
and special training he has had.

[Sidenote: Scope of the Articles]

There are in the Encyclopædia Britannica 1,186 articles dealing with
animal and vegetable life; and among the 11,341 geographical articles a
great many give important information about the production, distribution
and consumption of farm products. Those upon continents, countries,
states and provinces describe the local crops and any local methods of
farming that are of special interest. _There are some 600 articles on
individual plants_, of which a list will be found on pp. 889 and 890 of
Vol. 29 (the index volume). If any one of these thousands of articles
were not in the Britannica, it would not be quite so valuable as it is
to you, for you may, any day, want to find out about any plant that
grows, or about farming in any part of the world. A professor in an
agricultural college would of course be glad to study the whole series.
But in this Course of Reading only the articles which are of most
immediate use to all practical farmers are mentioned, and the contents
of each of these is described, so that you can omit any article that
goes into details which you think you do not want. If you do skip any of
them, it will, however, be a good plan to mark their titles in this
list, for you may like to come back to them later when you realize how
practical and understandable all the Britannica articles are—even those
with dullsounding names.

Of course you will begin by reading the article AGRICULTURE (Vol. 1, p.
338), by Dr. Fream and Roland Truslove, which is the key to the whole
subject. And remember that this chapter of the Readers’ Guide _mentions
only those subjects that are treated more fully in other parts of the
Britannica than in that article_, so that the chapter does not attempt
to tell the whole story.

[Sidenote: Soil and Subsoil]

The first thing a farmer has to deal with is the ground from which his
crops are to come. The whole surface of the earth was originally hard
rock. The article on PETROLOGY, the science of rocks (Vol. 21, p. 323),
by J. S. Flett, and the second part (Vol. 11, p. 659) of the article
GEOLOGY, by Sir Archibald Geikie, deal with the “weathering” of rock,
which has in great part broken it down into the small particles of stone
that, mixed with decayed roots and plants, form the soil or subsoil. It
may seem that it is going very far back into the origin of things for a
farmer to read about the sources from which soil comes, but the nature
of the mineral substances in it has a great deal to do with its power to
nourish plants, and you cannot know too much about the material on which
your principal work is done. The article which should next be read, SOIL
(Vol. 25, p. 345), continues the story of these particles of rock and
shows how sand and clay must be combined with decaying vegetable or
animal matter in order to make the best soil. This mixture is in turn
“weathered” by air, heat, frost, and moisture; and not only the size of
the grains in which it lies, but also their shape—which makes them pack
more or less tightly—affect the pores, or spaces between the grains,
through which the roots of the plants must push their way, and through
which air and water must reach these roots. The article EARTHWORM (Vol.
8, p. 825) describes the useful part that worms play in stirring the
mixture, while the natural and artificial fertilizers, which supply
whatever ingredients the soil lacks, are discussed in the article
MANURES AND MANURING (Vol. 17, p. 610). An important part of this
article deals with the best methods of keeping farm yard manure in such
a way that it does not lose its value before it is spread over the
fields, and with the use, in this connection, of the liquid-manure tank.
The microbes in the soil render the farmer an enormous service by
changing crude nitrogen, which plants cannot digest, into the forms in
which it is indispensable to them, and this process is described in the
article BACTERIOLOGY (Vol. 3, p. 164), by Professor Marshall Ward,
Professor Blackman, and Professor Muir.

[Sidenote: Sunlight and Shade, Heat and Cold, Water Enough—and Not too
           Much]

The action of light, the supply of which is just as necessary in causing
growth as the warmth the sun gives, and the action of water and of heat
and cold, are explained in the section “Physiology” (Vol. 21, p. 745) of
the article on PLANTS. The proper method of working each farm, with a
view to using these four in the right proportions, is influenced by the
latitude in which it lies, its height above sea level, the protection
that mountains give it, the slope at which the fields face the sun or
turn away from it, the rain-fall, the relative dampness or dryness of
the air when it is not raining, and the moisture of the soil. Every one
of these subjects is vital to the farmer, and the Britannica brings to
its readers the latest information regarding them in articles written by
the leaders of progress. You will find the latest scientific guidance,
in the most practical shape, in the articles CLIMATE (Vol. 6, p. 509),
by Professor R. de C. Ward, of Harvard, METEOROLOGY (Vol. 18, p. 264),
by Professor Cleveland Abbe, of the United States Weather Bureau, and
ACCLIMATIZATION (Vol. 1, p. 114). The distribution of heat in the soil
is described in the article CONDUCTION OF HEAT (Vol. 6, p. 893), where
the diagram showing variations of temperature at different depths in the
soil should be carefully studied.

[Sidenote: Drainage and Irrigation]

The brackish water that troubles farmers near tidal creeks, the alkali
water that often occurs West of the Mississippi, and the stagnant water
that never does the farm any good, are all as bad in their way as the
river-floods or the merely sodden soil in which nothing will grow but
coarse grass that is always unsafe pasturage. Drains and embankments
need very careful planning, and sound information will be found in the
articles DRAINAGE OF LAND (Vol. 8, p. 471), RECLAMATION OF LAND (Vol.
22, p. 954), and RIVER ENGINEERING (Vol. 23, p. 374), the latter by
Professor L. F. Vernon H. Harcourt, the leading authority on such
subjects the world over.

The saving of water and the method of bringing it to the farm and
distributing it over the fields are authoritatively discussed in the
articles IRRIGATION (Vol. 14, p. 841), WATER SUPPLY (Vol. 28, p. 387),
by G. F. Deacon, WINDMILL (Vol. 28, p. 710), PUMP (Vol. 22, p. 645), and
in the section headed “Utility of Forests” (Vol. 10, p. 646) of the
article FORESTS AND FORESTRY, by Gifford Pinchot, formerly U. S. Chief
Forester. The other parts of this article, dealing with the timber
industry, are of course important to farmers whose land includes any
lumber. WATER RIGHTS (Vol. 28, p. 385) explains the laws which regulate
the taking of water from streams and lakes, and the article LAKE (Vol.
16, p. 86) is also of interest in connection with irrigation.

[Sidenote: Farm Buildings and Fences]

When the farmer, who has to be everything by turns, has been an engineer
long enough to get the water off his farm or on his farm—and perhaps he
has to do both in different parts of the same farm—he must next take on
the builder’s job. He will be reminded of a good many precautions and
economies that are often overlooked, and may find, too, some hints that
are quite new to him, in the excellent series of articles, all by
experts in the building trade: FARM BUILDINGS (Vol. 10, p. 180),
BUILDING (Vol. 4, p. 762), FOUNDATIONS (Vol. 10, p. 738), BRICKWORK
(Vol. 4, p. 521), STONE (Vol. 25, p. 958), MASONRY (Vol. 17, p. 841),
TIMBER (Vol. 26, p. 978), CARPENTRY (Vol. 5, p. 386), and ROOFS (Vol.
23, p. 697). The use of concrete for buildings, tanks, irrigation works,
etc., has proved so successful, and is so rapidly increasing, that you
will be especially interested by the article CONCRETE (Vol. 6, p. 835).
BARBED WIRE (Vol. 3, p. 384), in which the meshed field fencing, of late
increasing in favor, is also dealt with, is another practical article.

[Sidenote: Agricultural Machines]

Advertisers no doubt supply you with more literature about farm
machinery than you find time to read, but that makes it all the more
essential to get sound information that has no trade bias. The
Britannica goes into the principles of construction and helps you to see
the good and bad points in the new models you are constantly offered.
You can learn a great deal from the articles PLOUGH (Vol. 21, p. 850),
HARROW (Vol. 13, p. 27), CULTIVATOR (Vol. 7, p. 618), HOE (Vol. 13, p.
559), and the sections on machines in the articles HAY (Vol. 13, p.
106), REAPING (Vol. 22, p. 944), SOWING (Vol. 25, p. 523) and THRASHING
(Vol. 26, p. 887). OIL ENGINE (Vol. 20, p. 35), WATER MOTORS (Vol. 28,
p. 382) and TRACTION (Vol. 27, p. 118) are also of importance.

Farm horses and the other live-stock required in general farming fall
under Chapter II of this Guide.

[Sidenote: Farm Finance]

You cannot read the articles already mentioned, and consider all that
has to be done in merely getting a farm ready to be worked, without
realizing how grossly unfair it is that the American farmer should be
hampered, as he is, by the want of proper banking facilities when he is
making a start. And after he has bought and prepared his land and
equipped and stocked his farm he needs, each year, money to finance his
crops. For any loan used in the purchase of land and in permanent
improvements such as buildings, drainage, irrigation, a mortgage is the
natural security; but the short-term farm mortgages—five years at
most—customary in the United States, do not give the farmer as much time
as he needs for repayment, no matter how successful he may be. The
average farm offers quite as good a certainty of continued earning power
as does the average railroad, and farm mortgages should be—in
fairness—regarded not as opportunities for short loans, but as sound
standing investments, just as suitable as railroad bonds for
conservative investors. The farmer’s position is even worse when he
needs a short loan that he will be able to repay as soon as his crops
have been sold, for he is then expected either to give a mortgage as
security or to pay exorbitant interest.

Notwithstanding the prosperous conditions of farming in the United
States, the country as a whole produces only half as much grain for
every acre of farm land as is produced in Europe, and the only reason is
that most of our farmers lack the capital needed in order to get the
fullest yield from their land. In the chief European countries, the
system of banking facilities for farmers, described in the article
CO-OPERATION (Vol. 7, p. 86), by Aneurin Williams, shows what can be
done, and sooner or later will be done, in the United States. This
article fully describes the admirable Raiffeisen banks in Germany, which
are based upon the idea that a society of farmers (restricted to the
neighborhood, so that each member’s honesty and capability are known to
the other members) make themselves jointly responsible for loans to the
members. A promissory note is the only security required. The French,
Italian, Austrian, and other systems are also discussed in the
Britannica, but the German plan is that which offers the best example to
America.

[Sidenote: Plants and Crops]

This course of reading has now covered the conditions and the material
required for farming, and it is time to get down to something that
_grows_. In the old books everything about the life of a plant was
treated as a part of the science of botany, and if you remember the
botany you were taught at school, you remember a string of long names
and very little else. There is of course an article on botany in the
Britannica, but it deals chiefly with the history of botanical science,
and the life of the plant is treated under another heading, and in a
novel, interesting, and practical way. The article PLANTS (Vol. 21, p.
728) is indeed one of the most important and unusual in the
Encyclopædia, giving the results of recent investigation which you could
not find in any other book. It is written by eight contributors, all men
who have done a great deal of original work. The section on classes of
plants is by Dr. Rendle, that on the anatomy of plants by A. G. Tansley,
that on the healthy life of plants by Professor J. Reynolds Green, that
on their diseases by Professor H. Marshall Ward, that on the relation
between plants and their surroundings by Dr. C. E. Moss, that on plant
cells by Harold Wager, that on the forms and organs of plants by
Professor S. H. Vines, and that on the distribution of plants in various
parts of the world by Sir. W. Thiselton-Dyer. Special accounts of the
chief parts of the plant are given in the articles LEAF (Vol. 16, p.
322), STEM (Vol. 25, p. 875), and ROOT (Vol. 23, p. 712). The success of
artificial fertilization or impregnation is explained (Vol. 13, p. 744)
in the article HORTICULTURE.

Apart from the diseases described in the section, already mentioned, of
the article PLANTS, the greatest danger to which crops are exposed is
that of insect pests, and the special article ECONOMIC ENTOMOLOGY,
dealing with them (Vol. 8, p. 896), gives a full account of each of the
remedies that have proved useful. The cotton boll weevil is the subject
of a most interesting section of the article COTTON (Vol. 7, p. 261).
Separate articles are devoted to individual pests, such as LOCUST (Vol.
16, p. 857), and—turning to a larger enemy—RABBIT (Vol. 22, p. 767).
There is no bird that troubles the farmer, or helps him by killing
insects, upon which there is not an article, for more than 200 distinct
bird articles are listed under the heading “Birds” on p. 891 of Vol. 29
(the index volume), in addition to the information in the article BIRD
(Vol. 3, p. 959), and the article on families of birds (Vol. 20, p.
299).

The crops of all climates are treated in general in the article
AGRICULTURE, and in particular under their individual names, all of
which are so familiar, and indeed so fully listed on p. 889 of Vol. 29
(the index volume), that they need not be repeated here. Naturally you
will include in this course of reading the crops with which you are
personally concerned, and in any case you ought to read GRASS AND
GRASSLAND (Vol. 12, p. 367), and GRASSES (Vol. 12, p. 369).

[Sidenote: Wheat]

The article WHEAT (Vol. 28, p. 576) deals with one of the chief products
of “the greatest cereal producing region of the world.” It begins the
story of a wheat crop with the burning of the old straw of the previous
year, then takes up ploughing, harrowing, seeding, thrashing, labor in
connection with all these operations, and transportation and marketing.
At this point, the article FLOUR AND FLOUR MANUFACTURE (Vol. 10, p.
548), by G. F. Zimmer, takes up the later history of wheat. It may
surprise you to learn from the Britannica that wheat first found its way
to America through a few grains being accidentally mixed with some rice.
BARLEY (Vol. 3, p. 405) is an interesting article on the grain that is
the oldest cereal food of the human race, and that is also remarkable
for its power to grow over a greater range of latitude than any other
grain. COTTON (Vol. 7, p. 256), by Professor Chapman, is an article of
which the vast importance may be judged by the following table taken
from page 261:

[Illustration: PRODUCTS FROM A TON OF COTTON SEED]

                                     Cotton seed, 2000 pounds
                                           +------+----------------------+----------
                                           |      |                      |
                                           | Linters, 23 pounds          |
                                           | ------------------          |
                Meats, 1090 pounds                              Hulls, 888 pounds
                -----+---------+--                            +------+-------+----
                     |         |                              |      |       |
               Cake, 800 pounds|                              |      |       |
               ---+------------+                              |      |       |
                  |            |                              |      |       |
                 Meal          |                              |      |       |
    ---------------------------+                              |      |       |
    (Feeding stuff. Fertilizer)|                        Fibre |      |      Bran
    ---------------------------+                       ---+---+      |      -+--
                               |                          |          |       |
                               |                  --------+----------+-------+------
              Crude Oil, 290 pounds               (High-grade paper) | (Cattle food)
              ----+----------+-----               -------------------+--------------
                  |          |                                       |
            Summer Yellow    |Soap stock                  (Fuel)     |
 +-------+-------------      +----+-----                  --+--------+--------------+
 |(Winter|Cotton seed             |                         |                       |
 |yellow | stearin)             Soaps                     Ashes              -------+-----
 +-------+-----------           -----                     --+--              (Cattle food)
 |                                                          |                with the meal
 |                                                          |                       |
 |      Salad oil                                           |                       |
 +--------------------                                      |                       |
 |      Summer white                                   Fertilizer                   |
 +----+---------------                                                         These together,
 |Lard|                                                                        a very valuable
 +----+                                                                            manure
 |Cottolene (with beef stearin, cooking oil)
 +------------------------------------------
 |Miners’ oil
 +-----------
 |Soap
 +----

Every one of the other cereal and general crops produced in any part of
the world is treated in the Britannica with the same fullness of
information and with the same practical detail which characterizes these
articles on wheat, barley and cotton.

Some of the principal articles on the routine of farming such as sowing,
reaping, and the like, have already been mentioned in connection with
agricultural machinery. The articles on individual countries contain
sections on the crops of each of them, and you will find CANADA (Vol. 5,
p. 152), and GERMANY (Vol. 11, p. 810), of special interest. The special
features of tropical farming are described in the articles on tropical
crops.

[Sidenote: Fruit and Flower Growing]

The article FRUIT AND FLOWER FARMING (Vol. 11, p. 260) covers fruit
culture in general, and, in the section of it which deals with the
United States (Vol. 11, p. 268), the American fruit crops. This section
describes the wonderful development of the fruit industry since cold
transportation and cold storage enabled consumers in every part of the
country, and in Europe as well, to purchase fruit grown in whatever
state most advantageously produces any one variety. You should select,
from the twenty separate articles on individual fruits, not only those
on the varieties which you are already growing, but those on any others
that are possible in the part of the country where your land lies. The
section on fruit in the article on HORTICULTURE (Vol. 13, p. 775) is
devoted to growing on a smaller scale, in gardens. It contains (Vol. 13,
p. 780) a practical calendar to show each month’s work.

Flower culture is the subject of special sections in both the articles
above named and there is a descriptive list (Vol. 13, p. 766) of more
than three hundred hardy annuals, biennials, and perennials, full of
practical information. The calendar already mentioned indicates the
dates for indoor and out-door operations. From the many articles on
individual flower plants listed at the end of Part 3 of this chapter you
can make your own choice.

[Sidenote: Poultry and Bees]

Poultry and their rearing are dealt with in the articles POULTRY AND
POULTRY FARMING (Vol. 22, p. 213), FOWL (Vol. 10, p. 760), TURKEY (Vol.
27, p. 467), GUINEA FOWL (Vol. 12, p. 697), DUCK (Vol. 8, p. 630), GOOSE
(Vol. 12, p. 241), and INCUBATION and INCUBATORS (Vol. 14, p. 359).
Bee-keeping and the honey industry are treated in the articles BEE (Vol.
3, p. 625) and HONEY (Vol. 13, p. 653). Truck farming is treated in the
section dealing with vegetables (Vol. 13, p. 776), of the article
HORTICULTURE. Apart from the law as to water rights already mentioned
the legal doctrine most particularly affecting farmers is that of
EMBLEMENTS (Vol. 9, p. 308). GRAIN TRADE (Vol. 12, p. 322), and
GRANARIES (Vol. 12, p. 336), the latter describing the latest type of
grain elevators, are articles of great interest to farmers who
specialize in cereal crops.

The new system of purchase of grain by the government, which is working
admirably in Western Canada, protects the farmer against the speculators
who buy standing crops for less than a fair price, and it is to be hoped
that some similar plan may be adopted in the United States.

ECONOMICS (Vol. 8, p. 899), by Professor Hewins, CO-OPERATION (Vol. 7,
p. 82), and TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 422), deal with topics related to the
marketing of all agricultural products. The articles on learned
societies have an extensive section (Vol. 25, p. 317) on the
agricultural societies of all countries.

[Sidenote: The History of Farming]

Agricultural history is, naturally, based upon the history of vegetable
life, and the fossil plants described in the article PALÆOBOTANY (Vol.
20, p. 524), long as their appearance preceded that of man, greatly
affected the nature of the earth’s crust which he was to occupy.

The earliest of all known writings, the Code of Khammurabi, described in
the article on Babylonian Law, shows (Vol. 3, p. 117) that agriculture
was the subject of careful legislation under the oldest government of
which a contemporary record has survived; and the provisions as to the
working of land on the “metayer” system, under which the landowner
received from the landholder a share of the crops, and as to irrigation,
are most explicit and practical. Ancient Egyptian implements of
agriculture are fully described (Vol. 9, p. 69) in the article EGYPT,
and pictures of them appear on page 72 of the same volume. If the
ancient history of farming interests you, it is only necessary for you
to turn to the heading “Agriculture,” in the Index (Vol. 29), where you
will find references to a number of other articles on the early
civilizations.

From these articles, as from the historical section of the guiding
article AGRICULTURE, and the passages relating to agriculture in many of
the 6,292 articles on the histories of races and countries, the reader
may learn that agriculture has been the key to all history. The earliest
migrations of the human race, as definitely as the comparatively recent
development of America, Australasia and the interior of Africa, were
based upon an agricultural impetus. And his reading upon other subjects
in the Encyclopædia Britannica will often remind him that the wool and
cotton and linen and leather that we wear, the carpets and blankets and
sheets in our houses, all originated in farming of one kind or another;
while every food that nourishes us, save fish and game, is directly an
agricultural product. All the bustle of the great cities, all the wheels
that turn in the mills, all the intricate mechanism of industry and
commerce, all the world’s work and thought and happiness, depend upon
the mysterious and inimitable processes by which the brown soil yields
green growth. For all the progress science has made, we are no nearer to
replacing these processes by any short cut of chemistry than were the
first farmers whose husbandry is recorded in history. If all the little
roots ceased for one year to do their work in the dark, the human race
would hopelessly starve to death.

The alphabetical list of articles at the end of Chapter III of this
Guide will make it easy for you to add to this course of reading,
choosing for yourself the line that will be most attractive to you. In
making your choice, do not forget that plant-life is a subject you
cannot study too closely. No matter what crop you make your specialty,
you have to _educate_ the plants that produce it to do their work, just
as carefully as a teacher trains children. Another fact to keep in mind
is that just as a doctor is dealing with organs in the human body which
he cannot see, so you are particularly concerned with the roots down in
the soil, and the more you know about the way they eat and drink, the
better for your farm.

The names of many of the writers of these articles are given in the
table of the 1,500 Contributors to the Britannica, beginning at page 949
of Vol. 29 (the index volume); a glance will show you what authoritative
positions they occupy and how thoroughly they command your confidence.

[_See list of articles on subjects connected with farming, at the end of
Chapter III of this Guide._]




                               CHAPTER II
                           FOR STOCK-RAISERS


Stock-raising in the United States was, until quite recent years, under
the evil influence of the careless methods which had been handed down
from the old days of the range-cattle industry. Chicago men still tell
the story of the Chicago banker, afterwards Secretary of the Treasury,
who declared, in reply to a request for a loan on the security of
range-cattle, that he “would as soon lend money on a shoal of mackerel
in the Atlantic Ocean.” The vague possession and the vague methods of
breeding and marketing which suggested this comparison did not form the
habits of close observation and incessant care which became necessary
when land and food began to cost money. The lesson has been learned, and
the present conditions of the industry are infinitely better for the
country at large. It has been proved that fattening as well as breeding
can be successfully undertaken in almost every part of the United
States. Even in the North West, the tendency to-day is to turn from
exclusive grain growing to a combination of cropping and feeding.
Cattle, and also work horses of the right type, for which the demand is
always greater than the supply, are yielding fair profits on many of the
New England farms which had been neglected for years.

[Sidenote: Staying on the Land]

One of the most encouraging features of the present situation is that
the broader distribution of the live-stock industry encourages farm-bred
boys to remain at home. It has long been a popular belief that the
attraction of the cities lies largely in the facilities for amusement
which they offer; but the best class of young men who have left the
farms have done so because they did not believe that plowing and sowing
and reaping gave enough scope for their intelligence and their
initiative. When stock-raising is combined with tillage, there is not
only a greater interest in farm life and a greater chance to make
general knowledge effective, but there are also better opportunities for
a young man to make a small venture of his own while he is still a farm
hand. It is certainly true that stock-raising needs the young man who is
determined to know something about everything and all there is to know
about one thing. To him the articles in the Britannica which are
indicated in this chapter should be of the greatest value, for they
cover a broad range, and they are written by specialists of the highest
authority. They do not profess to teach what can only be learnt in the
course of practical experience, but they will make each day’s work more
interesting and more effective.

[Sidenote: Cattle]

You cannot do better than to begin your reading with the article (Vol.
4, p. 337) on the family of animals to which cattle belong, a family so
varied that it includes so small a creature as the hare, and so large a
one as the rhinoceros. The article CATTLE (Vol. 5, p. 359), by Professor
Wallace and Dr. Fream, begins by reminding you that the idea of cattle
owning has always been so closely associated with the idea of wealth
that the two words “capital” and “cattle” have the same root, and that
our word “pecuniary” is taken from the Latin term for cattle. This
article, illustrated with photographs of the best specimens of bulls and
cows of different breeds, deals with Shorthorns, Herefords, Devons,
Holsteins, Dutch Belteds, Sussexes, Longhorns, Aberdeen-Angus, Red
Polleds, Galloways, Highlands, Kerry’s, Dexters, Jerseys and Guernseys,
and has a section on the rearing of calves. OX (Vol. 20, p. 398) is
chiefly about the origin of domestic cattle. AGRICULTURE (Vol. 1, p.
388) contains information of a more general kind as to practical
stock-raising. The best methods of mating are described fully in BREEDS
and BREEDING (Vol. 4, p. 487), VARIATION and SELECTION (Vol. 27, p.
906), and HEREDITY (Vol. 13, p. 350), by Dr. Chalmers Mitchell.
MENDELISM (Vol. 18, p. 115) will tell you all about the theory which is
nowadays the great subject of discussion among experts in breeding.
EMBRYOLOGY (Vol. 9, p. 314), by Dr. Hans Driesch, and REPRODUCTION (Vol.
23, p. 116), by Professor Vines, contain the results of the latest
investigations, and the article SEX (Vol. 24, p. 747) describes the
recent experiments undertaken with the hope that breeders may at some
future time be enabled to vary at will the proportion of males and
females. TELEGONY (Vol. 26, p. 509) gives you the evidence for and
against the belief that offspring are influenced by a previous mate of
the dam. FOOD PRESERVATION (Vol. 10, p. 612) and REFRIGERATING (Vol. 23,
p. 30) cover the cold shipping and cold storage of beef. LEATHER (Vol.
16, p. 330), by Dr. J. G. Parker, one of the foremost technical experts
on this subject, follows hides through the market to their final
distribution and industrial uses.

[Sidenote: Horses and Mules]

Notwithstanding the harm that trolley cars and automobiles and
mechanically propelled agricultural machines have done to important
branches of the horse business, and notwithstanding the competition
which American exporters find in Europe from the Argentine ranches,
there is still an active market for farm horses and for stock suited to
trucking and light delivery work in cities. You no doubt find, in
whatever part of the United States your interests lie, that you need to
watch the market very closely, and that you must always be ready to
change your plans at short notice. But it is to the quick-witted man who
is always prepared to vary his methods that the Britannica offers the
greatest practical services. The article on the horse family in general
(Vol. 9, p. 720) is very interesting, but you will give more time to the
elaborate article HORSE (Vol. 13, p. 712), by Richard Lyddeker, E. D.
Brickwood, Sir William Flower, and Professor Wallace. The illustrations
are unusually valuable, for instead of following the usual custom of
making all the photographs the same size, the Editors of the Britannica
showed good sense and originality by making each one to scale. The
breeds are separately described, and the sections on feeding and
breaking are full of useful hints. The history of the thoroughbred
strain is carefully traced, the pedigree of one famous type being shown
in a table naming more than one hundred ancestors. The article
HORSE-RACING (Vol. 13, p. 726), by Alfred Watson, shows how the sport
has influenced breeding, and the description of American trotting goes
back to the day when “Boston Blue,” in 1818, trotted a mile in three
minutes, “a feat deemed impossible” at that period! The English race
meetings, in which American owners and jockeys now play so conspicuous a
part, are described in special sections, as well as the training at
Newmarket. RIDING (Vol. 23, p. 317), and DRIVING (Vol. 8, p. 585), are
by practical experts, and TRACTION (Vol. 27, p. 118) contains an
interesting table analyzing the draft power of the horse. The section on
Arab horses in the article ARABIA (Vol. 2, p. 261) should be read, for
it adds to the information, in the articles already named, on the breed
that has influenced every variety of horse. MULE (Vol. 18, p. 959) will
tell you about the varieties not only in the United States and Mexico,
but also in France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt,
Algeria and North China. The section on Hybrids (Vol. 13, p. 713) of the
article HORSE deals with all the attempts that have been made to get a
perfect type of mule by introducing various strains of blood.

[Sidenote: Sheep and the Wool Market]

SHEEP (Vol. 24, p. 817) contains separate descriptions of the 28 best
breeds, discussing their values both for wool and for the meat trade.
Breeding, feeding, dipping and lambing are fully treated. Sheepdogs and
other breeds useful to the stock-raiser fall under the article DOG (Vol.
8, p. 374). WOOL (Vol. 28, p. 805), by Professor Aldred Barker, is an
article in which you will at once be impressed by the splendid
thoroughness that is characteristic of the Britannica. It goes to the
very foundation of the subject by giving you microscopic photographs, on
a scale of 320 to 1, of each of the six great varieties of wool, and
explaining the structure of the fibres. The article FIBRES (Vol. 10, p.
309) will enable you to compare another microscopic photograph of wool
fibre with similar pictures of silk, flax, cotton, jute, and other
textile materials. The article wool deals next with wool-yolk and
wool-fat, and then goes on to show why greasy wool is better than wool
washed before shearing. Wool classing and sorting are next described,
and then scouring. From this point the treatment of wool hardly comes
within the jurisdiction of the sheep-man, although he cannot know too
much about the qualities of the yarns obtained from different kinds of
wool. It is interesting to note in this article that the first fulling
mill in America was built at Rowley, Mass., in 1643, only thirty-four
years after the first sheep was brought to America, and only
twenty-three years after the Pilgrims landed on Plymouth Rock.

[Sidenote: Pigs and Pork]

The article SWINE (Vol. 26, p. 236) deals with the swine family in
general, and the article PIG (Vol. 21, p. 594), containing a fine
full-page plate, gives a detailed account of the breeds most profitable
on the farm, including the Poland-China, the Berkshire, the Duroc, and
the Chester White. Eleven breeds in all are particularized. The breeding
and fattening of hogs, although it is now successfully followed as a
distinct branch of the live-stock industry, must always remain in great
part a mere branch of general farming; for the pig’s power of thriving
on many kinds of food, enables the farmer to utilize produce that cannot
advantageously be shipped, and to keep his pigs following his cattle
over the fields. Much information will be found all through the article
AGRICULTURE (Vol. 1, p. 388). TRICHINOSIS (Vol. 27, p. 266) deals with a
disease that has sometimes seriously affected the pork market, and been
made the excuse, too, for some very harsh restrictions on American
exportation.

[Sidenote: Diseases and Parasites of Live-stock]

You will find in the Britannica (Vol. 28, p. 6) a very full and clear
account of the diseases of all domestic animals, by Dr. Fleming and
Professor McQueen, with special sections on the maladies of the horse,
of cattle, of sheep, and of pigs, and on the parasites that infest them.
TUBERCULOSIS (Vol. 27, p. 354) calls for special study, for it is a
“disease of civilization” almost unknown among wild animals in their
natural state and among the uncivilized races of mankind. The connection
between the disease in cattle and its spread among human beings is fully
explained in this article. PLEURO PNEUMONIA (Vol. 21, p. 838) deals with
the lung disease from which cattle are the only sufferers, RINDERPEST
(Vol. 23, p. 348), with the infectious fever which affects both cattle
and sheep, and ANTHRAX (Vol. 2, p. 106), with the terribly infectious
carbuncles communicated from cattle and sheep to man by the microbes
carried in wool and hides. GLANDERS (Vol. 12, p. 76) describes the form
in which this disease of horses and mules afflicts human beings, the
symptoms and course of which, in the animals themselves, fall under the
subject of horse diseases (Vol. 28, p. 8). The microbe by which this
disease is carried is shown in the plate facing one of the pages (Vol.
20, p. 770) of the article PARASITIC DISEASES. FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE
(Vol. 10, p. 617) afflicts cattle, sheep, and pigs, and occasionally
human beings.

Among the articles on continents and countries which contain special
information on stock-raising, you should not miss the interesting
general review of the European live-stock industry in the article EUROPE
(Vol. 9, p. 914), the section on live-stock in CANADA (Vol. 5, p. 153),
that in ARGENTINA (Vol. 2, p. 465), in AUSTRALIA (Vol. 2, p. 950), and
in NEW ZEALAND (Vol. 19, p. 627) The history of stock-raising is fully
treated at the beginning of the article AGRICULTURE (Vol. 1, p. 388).

[Sidenote: How to “Even Up”]

When you have read the articles mentioned in the three parts of this
chapter on Farming, do not turn away with the idea that you have got
from the Britannica all that it can give you to help you in your
business. Remember that you have to judge men, as well as live-stock, in
order to succeed, and that general knowledge is of the greatest use in
doing that. The one sure sign of the kind of man you cannot rely upon is
that he talks confidently about subjects of which he really knows
little, and the more you yourself know, the more readily you can detect
the pretentious people who might make you think too well of them.

If you turn over the pages of this guide, and ask yourself, as you
glance at the chapters, in what departments of general knowledge you are
weakest, you will see what courses of reading will do most to make you
an “evened up” man, without any weak threads in your intellectual
texture. And, whatever you read, do not forget that the Britannica is a
book of reference as well as for reading: that you are debasing your
mind every time you leave unanswered any question that comes up in the
course of the day’s work or talk, or while you are reading your
newspaper. A vigorous mind wants an answer whenever it becomes conscious
of a question or of a doubt, and if you fail to feed it with the
information it asks for, it loses health. Now that you have the
Britannica, the food is in the store-room, do not leave it there!

[_See list of articles on subjects connected with stock-raising and
other branches of farming, at the end of Chapter III of this Guide._]




                              CHAPTER III
                           FOR DAIRY FARMERS

   SEE ALSO CHAPTER I, FOR FARMERS, AND CHAPTER II, FOR STOCK-RAISERS


The admirable set of rules for dairy farmers issued by the United States
Department of Agriculture begins by telling you to “read current
literature and keep posted on new ideas.” And you can easily see that
the information on dairy-farming and the many subjects connected with
it, supplied by the Britannica, must cover a much broader field of new
ideas than can be included in any periodical or dairying manual. The
branches of science in which the greatest advance has been made since
the beginning of the present century happen to be those that have most
to do with dairying; and the industry itself has been completely
revolutionized since the days when cities got their milk from ramshackle
cow-sheds in their suburbs, and when butter-making was regarded as one
of the “chores” to be done at odd times.

The key article in the Britannica, DAIRY AND DAIRY FARMING (Vol. 7, p.
737), deals with the best milking breeds, the installation, equipment,
and management of a dairy farm, the values of various kinds of pasturage
and fodder; with the milk trade, with butter-making and cheese-making,
with condensed milk, skim milk, and milk powder and with the
organization and operation of creameries, cheeseries, and dairy
factories in general. Such subjects as soil, grass, hay and other fodder
crops fall under Part I of this chapter, and the articles dealing with
the breeding and rearing of dairy cattle are mentioned in Part II, “For
Stock-Raisers.”

[Sidenote: Dairy-Herd Diseases]

Cattle diseases in general are also covered by the course of reading
suggested in Part II; but the dairy farmer has a special interest in
contagious mammitis, milk fever, contagious abortion, and cowpox, all of
which are described (Vol. 28, p. 10) in the article on VETERINARY
SCIENCE. You cannot study too carefully the article on TUBERCULOSIS
(Vol. 27, p. 354), for this terrible infection is not only a standing
danger to your herd, but also affects the transportation and marketing
of milk. Dr. Hennessy, who wrote the article, is an expert of the first
rank and, like most other great authorities, is not inclined to
encourage the popular exaggeration of the dangers for which newspaper
“sensations” are responsible.

[Sidenote: Milk and the Milk Market]

You get to the very foundation of the supply of milk in Professor
Parson’s and Dr. Edmund Owen’s article MAMMARY GLAND (Vol. 17, p. 528),
in which the comparative anatomy of the milk yielding organ is fully
treated. The article MILK (Vol. 18, p. 451) discusses the chemistry of
many kinds of milk and the diseases carried by milk, and deals with the
gravest problems of the industry: the difficulty of sterilizing milk, so
that tuberculosis and typhoid cannot be carried by it, and the
difficulty of sterilizing cream, so that butter may be quite safe,
without making the milk less nutritious and the butter less delicate in
flavor. The article BACTERIOLOGY (Vol. 3, p. 156), by Professor H.
Marshall Ward and Professor Blackman, goes to the root of this whole
question of infection. Milk is, on the other hand, used to convey into
the human system the “friendly microbes,” and the use of soured milk and
cheese for this purpose is explained in the articles THERAPEUTICS (Vol.
26, p. 800) and LONGEVITY (Vol. 16, p. 977), which deal with
Metchnikoff’s system of treatment. PEPSIN (Vol. 21, p. 130) describes
the process by which milk is rendered more digestible, and INFANCY (Vol.
14, p. 513) deals with the preparation of milk to be sold for the use of
young children. There is so general a demand for prepared milk which is
from every point of view wholesome that you will find it worth while to
read, in this connection, FOOD (Vol. 10, p. 611), NUTRITION (Vol. 19, p.
920) and DIETETICS (Vol. 8, p. 214).

[Sidenote: Products and Marketing]

BUTTER (Vol. 4, p. 889,) and CHEESE (Vol. 6, p. 22) are brief articles
which you should not overlook, although they refer you to the key and
article on dairying for details; and OILS contains (Vol. 20, p. 47) an
interesting analytical table in which butter is compared with other
animal fats. FOOD PRESERVATION (Vol. 10, p. 612) deals with the cold
storage of butter, cheese, condensed milk and milk powder; and
REFRIGERATING (Vol. 23, p. 30) with the processes and machinery
employed. KOUMISS (Vol. 15, p. 920) describes the milk-wine or
milk-brandy prepared by fermenting mare’s milk, and the similar product
“kerif” made from cow’s milk. Although the special developments of
dairying in various parts of the world are discussed in the article
DAIRY AND DAIRY-FARMING, the articles on individual countries also
contain information of value. The section on dairying (Vol. 5, p. 154)
in the article CANADA, and the account of co-operative dairying (Vol. 7,
p. 87) in DENMARK should not be overlooked.

In reading these articles in Britannica, and thinking of the present
conditions of this great business, you will be reminded that dairying is
an industry of peculiar importance to the whole people of the United
States, not only because of the money made out of it, and not only
because it gives hundreds of thousands of men employment on the land
instead of in crowded cities, but also because it promises to develop
the co-operative action which harmonizes with the best ideals of
democracy. The co-operative plants which are beginning to be established
by dairy farmers are the only institutions our modern civilization has
created in which you find the neighborly spirit that the first American
settlers showed in the days when they joined to defend themselves
against the Indians. At political meetings, in machine shops and cotton
mills and shoe factories, you hear unhappy talk about the relations of
capital and labor, about strikes and trusts, about the man on top and
the man underneath. But where the farmer’s wagons clatter up to the
separator platform, there is combination in the best sense of the word.
The Britannica article on co-operation says that the word “in its widest
usage, _means the creed that life may best be ordered not by the
competition of individuals, where each seeks the interest of himself and
his family, but by mutual help, by each individual consciously striving
for the good of the social body of which he forms part, and the social
body in return caring for each individual; ‘each for all, and all for
each’ is its accepted motto. Thus it proposes to replace among rational
and moral things the struggle for existence by voluntary combination for
life._”


 ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE BRITANNICA ON SUBJECTS CONNECTED
                WITH FARMING, STOCK-RAISING AND DAIRYING

    (The more important articles have already been mentioned in the
 preceding pages, but the following list includes many others in which
                  valuable information will be found.)

 Aal
 Aaron’s Rod
 Abaca
 Abutilon
 Acacia
 Acanthus
 Acaulescent
 Acerose
 Achimenes
 Acinus
 Acorn
 Acorus Calamus
 Acotyledones
 Acrogenæ
 Adonis
 African Lily
 Agave
 Agrimony
 Ailanthus
 Alburnum
 Alder
 Aleurites
 Alexanders
 Algæ
 Algum or Almug
 Alismaceæa
 Allamanda
 Alliaria Officinalis
 Allium
 Almond
 Aloe
 Amadou
 Amanita
 Amaranth
 Amaryllis
 Amentiferæ
 Ammoniacum
 Ampelopsis
 Anatto
 Anemone
 Angelica
 Angiosperms
 Angulate
 Anime
 Anise
 Antirrhinum
 Apiculture
 Apple
 Apricot
 Araucaria
 Arbor Day
 Arbor Vitæ
 Arboretum
 Arboriculture
 Archil
 Aristolochia
 Aroideæ
 Arrowroot
 Artichoke
 Ascus
 Ash
 Asparagus
 Aspen
 Ashpodel
 Aspidistra
 Aster
 Aubergine
 Aucuba
 Auricula
 Autogamy
 Auxanometer
 Averruncator
 Avocado Pear
 Axile or Axial
 Azalea
 Bael Fruit
 Balm
 Bamboo
 Banana
 Baneberry
 Banksia
 Baobab
 Barberry
 Barley
 Bdellium
 Bean
 Bee
 Beech
 Beet
 Begonia
 Benzoin
 Betel-nut
 Bilberry
 Birch
 Bird’s Eye
 Blackberry
 Bladder-wort
 Boletus
 Boll
 Borage
 Boraginaceæ
 Botryis
 Bottle-brush plants
 Bouvardia
 Boxwood
 Bracket-fungi
 Bramble
 Bran
 Brazil Nuts
 Brazil Wood
 Bread-fruit
 Breed and Breeding
 Bromeliaceæ
 Brooklime
 Broom
 Broom-rape
 Bryophyta
 Buchu
 Buck-bean
 Buckthorn
 Buckwheat
 Bulrush
 Bur, or Burr
 Burnet
 Buttercup
 Butter-nut
 Butterwort
 Cabbage
 Cactus
 Caducous
 Cæspitose
 Calabash
 Calabash Tree
 Calceolaria
 Calf
 Camellia
 Campanula
 Candytuft
 Cane
 Cannon-ball Tree
 Capers
 Caprifoliaceæ
 Capsule
 Caraway
 Cardamon
 Cardoon
 Carnation
 Carrageen
 Carrot
 Caryophyllaceæ
 Cashew Nut
 Cassava
 Cassia
 Casuarina
 Catalpa
 Cataphyll
 Catha
 Cattle
 Cayenne Pepper
 Ceanothus
 Cecropia
 Cedar
 Celandine
 Celery
 Centaurea
 Centaury
 Chantarelle
 Chenopodium
 Cherry
 Chestnut
 Chicory
 Chive
 Chlorosis
 Chrysanthemum
 Churn
 Cicely
 Cimicifuga
 Cinchona
 Cineraria
 Cinnamon
 Citron
 Cleavers
 Clematis
 Climbing Fern
 Cloudberry
 Clover
 Cloves
 Cocoa, or Cuca
 Cocculus Indicus
 Cock’s-comb
 Cocoa
 Coco de Mer
 Coco-nut Palm
 Codiæum
 Coffee
 Colchicum
 Coleus
 Colleter
 Colocynth
 Colt’s-foot
 Columbine
 Compass plant
 Compositæ
 Convolvulaceæ
 Copaiba
 Copal
 Coppice
 Coriander
 Cork
 Corn
 Corn-salad or Lamb’s Lettuce
 Correa
 Cotoneaster
 Cotton
 Cow-tree
 Cranberry
 Crassulaceæ
 Crazy Weed
 Cress
 Crinum
 Crocus
 Crowberry
 Cruciferæ
 Cryptomeria
 Cucumber
 Cucurbitaceæ
 Cumin or Cummin
 Cupulliferæ
 Cultivator
 Currant
 Custard Apple
 Cyclamen
 Cyperaceæ
 Cypress
 Cystolith
 Daffodil
 Dairy & Dairy Farming
 Dahlia
 Daisy
 Dame’s Violet
 Dammar
 Dandelion
 Daphne
 Darlingtonia
 Date Palm
 Deciduous
 Dewberry
 Diatomaceæ
 Dicotyledons
 Dictyogens
 Dividivi
 Dock
 Dodder
 Dogwood
 Dracæna
 Dragons Blood
 Drainage
 Dropwort
 Duck
 Duckweed
 Dulse
 Duramen
 Durian
 Durra
 Earth-nut
 Earth-star
 Ebony
 Economic Entomology
 Edelweiss
 Eglantine
 Elder
 Elecampine
 Elephant’s foot
 Elm
 Endive
 Ensilage
 Entada
 Ericaceæ
 Espalier
 Esparto
 Eucharis
 Eunonymus
 Euphorbia
 Euphorbiaceæ
 Evergreen
 Everlasting
 Fairy Ring
 Fallow
 Farm
 Farm Buildings
 Fennel
 Fenugreek
 Fern
 Fig
 Filmy Ferns
 Finger-and-toe
 Fir
 Flail
 Flax
 Flower
 Fool’s Parsley
 Forage
 Forests & Forestry
 Forget-me-not
 Fork
 Foxglove
 Freesia
 Fritillary
 Frog-bit
 Fruit
 Fruit & Flower Farming
 Fuchsia
 Fumitory
 Fungi
 Funkia
 Furze
 Fustic
 Gale
 Galls
 Gardenia
 Garlic
 Genista
 Gentian
 Gentianaceæ
 Geoponici
 Geraniaceæ
 Geranium
 Geum
 Gillyflower
 Ginger
 Gladiolus
 Glasswort
 Glaucous
 Gloriosa
 Gloxinia
 Goat
 Golden Rod
 Goose
 Gooseberry
 Goose Grass
 Gorse
 Gourd
 Graft
 Grains of Paradise
 Gram or Chick-pea
 Granadilla
 Grass and Grassland
 Grass of Parnassus
 Grasses
 Greenheart
 Ground Nut
 Groundsel
 Guano
 Guava
 Guelder Rose
 Gulfweed
 Gum
 Gumbo
 Gutta Percha
 Gymnosperms
 Hacienda
 Hackberry
 Harebell
 Harrow
 Hawthorn
 Hay
 Hazel
 Heath
 Hedges and Fences
 Heifer
 Heliotrope
 Hellebore
 Hemlock
 Hemp
 Hen
 Henbane
 Henna
 Herb
 Herbarium
 Hickory
 Hippeastrum
 Hoe
 Holly
 Hollyhock
 Honey
 Honey Locust
 Honeysuckle
 Hop
 Horehound
 Hornbeam
 Horse
 Horseradish
 Horsetail
 Horticulture
 Houseleek
 Huckleberry
 Humus
 Huon Pine
 Hyacinth
 Hydrangea
 Hydrocharideæ
 Hyssop
 Ice-plant
 Iceland Moss
 Idioblast
 Immortelle
 Impatiens
 India Hemp
 Indian Corn
 Insectivorous Plants
 Iridaceæ
 Iris
 Irish Moss
 Iron-wood
 Ivy
 Jarrah Wood
 Jasmine
 Jew’s Ears
 Job’s Tears
 Judas Tree
 Jujube
 Juncaceæ
 Juniper
 Jute
 Kaffir Bread
 Kauri Pine
 Kerguelen’s Land Cabbage
 Kumquat
 Labiatæ
 Labrador Tea
 Laburnum
 Lac
 Lace-bark Tree
 Lancewood
 Larch
 Larkspur
 Lattice Leaf Plant
 Laurel
 Laurustinue
 Lavender
 Leaf
 Leek
 Leguminosæ
 Lemon
 Lentil
 Lettuce
 Lichens
 Lilac or Pipe Tree
 Liliacæ
 Lily
 Lime or Linden
 Liquidambar
 Litchi
 Lobelia
 Loco-weeds
 Locust
 Loosestrife
 Loquat
 Lotus
 Lucerne
 Lupine
 Lycopodium
 Madder
 Magnolia
 Mahogany
 Maidenhair
 Maize
 Mallow
 Malvaceæ
 Mammee Apple
 Mandrake
 Mangel-wurzel
 Mango
 Mangosteen
 Mangrove
 Manila Hemp
 Manna
 Manures
 Maple
 Marcescent
 Mare’s-tail
 Marguerite
 Marigold
 Marjoram
 Mastic
 Mate
 Mattock
 Medlar
 Melon
 Meristem
 Mesquite
 Merino
 Mignonette
 Mildew
 Milkwort
 Millet
 Mimosa
 Mimulus
 Mint
 Mistletoe
 Moly
 Momordica
 Moonseed
 Moonwort
 Moraceæ
 Moreton Bay Chestnut
 Mucuna
 Mulberry
 Mushroom
 Mustard
 Myrobalans
 Myrrh
 Myrtle
 Narcissus
 Nard
 Nasturtium
 Nettle
 Nettle Tree
 New England Flax
 Nightshade
 Nut
 Nutmeg
 Oak
 Oat
 Okra
 Oleander
 Oleaster
 Olive
 Onagraceæ
 Onion
 Orach or Mountain Spinach
 Orange
 Orchard
 Orchids
 Orris-Root
 Osier
 Ox
 Oxalis
 Pæony
 Palm
 Palmetto
 Pansy or Heartsease
 Papyrus
 Paraguay Tea
 Parsley
 Parsnip
 Passionflower
 Pea
 Peach
 Pear
 Pellitory
 Pennyroyal
 Pentstemon
 Pepper
 Peppermint
 Pepper Tree
 Persimmon
 Petunia
 Phlox
 Phormium
 Pig
 Pimento
 Pine
 Pine-apple
 Pin-eyed
 Pink
 Pistachio Nut
 Pistil
 Pitcher Plants
 Plane
 Plantain
 Plough and Ploughing
 Plum
 Poinsettia
 Pokeberry
 Pollination
 Polyanthus
 Polygonaceæ
 Polypodium
 Pomegranate
 Pondweed
 Poplar
 Poppy
 Potato
 Potentilla
 Poultry & Poultry Farming
 Primrose
 Primulaceæ
 Privet
 Pteridophyta
 Puff-ball
 Pumpkin
 Purslane
 Pyrethrum
 Quince
 Radish
 Ram
 Ramie
 Ramsons
 Ranch
 Ranunculas
 Ranunculaceæ
 Rape
 Raspberry
 Reaping
 Reed
 Rhododendron
 Rice
 Richardia
 Robinia
 Rocambole
 Roller
 Root
 Rosaceæ
 Rose
 Rosemary
 Rosewood
 Rosin or Colophony
 Royal Fern
 Rubraceæ
 Rubber
 Ruderal
 Rue
 Rush
 Rye
 Sabicu Wood
 Safflower
 Saffron
 Sago
 Sainfoin
 St. John’s Wort
 Salsafy or Salsify
 Salvia
 Sap
 Sapan Wood
 Sarcocarp
 Sarmentose
 Sarracenia
 Satin Wood
 Saxifrage
 Saxifragaceæ
 Scammony
 Scion
 Scorzonera
 Screw-pine
 Scrophulariaceæ
 Scythe
 Sea-kale
 Seawrack
 Sedum
 Secund
 Seed
 Sequoia
 Service Tree
 Sesame
 Shaddock
 Shallot
 Sheep
 Sisal Hemp
 Skirret
 Snake-root
 Snapdragon
 Snowdrop
 Soap-bark
 Soil
 Solanaceæ
 Sorghum
 Sorrel
 Sowing
 Spade
 Spanish Broom
 Spanish Grass
 Spikenard
 Spinach
 Spruce
 Stem
 Stink-wood
 Strawberry
 Strophanthus
 Sudd
 Sumach
 Sundew
 Sunflower
 Sunn
 Sweet Gum
 Sweet Potato
 Sweet-sop
 Swine
 Switch-plants
 Synanthry
 Tallow Tree
 Tamarind
 Tamarisk
 Tea
 Teak
 Teasel
 Terebinth
 Thistle
 Thorn
 Thrashing
 Thrum-eyed
 Thyme
 Tiger-flower
 Toadstool
 Tobacco
 Tomato
 Tonqua Bean
 Toothwart
 Topiary
 Traveller’s Tree
 Tree
 Tree-fern
 Trowel
 Truffle
 Tuberose
 Tulip
 Tulip Tree
 Tumble-weed
 Turkey
 Turmeric
 Turnip
 Turnsole
 Umbelliferæ
 Urticaceæ
 Vanilla
 Vegetable
 Vegetable Marrow
 Venus’s Fly Trap
 Venus’s Looking Glass
 Veratrum
 Verbena
 Vetch
 Vine
 Violet
 Walnut
 Water-lily
 Water-thyme
 Wax-tree
 Wheat
 Whin
 Whortleberry
 Willow
 Willow-herb
 Wintergreen
 Winter’s-bark
 Witch Brooms
 Witch Hazel
 Woad
 Wormwood
 Yam
 Yew
 Yucca
 Zinnia




                               CHAPTER IV
       FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS: GENERAL AND INTRODUCTORY


[Sidenote: Technical Education for Manufacturer and Merchant]

The article on TECHNICAL EDUCATION in the new (Eleventh) Edition of the
Encyclopædia Britannica (Vol. 26, p. 487), written by Philip Magnus, one
of the greatest educational authorities in the world, says that:

  “The widespread appreciation of the advantages of the higher education
  among all classes of the American people, and the general recognition
  among manufacturers, engineers and employers of labour, of the value
  to them in their own work, of the services of college-trained men, has
  largely helped to increase the number of students in attendance at the
  universities and technical institutions.”

A still broader truth is that the men who have learned to think clearly,
by whatever study or _reading_ they may have developed that power,
possess the greatest of all advantages. As the Britannica article on
EDUCATION indicates, the true value of education (not simply school
education, but all education) lies as much in the influence which
intelligently directed study exerts upon the mind as in the immediate
usefulness of the information acquired, and the articles in the
Britannica not only supply the most recent and authoritative
information, but are so logically arranged, one dove-tailing into
another, that they give the reader precisely that _orderly_ view of
knowledge which is the foundation of all mental training.

Since all of the series of chapters which immediately follow and which
are intended for merchants and manufacturers, deal with commerce and
manufactures, it will be for the reader’s convenience to begin by
dealing with those two subjects in general. But certain branches of
industrial and manufacturing knowledge are dealt with in special
chapters. The articles on banking and finance are described fully in
this Guide in the chapter _For Bankers and Financiers_, those on
insurance in the chapter _For Insurance Men_, and those on law in the
chapter _For Lawyers_. Three of the legal articles should, however, be
mentioned here, as they are on especially important subjects: SALE OF
GOODS (Vol. 24, p. 63), COMPANY (Vol. 6, p. 795), which deals with the
laws in various countries regulating corporations, and EMPLOYERS’
LIABILITY (Vol. 9, p. 356), on this topic so important in modern
industrial law and in the relations between capital and labour.

[Sidenote: Practical Economics for Practical Men]

The broad questions of commercial and industrial policy are discussed in
ECONOMICS (Vol. 8, p. 899), by Prof. Hewins; COMMERCE (Vol. 6, p. 766);
TRUSTS (Vol. 27, p. 334); MONOPOLY (Vol. 18, p. 733), and TRADE
ORGANIZATION (Vol. 27, p. 335), which describes commercial associations
in the United States, the work of the consular service, and the
organizations in Germany, France, Great Britain and other countries.
BOOK-KEEPING (Vol. 4, p. 225), with its up-to-date account of modern
accounting methods, card ledgers and loose leaf systems; ADVERTISEMENT
(Vol. 1, p. 235), and MERCANTILE AGENCIES (Vol. 18, p. 148) may be named
as specimens of the many practical articles on business methods which
need not all be enumerated here.

[Sidenote: Imports and Exports]

Much of what you read and hear about the tariff systems of the United
States and various other countries and about their influence upon trade
is so vague and confusing that you will be delighted with the group of
clear, common-sense articles in the Britannica. TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 422)
is by one of the most famous American economists, Prof. Taussig of
Harvard, and is a very full and fair discussion of the points in
controversy. PROTECTION (Vol. 22, p. 464) is by Prof. James of the
University of Illinois, and FREE TRADE (Vol. 11, p. 89) by William
Cunningham. You should read with care CUSTOMS DUTIES (Vol. 7, p. 669);
FREE PORTS (Vol. 11, p. 88), and BOUNTY (Vol. 4, p. 324). BALANCE OF
TRADE (Vol. 3, p. 235) and TAXATION (Vol. 26, p. 458) are both by Sir
Robert Giffen. EXCHANGE (Vol. 10, p. 50), by E. M. Harvey, a partner in
one of the largest firms of bullion brokers in the world, deals with the
movement of gold. COMMERCIAL TREATIES (Vol. 6, p. 771) is by Sir C. M.
Kennedy. Freights are discussed in AFFREIGHTMENT (Vol. 1, p. 302) by Sir
Joseph Walton. LIEN (Vol. 16, p. 594), with its section on “Stoppage in
transitu,” is by F. W. Raikes; SALVAGE (Vol. 24, p. 97), by T. G.
Carver, and BLOCKADE (Vol. 4, p. 72), by Sir Thomas Barclay, the great
international lawyer in Paris. Marine insurance, indemnity, Lloyds, and
other insurance subjects fall under the chapter of this Guide _For
Insurance Men_ to which you should refer. Cargo-carrying and merchant
shipping are further covered by SHIPPING (Vol. 24, p. 983). This article
is by Douglas Owen, honorary secretary and treasurer of the Society of
National Research, and author of _Ports and Docks_; it contains
information about the great freight carrying lines of the world that can
be found in no other book. Railroad freighting is covered by the article
RAILWAYS (Vol. 22, p. 819), in which there is a special section (p.
854b) on the new models of American freight cars.

[Sidenote: Manufacturing and Consuming Nations]

In the article UNITED STATES, which contains more matter than a whole
book of ordinary size and more information than a dozen ordinary books,
the sections (Vol. 27, p. 639) on manufactures and on foreign and
domestic commerce, are by F. S. Philbrick, Ph.D. _The internal commerce
of the United States, as this article states, is in itself greater than
the total international commerce of the world_, and is so far from
exhausting the country’s power of production and consumption, that even
when coastwise traffic is disregarded, New York is the most active port
in the world. A section (Vol. 9, p. 916) of the article EUROPE deals
with European commerce in general. The articles on the great
manufacturing towns of Europe contain much information as to industries.
Great Britain’s industries are dealt with in the article UNITED KINGDOM
(Vol. 27, p. 691). The industries of England alone are separately
treated in a section (Vol. 9, p. 426) of the article ENGLAND. Germany’s
industries are the subject of sections (Vol. 11, p. 811) of the article
GERMANY; and it is interesting to note that although Germany has
outranked France in cotton manufactures since Mülhausen, Colmar and
other important milling centres of Alsace became German, France has
retorted by overtaking and passing Germany in the production of linen.
The sections (Vol. 10, p. 785) on foreign commerce in the article FRANCE
show her position as in the main a self-supporting country, though only
a fourth of the cargoes loaded and discharged in French ports are
carried under the French flag. It would be a waste of space to enumerate
here the articles on Belgium, Switzerland, Italy and other countries,
which you will consult in relation to those of their exports in which
you are especially interested; but you should not overlook the article
on Japan. The Britannica has done commerce a great service in giving to
the world at last a good account of this extraordinary country.

The body of the article JAPAN (Vol. 15, p. 156) is by Capt. Brinkley,
long editor of the Japan _Mail_, whose opportunities of seeing Japanese
life from the inside have been greater than those of any other foreign
observer. Baron Dairoku Kikuchi, President of the Imperial University of
Kyoto, a statesman of great experience and authority, contributes to the
article a section (Vol. 15, p. 273) dealing with Japan’s international
position. His remarks upon the commercial morality of the Japanese are
so ingenuous and so candid that an extract from them cannot be omitted:

  Now when foreign trade was first opened, it was naturally not firms
  with long-established credit and methods that first ventured upon the
  new field of business—some few that did failed owing to their want of
  experience—it was rather enterprising and adventurous spirits with
  little capital or credit who eagerly flocked to the newly opened ports
  to try their fortune. It was not to be expected that all or most of
  those should be very scrupulous in their dealings with the foreigners;
  the majority of those adventurers failed, while a few of the abler
  men, generally those who believed in and practised honesty as the best
  policy, succeeded and came to occupy an honourable position as
  business men.... Commerce and trade are now regarded as highly
  honourable professions, merchants and business men occupy the highest
  social positions, several of them having been lately raised to the
  peerage, and are as honourable a set of men as can be met anywhere. It
  is, however, to be regretted that in introducing Western business
  methods, it has not been quite possible to exclude some of their
  evils, such as promotion of swindling companies, tampering with
  members of legislature, and so forth.

The account (Vol. 15, p. 201) by Capt. Brinkley of the curious system of
creating branches of Japanese business houses is another part of this
article which should not be overlooked.

[Sidenote: Mill Labour]

The proportion of labour cost to the total cost of production is in most
industries so great that you cannot study too carefully every aspect of
the labour question. The chief articles are LABOUR LEGISLATION (Vol. 16,
p. 7), jointly written by the late Dr. Carroll D. Wright, the great
American authority on the subject, and Miss A. M. Anderson, Principal
Lady Inspector of Factories to the British government; TRADES UNION
(Vol. 27, p. 140); STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS (Vol. 25, p. 1024); WAGES (Vol.
28, p. 229), by Prof. J. S. Nicholson; PROFIT SHARING (Vol. 22, p. 423),
by Aneurin Williams and APPRENTICESHIP (Vol. 2, p. 228), by J. S.
Ballin. The article EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY (Vol. 9, p. 356), has already
been mentioned.




                               CHAPTER V
              FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF TEXTILES


[Sidenote: Practical Men Among the Contributors]

The Course of Reading outlined in this chapter will help anyone who has
to do with the making or with the buying and selling of textiles, in
three ways, at least, each of the greatest importance to him—and
possibly in many more. Taking up these three:—In the first place, it
will teach him many facts about manufacturing and merchandizing in
general, and about dry goods in particular, that he could learn nowhere
else, because the scope of the Britannica is broader than that of any
other book—or, for that matter, than the scope of any collegiate course
can well be. In the second place, the number of distinguished men who
have devoted their exclusive attention to the subjects upon which they
write, and have given to the Britannica the results of their research
and of their experience as practical experts—in many cases, indeed, as
successful business men—is far greater than the number of men who form
the faculty of any university in the world. The fifteen hundred
contributors in fact include no less than 704 connected with the staffs
of 151 different universities, technological and commercial institutes
and colleges in twenty countries. The reader thus gets the benefit of
contact with the thought of many, of varied, and always of
authoritative, personalities. In the third place, the _textile trade is
peculiarly an international trade_, the raw materials often traveling
from one end of the world to the other before manufacture, and making as
long a journey in the finished form, before they reach the consumer, and
the international character of the Britannica gives equal weight to the
articles which deal with the textiles and with the markets of all
countries—a statement which it would certainly not be safe to make about
any other book.

[Sidenote: Textile Fibres and their Treatment]

The article FIBERS (Vol. 10, p. 309), by C. F. Cross, whose name has
been much before the public in connection with the recent scientific
investigation of the subject, compares the fibres yielded by all the
vegetable and animal substances used in textiles. The 18 microscopic
photographs on the full page plates (facing pp. 310 and 311) and the
table of vegetable fibres (p. 311) should be carefully studied.
CELLULOSE (Vol. 5, p. 606) deals with the “body” of cotton, flax, hemp
and jute fibres. CARDING (Vol. 5, p. 324) deals with the brushing and
combing of fibres. SPINNING (Vol. 25, p. 685) covers both cotton and
linen, and it is curious to note from this article that in preparing
yarns for the exquisite Dacca muslins one pound of cotton has been spun
into a thread 252 miles long; while the article DACCA says that a piece
15 feet by 3 was once woven that weighed only 900 grains. YARN (Vol. 28,
p. 906) deals with cotton, woollen and silk yarns. WEAVING (Vol. 28, p.
440), by Prof. T. W. Fox, author of _Mechanics of Weaving_, and Alan
Cole, is the first article you should read in a group dealing with
processes applied to more than one material. The first section is on the
various combinations of warp and weft, and contains 23 illustrations
showing the chief weaving “schemes.” A section on weaving machinery
follows, and then one on weaving as an art, illustrated with a number of
reproductions of famous specimens of hand-loom work. The whole article
is full of practical every-day information of the kind the merchant and
manufacturer wants to know. BLEACHING (Vol. 4, p. 49) describes the
chemical processes which have expedited the bleaching of cotton, wool,
linen and silk, which it used to take all summer to complete. DYEING
(Vol. 8, p. 744), by Prof. Hummel, author of _The Dyeing of Textile
Fabrics_, and Prof. Knecht, author of _A Manual of Dyeing_, is another
of the thorough articles which entitle the Britannica to rank as a great
original work on textiles. Every dye is separately treated, and the
latest models of dyeing machinery are carefully described. FINISHING
(Vol. 10, p. 378) deals with the processes used for cotton, woollens,
worsteds, pile fabrics, silks and yarns. TEXTILE-PRINTING (Vol. 26, p.
694) is by Prof. Knecht and Alan Cole, author of _Ornament in European
Silks_, and not only describes all the styles of printing, but gives
sixty recipes for various shades of colour. The full page plates
reproduce fine specimens of early printing. The art of textile-printing
“is very ancient, probably originating in the East. It has been
practised in China and India from time immemorial, and the Chinese, at
least, are known to have made use of engraved wood-blocks many centuries
before any kind of printing was known in Europe.”

[Sidenote: Cotton and Cotton Fabrics]

The elaborate article COTTON (Vol. 7, p. 256) begins by discussing the
peculiar twist of the hairs on the cotton seed which by facilitating
spinning gives cotton its predominant position as a textile material.
The section on cultivation, by W. G. Freeman, deals with the soils,
bedding, planting, hoeing and picking, then with ginning and baling. A
section on diseases and pests of the cotton plant follows, then a
discussion of the improvement of yield by seed selection. The section on
marketing and supply is by Prof. Chapman, and his practical study of
“futures,” “options,” and “straddles” shows how greatly the movement of
prices is affected by speculation and often by artificial manipulation.

COTTON MANUFACTURING (Vol. 7, p. 281) describes the industry in England,
that of the United States, with a special section on the recent
developments in the two Carolinas, Georgia and Alabama, and also the
mills in Germany, France, Russia, Switzerland, Italy and in other
countries, including India, China and Japan. It is interesting to note
(p. 293) that “Americans were making vast strides in industrial
efficiency even before the period when American theories and American
enterprise were monopolizing in a wonderful degree the attention of the
business world” abroad. As far back as 1875 progress in the United
States was so rapid that the production for each operative had increased
during the ten years 1865–75, by 100% in Massachusetts as against only
23% in England. One explanation of American success is that the American
employer “tries to save in labour but not in wages, if a generalization
may be ventured. The good workman gets high pay, but he is kept at tasks
requiring his powers and is not suffered to waste his time doing the
work of unskilled or boy labour.”

COTTON SPINNING MACHINERY (Vol. 7, p. 301) describes all the machines in
great detail and contains a number of full-page plates and other
illustrations. MERCERIZING (Vol. 18, p. 150) is another important
article.

[Sidenote: Wool, Linen and Silk]

WOOL, WORSTED AND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES (Vol. 28, p. 805) is by Prof.
Aldred F. Barker. The development in wool production of various
countries is first described and then the wool fibre is studied and
microscopic photographs reproduced to show the structure of different
varieties. A diagram of a fleece shows the qualities obtained from
various parts of the animal, ranging from the shoulders, where the
finest is found, to the hind quarters. Lamb, hogg and wether wools are
compared and the article discusses shearing, classing, sorting,
scouring, drying, teasing, burring, mule spinning, combing, drawing and
spinning. The centres of the industry are then compared, with details as
to the special products of each. The article contains illustrations of a
number of machines. Articles dealing with certain sources of wool or of
the wool-like hair used in textiles, and with the finished products,
are: ALPACA (Vol. 1, p. 721), the history of its manufacture being “one
of the romances of commerce;” MOHAIR (Vol. 18, p. 647), which deals with
the hair of the Angora goat, familiar from discussions of the Underwood
Tariff bill, and dealing with its weaving and the imitations of the
cloth; LLAMA (Vol. 16, p. 827); and the articles GUANACO (Vol. 12, p.
649) and VICUGNA (Vol. 28, p. 47), on the two wild animals from whose
hair high priced materials, extraordinarily warm and light, are woven.

FLAX (Vol. 10, p. 484) describes the cultivation of the crops which are
harvested by being “pulled,” roots and all, instead of being cut, the
process of separating the capsules from the branches, and the subsequent
stages of preparation. LINEN AND LINEN MANUFACTURES (Vol. 16, p. 724),
by Thomas Woodhouse, takes up the story where the flax fibre is ready
for market and carries it to the point where the yarn is delivered for
weaving. The winding, warping, dressing and beaming, and the looms
employed, are virtually the same processes and machines that are used
for cotton. The article states that the finest linen threads used for
lace are produced by Belgian hand spinners who can only get the desired
results by working in damp cellars, the spinner being guided by touch
alone, as the filament is too fine for him to see. This thread is said
to have been sold for as much as $72 an ounce.

JUTE (Vol. 15, p. 603) deals with the vegetable fibre which ranks, in
its industrial importance, next after cotton and flax and with the
processes employed in its manufacture.

SILK (Vol. 25, p. 96) contains illustrations of cocoons and worms,
microscopic photographs of fibre, and pictures of the moths which
produce wild silk. The section on the fibre and its production and
preparation is by Frank Warner, president of the Silk Association of
Great Britain and Ireland; and that on the silk trade by Arthur Mellor,
a well known manufacturer of Macclesfield, the great British center. The
degree of fineness to which silk thread can be spun is stated (Vol. 28,
p. 906) to be such that 450,000 yards of thread have been produced from
one pound of silk, and this is slightly in excess of the fineness of the
Dacca cotton thread already mentioned as producing 252 miles for a
pound. But at Cambrai the lace maker’s linen thread already described
has been made as fine as 272 miles to the pound, and the drawing of
platinum wire to the fifty-thousandth part of an inch in thickness (Vol.
28, p. 738) seems hardly more wonderful than this. Spider silk is as
valuable as the best qualities of the silkworm product, but spiders are
such fierce cannibals that it is necessary to keep each one in a
separate cage, and the cost of doing this has prevented the fibre from
being generally used (Vol. 25, p. 664). Artificial or “viscose” silk is
described in the article CELLULOSE (Vol. 5, p. 609), and is a textile of
which the importance is rapidly increasing.

Felting is an even older textile process than weaving, just as weaving,
which no doubt originated in basket making (Vol. 3, p. 481) is older
than spinning. The article FELT (Vol. 10, p. 245) deals with asphalted
felts used for roofing as well as with the hat felts; and the article
HAT (Vol. 13, p. 60) gives further details as to both woollen and fur
felts and describes the machinery for hatmaking, which originated in the
United States.

Save that gold, silver and other metals are occasionally used in cloth
or gauze, ASBESTOS (Vol. 2, p. 714) is the only mineral employed in
textiles, and its value for jacketing steam pipes and boilers and for
insulating fabrics and fireproofing gives it great importance. RAMIE
(Vol. 22, p. 875) is not so largely used in textiles, but experiments in
the production of better fibre are being made.

SHODDY (Vol. 24, p. 992) is an article which shows how unfair it is to
treat the re-manufacture of “devilled” fabric as an illegitimate if not
absolutely fraudulent branch of the textile industry, for really
serviceable cloths are woven from it, and masses of poor people who
would otherwise be in rags are thus comfortably clad. “Mungo,” another
re-manufactured cloth, is described (Vol. 28, p. 906) in the article
YARN. Pine-apple fibre is described (Vol. 10, p. 311) as of exceptional
fineness and is used in yarn cloths of the best quality. The article
PINE-APPLE (Vol. 21, p. 625) describes its culture. SISAL HEMP (Vol. 25,
p. 158) is used in bagging as well as cordage, and the same is true of
PHORMIUM (Vol. 21, p. 471), sometimes called New Zealand flax. Paper
pulp yields a yarn which is used in some cheap fabrics as described
(Vol. 5, p. 609) in the article CELLULOSE already mentioned.

[Sidenote: Textile Merchandise]

The many varieties of woven cloths are described in the articles already
mentioned in the manufacture of cotton, linen, wool, and silk, and in
articles on special fabrics. HOSIERY (Vol. 13, p. 788) covers the
textiles that are produced by knitting or looping, and gives an account,
with illustrations, of the machinery employed. NET (Vol. 19, p. 412)
covers the textiles of which the mesh is knotted.

LACE (Vol. 16, p. 37), by Alan Cole, contains some of the most beautiful
full-page plates and other illustrations to be found in the Britannica,
and is a very full treatise on the history and the present state of the
lacemaking art.

FLANNEL (Vol. 10, p. 480) describes the true flannels made from wool,
and FLANNELETTE (Vol. 10, p. 481) the cotton imitations and the new
fire-resisting fabrics of this class. DRILL (Vol. 8, p. 580) covers both
the cotton and linen tissues sold under this name. CREPE (Vol. 7, p.
379) mentions the curious fact that the Chinese and Japanese makers of
soft crepe guard their secret processes, which are still unknown to
western manufacturers, so carefully that the different stages of their
production are carried on in towns far distant from one another.

CARPET (Vol. 5, p. 392) contains full-page plates of rare specimens and
describes pile carpets, flat-surfaced carpets and the printed
carpetings.

TAPESTRY (Vol. 26, p. 403) deals with another luxurious branch of the
textile industry, and is illustrated with photographs of the finest
specimens and with pictures showing the methods of weaving. BROCADE
(Vol. 4, p. 620) describes and illustrates this stately class of
fabrics. EMBROIDERY (Vol. 9, p. 309) with six full-page plates and SHAWL
(Vol. 24, p. 814) deal with other art textiles.

TARTAN (Vol. 26, p. 431) describes the colours and patterns of all
Scottish clan tartans. DAMASK (Vol. 7, p. 785) discusses this fine class
of fabrics, the weaving of which is the subject of a special section
(Vol. 28, p. 454) of the article WEAVING. The enormous consumption of
coarse bags for the packing of raw cotton and of sugar gives importance
to the articles BAGGING (Vol. 3, p. 200) and SACKING AND SACK
MANUFACTURE (Vol. 23, p. 975). CANVAS (Vol. 5, p. 223) discusses sail
cloth and artists’ canvas, and TARPAULIN (Vol. 26, p. 430) deals with
waterproof covers.

[Sidenote: The Seventy Articles on Special Fabrics]

It is unnecessary to describe one by one the seventy articles on other
fabrics and tissues, ranging through the alphabet from Alpaca to
Velveteen; but they are all included in the list at the end of this
chapter, and all are fully described in the Britannica. COSTUME (Vol. 7,
p. 224) is a long and important article, with a full page plate and many
other illustrations. The section on dress in general is by T. A. Joyce,
of the British Museum staff, that on ancient costumes by H. S. Jones,
director of the British School at Rome, and that on modern costume by
Oswald Barron, editor of _The Ancestor_. The account of underclothing is
of especial interest, as most books on costume altogether neglect this
branch of the subject. Another section of this article is on national
and official costumes by W. Alison Phillips, principal assistant editor
of the Britannica. The study of ceremonial robes is carried into further
detail by the article ROBE (Vol. 23, p. 408), with its five richly
colored plates, in one of which the judicial robes of the U. S. Supreme
Court Justices are shown. Liturgical vestments are dealt with in
VESTMENTS (Vol. 28, p. 27) and in a series of articles such as DALMATIC
(Vol. 7, p. 776) and ALB (Vol. 1, p. 497).

[Sidenote: Inventors of Textile Machinery and Great Textile Merchants]

Among the biographies which are of interest in connection with textiles
are those of ARKWRIGHT, RICHARD (Vol. 2, p. 556), the barber who
invented the spinning frame; CARTWRIGHT, EDMUND, (Vol. 5, p. 425),
inventor of the power loom; CROMPTON, SAMUEL (Vol. 7, p. 486), inventor
of the spinning mule; SALT, TITUS (Vol. 23, p. 87), who created the
alpaca industry; STRUTT, JEDEDIAH (Vol. 25, p. 1044), who did much to
perfect the manufacture of cotton; and of WHITNEY, ELI (Vol. 28, p.
611), who went from Yale to Savannah to secure a position as school
teacher and then, being disappointed, turned his attention to a device
for separating the cotton fibre from the seeds and refuse, and invented
the gin which has “profoundly influenced American industrial economic
and social history.” Another name of a great American inventor who
individually rendered great services to the textile industry is that of
HOWE, ELIAS (Vol. 13, p. 835), who invented the sewing machine. You will
also be interested in the lives of successful merchants such as
CANYNGES, WILLIAM (Vol. 5, p. 223), the great 15th Century cloth
manufacturer who became a clergyman after making a large fortune;
MACKINTOSH, CHARLES (Vol. 17, p. 250), who introduced lightweight
waterproof garments; WANAMAKER, JOHN (Vol. 28, p. 302), who began life
as an errand boy in a book store; FIELD, MARSHALL (Vol. 10, p. 322), who
when Chicago was a comparatively unimportant city founded there what has
become the finest dry goods store in the world; STEWART, A. T. (Vol. 25,
p. 912), who after studying for the ministry in Dublin, immigrated to
New York and gradually built up the largest retail store in the city;
PEASE, EDWARD (Vol. 21, p. 31), founder of a famous Quaker family of
textile manufacturers in England; and CLAFLIN, H. B. (Vol. 6, p. 418),
who came from Worcester, Mass., to New York where he for years
controlled “the greatest mercantile business in the world.” If you turn
to the Article WORCESTER (Vol. 28, p. 823) you will note the
associations of the locality with Elias Howe, Eli Whitney, Samuel
Crompton, already mentioned, L. J. Knowles, another inventor who helped
to perfect the power loom, and Erastus Bigelow, who invented the
carpet-weaving machine (Vol. 6, p. 530) and was one of the incorporators
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Other lives of successful
textile makers and dealers are those of RYLANDS, JOHN (Vol. 23, p. 950),
founder of the largest cotton mills in Lancashire; DEXTER, TIMOTHY (Vol.
8, p. 141), the eccentric New England merchant of the 18th Century who
beat his wife for not weeping heartily enough at the rehearsal of his
funeral; HORROCKS, JOHN (Vol. 13, p. 712), the great English cotton
manufacturer who was far ahead of his time and died of brain fever
produced by overwork in 1804; WORTH, C. F. (Vol. 28, p. 834), the famous
Paris dressmaker who began life as a London draper’s apprentice;
WHITELY, WILLIAM (Vol. 28, p. 605), “the Universal Provider,” of London;
and TATA, J. N. (Vol. 26, p. 448), the great Parsee textile
manufacturer.


 A LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL ARTICLES IN THE BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL INTEREST
            TO MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF TEXTILE GOODS

 Alb
 Alpaca
 Apprenticeship
 Arkwright, Richard
 Artel
 Asbestos
 Bagging
 Baize
 Bleaching
 Bombazine or Bombasine
 Book-keeping
 Bounty
 Brocade
 Buckram
 Bunting
 Calender
 Calico
 Cambric
 Camel
 Canvas
 Canynges, William
 Carding
 Carpet
 Cartwright, Edmund
 Cellulose
 Chasuble
 Cheese Cloth
 Chenille
 Chintz
 Claflin, H. B.
 Cloth
 Clouting
 Codilla
 Coir
 Commerce
 Corduroy
 Costume
 Cotton
 Cotton Manufacture
 Cotton Spinning Machinery
 Crash
 Cravat
 Crepe
 Cretonne
 Crompton, Samuel
 Dalmatic
 Damask
 Denim
 Dexter, Timothy
 Demurrage
 Diaper
 Die
 Dimity
 Dowlas
 Drill
 Duck
 Dyeing
 Embroidery
 Felt
 Fibres
 Field, Marshall
 Finishing
 Flannel
 Flannelette
 Flax
 Flock
 Floorcloth
 Frock
 Fustian
 Gante
 Gauze
 Gimp
 Gingham
 Girdle
 Glass Cloth
 Guanaco
 Gunny
 Haberdasher
 Hat
 Hessian
 Holland
 Honeycomb
 Horrocks, John
 Hosiery
 Hose-pipe
 Howe, Elias,
 Huckaback
 Jute
 Knitting
 Lace
 Lawn
 Linen
 Llama
 Longcloth
 Manila Hemp
 Macintosh, Charles
 Maniple
 Mantle
 Matting
 Mercantile System
 Mercerizing
 Merchant
 Mohair
 Moleskin
 Mull
 Muslin
 Nankeen
 Net
 Osnaburg
 Padding
 Pease, Edward
 Petticoat
 Phormium
 Pine-apple
 Plaid
 Plush
 Poplin or Tabinet
 Print
 Protection
 Ramie
 Rep
 Ribbons
 Ring
 Robes
 Rylands, John
 Sacking
 Salt, Titus
 Salvage
 Scarf
 Scrim
 Shawl
 Sheet
 Shoddy
 Silk
 Sisal Hemp
 Sleeve
 Spinning
 Stewart, A. T.
 Stocking
 Stole
 Strutt, Jedediah
 Tare and Tret
 Tariff
 Tarpaulin
 Tartan
 Tata, J. N.
 Tapestry
 Technical Education
 Textile-printing
 Ticking
 Tow
 Towel
 Trousers
 Tulle
 Twill
 Veil
 Velvet
 Velveteen
 Vestments
 Vicugna
 Wanamaker, John
 Weaving
 Whiteley, William
 Whitney, Eli
 Wool, Worsted and Woollen Manufactures
 Worth, C. F.
 Yarn




                               CHAPTER VI
              FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF MACHINERY


[Sidenote: A Change in Public Opinion]

An appreciation of the science of mechanical engineering is so
indispensable to the manufacture and sale of machinery that the reader
of this Guide might simply have been referred to the chapter _For
Engineers_ as covering the industry, if it were not that the Britannica
contains (as the list at the end of this chapter shows) a great number
of articles dealing with individual machines. The amount of space which
the new Britannica devotes to mechanical subjects, and the great number
of expert contributors whose collaboration was enlisted in this
connection, are significant from more than one point of view. All other
general encyclopaedias, including earlier editions of the Britannica
itself, seem to have been influenced by the old-fashioned fetish of
“pure” scholarship and “pure” science, treating theory as a subject of
study much more dignified than the application of knowledge to the
practical affairs of life. Until recent days the great universities of
such important manufacturing countries as England, Germany and France
were almost exclusively devoted to the teaching of philosophy, history,
Greek and Latin, mathematics and pure or natural science. The older
universities of the United States, too, were for a long time reluctant
to recognize the growing importance of technical education, and the
necessity, apart from technical education, of giving the general student
some knowledge of mechanics. And it is a significant fact that the
Britannica, the first encyclopaedia that has ever been published by a
university, should be, although it comes from one of the oldest of all
universities, the first to give full recognition to the importance of
this department of knowledge.

Men in the machinery trade will welcome this change of attitude in the
Britannica, not because they crave a public acknowledgment of the great
share of the world’s work that they are doing, but because public
ignorance of mechanical subjects results in the abuse of machines and in
unreasonable complaints against manufacturers when improperly used
machinery fails to do its work. A curious illustration of the general
disregard of the subject is supplied by the fact—as true of the United
States as of England, Germany or France—that representative government
is, in practice, chiefly government by lawyers, and that in this age of
machinery it is the exception to find in the cabinet which directs the
affairs of any country, a single member who has any knowledge of
mechanics. The same ignorance is conspicuous in newspaper offices. Even
the most dignified dailies seem unable to deal with any news that has to
do with machinery without making ridiculous blunders.

[Sidenote: Influence of Automobiles]

Fortunately, the automobile is beginning to stimulate interest in
practical mechanics, for no one can attempt to drive his own car, or
even to obtain proper service from his chauffeur and from garage
workmen, without realizing that he failed, at school, to learn some of
the most useful of lessons. Before long the authorities responsible for
our public schools may realize that it is absolute barbarism to neglect
mechanical teaching as they do; and the new Britannica is already doing
good service in stimulating public interest in the subject.

An examination of the articles mentioned in detail in the following
summary, and a glance at the long list of articles at the end of the
chapter, will show the comprehensiveness with which the Britannica
treats all types of machinery. The materials employed are, logically,
the first subjects upon which information will be desired.

IRON AND STEEL (Vol. 14, p. 801), by Professor H. M. Howe of Columbia
University, is a mine of information about the properties and uses of
the different varieties of the indispensable metal of which 50,000,000
tons per annum are employed. In the manufacture of electrical apparatus
COPPER (Vol. 7, p. 102) is largely employed, and for this reason alone
the article has great value for the manufacturer. Almost as important is
ALLOYS (Vol. 1, p. 704). Its chief author, Sir William Chandler
Roberts-Austen, is the greatest living authority on alloys, and it is
full of interesting facts about new admixtures.

The processes of ANNEALING, HARDENING AND TEMPERING are described in J.
G. Horner’s article under that title (Vol. 2, p. 70). This authority
explains clearly the difference between hardening and tempering and
gives valuable advice as to the most efficient methods of hardening.
FOUNDING (Vol. 10, p. 743), also by J. G. Horner, is fully illustrated,
and the question of the highest economies of machine moulding are among
the practical matters considered. FORGING (Vol. 10, p. 663), with 19
illustrations, discusses fullering, swaging, upsetting, bending,
welding, pinching, cutting-off, and die-forging. There is also a
separate article, WELDING (Vol. 28), in which the section on _Electric
Welding_ is written by Elihu Thomson, who invented the process. A table
of energy used in electric welding is added. See also BRAZING AND
SOLDERING (Vol. 4, p. 463).

[Sidenote: Manufacturing Methods]

The designer of machinery will find much practical information in
DRAWING, _Drawing Office Work_ (Vol. 8, p. 556), and SUN-COPYING (Vol.
26, p. 93). It is a remarkable fact that prints identical in scale with
the originals are now made up to a length of 22 feet.

BEARINGS (Vol. 3, p. 578), illustrated, is written by Professor Dalby of
the South Kensington Central Technical College. The article TOOL (Vol.
27, p. 14), by J. G. Horner, is 33 pages in length and has 79
illustrations. The whole subject is completely covered. In the section
on _Machine Tools_ are discussed turning lathes, reciprocating machines,
machines with drill and bore holes, milling machines, machines for
cutting the teeth of gear wheels, grinding machinery, sawing machines,
shearing and punching machines, hammers and presses, portable tools,
appliances, wood-working machines, and measurement. In regard to the
last subject great advances have lately been made. A thousandth of an
inch is now considered a coarse dimension in the machine shop, where
gauges within one five-thousandth of an inch are often used. This
article is an invaluable manual for the machine-shop, and supplies many
hints which should be given to workmen, for, to use the author’s words,
“a clumsy workman is as much out of place in a modern machine-shop as he
would be in a watch-factory.” Another article useful to the mechanic is
SCREW (Vol. 24, p. 477), with 10 illustrations, by J. G. Horner, with a
section on the _Errors of Screws_, by the late Henry A. Rowland, the
American physicist, whose skill, shown in the construction of dividing
engines of extraordinary precision and delicacy, made him famous the
world over. See also GRADUATION (Vol. 12, p. 312).

[Sidenote: Engines and Motors]

The articles on the prime-movers are an important and noteworthy part of
the new Britannica. Professor Ewing, of Cambridge University,
contributes AIR ENGINE (Vol. 1, p. 443) and STEAM ENGINE (Vol. 25, p.
818), both fully illustrated. The latter has a most interesting
preliminary historical account of engines from the aeolipile of Hero of
Alexandria (about 130 B.C.) to the steam-turbine, the most modern type
of all. The newest forms of internal combustion motors, OIL ENGINE (Vol.
20, p. 35) and GAS ENGINE (Vol. 11, p. 495), are described by Dugald
Clerk, inventor of the Clerk cycle gas engine, and the articles are
fully illustrated. Under HYDRAULICS (Vol. 14, p. 91) will be found
complete information as to the construction of water-pressure engines,
water-wheels, turbines, and also pumps. The article is written by
Professor W. C. Unwin, and has been universally declared to be the best
treatise on the subject that has yet appeared. There is a separate
illustrated article WATER-MOTORS (Vol. 28, p. 382), by Professor Beare
of Edinburgh University. See also WINDMILL (Vol. 28, p. 710).

Designers and constructors of electrical machinery will be greatly
interested in C. C. Hawkins’ illustrated article DYNAMO (Vol. 8, p.
764), which explains fully how the dynamo is constructed and gives its
history from Faraday’s discovery of the principle in 1831. Dr. Louis
Bell, of the General Electric Co., writes on MOTORS, ELECTRIC (Vol. 18,
p. 910).

[Sidenote: Machinery for Special Purposes]

In hundreds of articles on manufacturing and manufactured products there
are excellent descriptions of the machinery employed. COTTON-SPINNING
MACHINERY (Vol. 7, p. 301), by Professor Fox, of Manchester University,
gives details, with illustrations, of the modern systems of spinning,
all founded on the inventions of Paul, Arkwright, Hargreaves and
Crompton, while an historical account of primitive machines as well as
much practical information, will be found under SPINNING (Vol. 25, p.
685). WEAVING has a section _Weaving Machinery_ (Vol. 28, p. 443). An
account of the special machinery and appliances used in the manufacture
of woollens is included in Professor Barker’s illustrated article WOOL,
WORSTED AND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES (Vol. 28, p. 805). In HOSIERY (Vol. 13,
p. 788) we learn about framework knitting and warp-knitting machines. It
is recorded that up to the middle of the 19th century only a flat web
could be knitted, and that a circular knitting machine of American
origin is the type of machine on which is produced the seamless hosiery
of to-day. This was introduced by J. W. Lamb in 1863. ROPE AND ROPE
MAKING (Vol. 23, p. 713), by Thomas Woodhouse, of the Dundee Technical
College, is richly illustrated with pictures of the most modern type of
machinery for the manufacture of fibre and wire ropes. The various
machines and apparatus for sugar making are carefully described in
SUGAR, _Sugar Manufacture_ (Vol. 26, p. 35). For milling machinery see
FLOUR AND FLOUR MANUFACTURE (Vol. 10, p. 548), by George F. Zimmer,
author of _Mechanical Handling of Material_. The latest designs in
agricultural machines, with illustrations, as well as a history of their
development, will be found under PLOUGH AND PLOUGHING (Vol. 21, p. 850),
SOWING (Vol. 25, p. 523), HARROW (Vol. 13, p. 27), REAPING (Vol. 22, p.
944), THRASHING (Vol. 26, p. 887), etc. It is a matter of interest that
the first successful reaping-machine was invented by a Scotch clergyman
in 1826. For machinery used in the modern dairy see DAIRY AND DAIRY
PRODUCTS (Vol. 7, p. 750). The germ of the sewing machine dates back to
1755, and the whole story of its development is told in SEWING MACHINES
(Vol. 24, p. 744). [Sidenote: A Vast Encyclopaedia of Machinery] The
descriptions of machinery of various kinds are continued under such
headings as BREWING, _Brewing Operations_ (Vol. 4, p. 506), illustrated;
BELLOWS AND BLOWING MACHINES (Vol. 3, p. 705), illustrated; PIN (Vol.
21, p. 615); NEEDLE (Vol. 19, p. 338); TYPOGRAPHY, _Modern Practical
Typography_ (Vol. 27, p. 542), illustrated; PRINTING (Vol. 22, p. 350),
illustrated; BOOKBINDING, _Modern Methods_ (Vol. 4, p. 218),
illustrated; TEXTILE PRINTING (Vol. 26, p. 694); ALKALI MANUFACTURE
(Vol. 1, p. 674), illustrated; REFRIGERATING AND ICE MAKING (Vol. 23, p.
30); SILK, _Silk Manufacture_ (Vol. 25, p. 102); LACE, _Machine-made
Lace_ (Vol. 16, p. 44), illustrated; CARPET, _Modern Machinery_ (Vol. 5,
p. 396); LEATHER (Vol. 16, p. 330), illustrated; BICYCLE (Vol. 3, p.
913), illustrated; TYPEWRITER (Vol. 27, p. 501), illustrated; DREDGE AND
DREDGING (Vol. 8, p. 562), illustrated; and PAPER, _Paper Manufacture_
(Vol. 20, p. 727), illustrated.

Biographies of many inventors, designers and builders of machines are
included in the list of articles at the end of the chapter _For
Engineers_ in this Guide, and are therefore omitted in the following
alphabetical summary.


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL MACHINES AND APPLIANCES DESCRIBED IN
     THE BRITANNICA AND GENERAL SUBJECTS AND ARTICLES ON MACHINERY

 Accumulator
 Acetylene Generator
 Aerating Apparatus
 Aeroplane
 Air Brake
 Alternators
 Alloys
 Ammunition Hoist
 Anemometer
 Annealing, Hardening and Tempering
 Archimedes, Screw of Babbitt’s Metal
 Back-starching Mangle
 Bale-breakers
 Band-knife Cutting Machine
 Barbed Wire Machinery
 Barker’s Mill
 Barrel Organ
 Bearings
 Beating Machine
 Beetling Machine
 Bellows and Blowing Machines
 Bessemer Convertor
 Bevel
 Bicycle
 Black-ash Revolving Furnace
 Blast Furnace
 Blocking Machine
 Boiler
 Bolt-screwing Machines
 Book-sewing Machine
 Boring Tools
 Brake, Hydraulic
 Brass
 Brazing and Soldering
 Breaker Card
 Brewing Machinery
 Bronze
 Bundling Press
 Burner
 Butter Worker
 Butyrometer
 Calculating Machines
 Calender Machine
 Calipers
 Calorimeter
 Carburetter
 Carding Engine
 Carpet-making Machinery
 Case-making Machine
 Casing-in Machine
 Centrifugal Machines
 Chisel
 Chronograph
 Chucks
 Churn, Mechanical
 Clepsydra, or Waterclock
 Clock
 Coal-cutting Machines
 Coal-wedging Machines
 Coal-weighing Machine
 Coining Press
 Comber
 Compressed-air Machines
 Continuous Press
 Conveyors
 Copper
 Copying Machines
 Core-making
 Cotton-gin
 Cotton-spinning Machinery
 Cranes
 Crushing Machine
 Cultivator
 Current Meter
 Curvometer
 Cutting Machines
 Cutting Tools
 Damping Machines
 Dash Wheel
 Depth Recorder
 Die
 Differential Machines
 Dividing Engines
 Diving Bell
 Doublers
 Dough Kneaders
 Dough Dividers and Moulders
 Dough Mixers
 Drawing-box
 Drawing-frame
 Drawing-office
 Dredgers
 Dressing Machine
 Drill
 Drop Hammer
 Drying Machine, Horizontal
 Dye-jigger
 Dynamo
 Dynamometer
 Eccentric
 Elevators, Lifts and Hoists
 Error of Screws
 Fans, Rotary
 Fire-engines
 Flour-sifters
 Flying Machines
 Fly-shuttle
 Forging
 Forging Press, Hydraulic
 Founding
 Friction
 Furnace
 Gas Engine
 Gas Plants
 Gas Producers
 Gill Frame
 Glass-blowing Machine
 Glass Press
 Graduation
 Gravity Stamp
 Grinding Machinery
 Gyroscope and Gyrostat
 Hackling and Spreading Machine
 Half-stuff Machine
 Hammer
 Hand Drill, Electric Harrow
 Hat-making Machines
 Hay Elevator
 Hide Mill, or Double-Acting Stock
 Hoe, Horse
 Holden Burner
 Hydraulic Machines
 Hydraulics
 Hydro-extractors
 Ice-making Machines
 Indicator
 Injector
 Integrators
 Iron and Steel
 Ironing Machines
 Jigger, Hydraulic
 Jigs
 Jute-Crusher
 Jute-Opener
 Jute-softening Machine
 Kier
 Knitting Machines
 Labour Legislation
 Lace Machines
 Lappet Looms
 Lathe, Automatic
 Laundry Machines
 Lever
 Lifts, Hydraulic
 Linotype Machine
 Liquid-air Machine
 Lithographing Machines
 Loaders
 Lock
 Locomotives
 Loom
 Lubricants
 Luggage-weighing machine, Automatic
 Machine
 Machine Gun
 Machine Moulding
 Mandrel Lathe
 Mangling Machines
 Manometer
 Measuring Machine
 Mercerizing Machines
 Metal-turning Tools
 Meter, Electric
 Micrometer
 Microtome
 Milling Cutters
 Milling Machines
 Milling Stock
 Monotype Machine
 Mortising Machine
 Motors, Electric
 Motor Vehicles
 Mowers
 Mule, Crompton’s
 Nail Machines
 Needle Machines
 Netting Machine
 Oil Engine
 Oil Muffle Furnace
 Opening Machine
 Ore-Breaker
 Pantograph
 Paper-making Machines
 Patent logs
 Patents
 Perpetual Motion
 Phonograph
 Phosphor Bronze
 Pin Machine
 Pig-casting Machine
 Planimeters
 Planing Tools
 Plug and Ring Gauge
 Pneumatic Hammer
 Potter’s Wheel
 Power-looms
 Power Transmission
 Price-computing Weighing Machine
 Printing Presses
 Pulley
 Pumps
 Purifiers
 Rag Boiler, Revolving
 Rag-breaking Engine
 Rake, Horse
 Reaping Machines
 Reciprocating Machines
 Rectifiers
 Reel Paper-Cutter
 Reels
 Refrigerating Machines
 Remontoire
 Reverbatory Furnace
 Rifling Machine
 Ring-frame
 Rock Drill
 Rod Gauge
 Roller Milling Machine
 Roller Washing Machine
 Rolling, Mill
 Rope-making Machines
 Rotary Washing Machines
 Rounding and Backing Machines
 Rusden and Eeles Burner
 Salt-cake Furnace, Mechanical
 Sawing Machines
 Scalpers
 Screw cutting
 Screw-Gill Drawing Frames
 Screw-thread gauge
 Screw
 Screwing Machine
 Scutcher
 Separators
 Sewing Machines
 Shaping Machines
 Shearing and Punching Machines
 Shuttles
 Signal Lever
 Silk-reeling Machine
 Slide-rule
 Slime-tables
 Slotter Tools
 Sowing Machines
 Spinning-jinny
 Splitting Machine
 Steam Engine
 Steam Hammers
 Steam Plough
 Steam Turbines
 Stentering Frame
 Still
 Stocking Frame
 Strength of Materials
 Sugar-making Machinery
 Sugar Weighing Machine, Automatic
 Sulphuric-Acid Plant
 Sun Copying
 Swathe Turners
 Sweep Rake
 Table, Mathematical
 Tea-weighing Machine
 Teasel
 Technical Education
 Testing Machines
 Thermodynamics
 Thrashing Machines
 Throstle
 Tool
 Tractors, Steam and Oil
 Trepans
 Turbine
 Turning Lathes
 Turret Lathe
 Type-setting Machines
 Typewriter
 Units, Physical
 Vacuum brake
 Valve
 Vanners
 Vernier
 Voting Machines
 Vulcanizer
 Washing Machines
 Wash Mill
 Watch
 Water Motors
 Water-pressure Engines
 Water Wheels
 Weaving Machinery
 Weighing Machines
 Welder, Automatic
 Welding
 Welding, Electric
 Winding Machines
 Windmill
 Wire-winding Machine
 Wiring Machine
 Wood-working Machines
 Woolen Mule




                              CHAPTER VII
  FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF METALS, HARDWARE, GLASS AND CHINA


Elisée Reclus, the great French student of the origins of civilization,
says, in the Britannica article FIRE (Vol. 10, p. 399), that “human
culture may be said to have begun with fire, of which the uses increased
in the same ratio as culture itself.” The industries grouped in the
present chapter all depend upon the curiously diverse effects of heat;
the softening and tempering of metals, the hardening of clay and the
changes by which sand becomes glass. It is for the reader himself to
decide whether he wishes to begin his course of reading by a study of
the article HEAT (Vol. 13, p. 135), and the allied articles to which it
refers, and thus to understand how temperature plays its dominant part
in the most useful of manufacturing processes.

[Sidenote: Knowledge in “Layers”]

It is, indeed, one of the most attractive features of the Britannica
that it presents knowledge in _layers_. In text-books, the theoretical
and practical aspects of an industry are so interwoven that you cannot
separate them. But in the Britannica, if you desire only to examine the
finished products of any branch of industry, as you might see them and
hear them described at an exhibition or in a manufacturer’s sample room,
you can turn to articles and sections of articles in which critical
comment and elaborate illustrations put clearly before you the varieties
of, for example, plated ware, china or glass. Proceeding to the next
“layer,” you find technical information about the manufacture of these
and all other goods; you have been permitted to pass from the sample
room into the factory, which is not usually so easy of access. And in
the scientific articles you arrive at the very substratum and foundation
of knowledge; you have what the experts in the factory could not give
you if they would: the clear teaching that only the great masters of
science can supply.

The manufacturer, of course, absolutely _needs_ to know all that can be
learned about the origin of his materials and the principles upon which
his processes are based. But the dealer, in his turn, will be a shrewder
buyer, a more convincing salesman and a better manager of the salesmen
under him, if he knows the whole history of his wares, of the
ingredients that enter into their composition and of their manufacture.
Factory experience is hardly more universal among wholesale men, most of
whom begin as clerks, than among retailers, and it is impossible for a
business man who has got his foot fairly on the ladder to drop his work
and go through an apprenticeship or take a thorough course at a
technical college. If, however, he will for a few months devote his
spare time to the studies he can pursue, unaided, in the Britannica, the
insight he obtains will give a new value to all the knowledge he picks
up in the course of his business.

[Sidenote: Physics and Chemistry]

[Sidenote: Some of the Authorities]

The departments of physics and physical chemistry are of course those in
which the Britannica’s scientific contents especially interest those to
whom this chapter is addressed, and the authority of the Britannica in
those departments of knowledge is shown by a very striking fact. You may
remember that Alfred Nobel, the great Swedish chemist, who made a
fortune by the invention and manufacture of dynamite, devoted $9,000,000
to the establishment of the annual Nobel prizes, to be awarded,
irrespective of nationality, for eminence in scientific research and in
the cause of peace. In physics and chemistry, _Britannica contributors
have won, in eleven years, seven of these prizes_, these winners being:
in 1901, Prof. J. H. van’t Hoff, of the University of Berlin; in 1902,
Prof. Lorentz, of the University of Leiden; in 1904, Lord Rayleigh,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge; in 1906, Sir J. J. Thomson,
of the University of Cambridge; in 1909, Prof. Ostwald, of the
University of Leipzig; in 1911, Prof. Van der Waals, of the University
of Amsterdam. In other words, you find that the scientific committee who
award the Nobel prizes select for these unique distinctions the same men
whom the editor of the Britannica selected as contributors. Now apply
another test, in connection with the subject matter of this chapter.
What is, by general consent, the most exquisitely finished product of
any of the industries under discussion in the present section? To this
question there can be but one answer: Optical glass. Where is the best
glass made? At the Zeiss Works in Jena, Germany. Very well, Dr. Otto
Henker and Dr. Eppenstein, both of the scientific staff of the Zeiss
Works, wrote the optical articles in the Britannica which deal with the
lens and with aberration in lenses. You should therefore remember, in
reading the Britannica, that whether you are only going as far as the
uppermost layer of knowledge, or reaching down to the very foundations
of science, the men whose articles you are reading command the respect
that you can pay to them by giving your very closest attention. Do not
imagine that because the book contains forty-four million words, it is
made to be skimmed; every article in it is condensed; and you cannot
derive the fullest benefit from your reading unless you feel, as you
would feel if you were fortunate enough to be brought into personal
contact with any of these great men, that you have a privilege of which
you must make the most.

[Sidenote: Metals]

Other chapters of this Guide also deal in detail with the scientific
side of the industries mentioned here; and in examining the groups of
industrial articles, those dealing with metals claim first
consideration. The article METAL (Vol. 18, p. 198) is devoted to
classification only, and would not occupy more than ten pages of this
Guide. It contains information as to the physical properties of the
metals, including a table in which the specific gravity of each of 42
metals is stated, a table of comparative ductility under the hammer, for
rolling and for wire drawing, a table of elasticities, and other tables
showing the ratio of expansion under heat, the melting and boiling
points, and the relative thermic and electric conductivity. A section is
devoted to the action of chemical agents upon the simple metals.

METALLURGY (Vol. 18, p. 203), and ELECTROMETALLURGY (Vol. 9, p. 232), by
W. G. McMillan, lecturer on metallurgy at Mason College, Birmingham,
deal with all the methods of smelting ores. Your next reading should be
the great article IRON AND STEEL (Vol. 14, p. 801), by Prof. H. M. Howe,
of Columbia University, containing as much matter as would fill 110
pages of this Guide. At the beginning of this article Prof. Howe
disposes of the much discussed question as to the true distinction
between iron and steel, as to which there has been great confusion.
Before 1860, the word “steel” was never applied to a metal that could
not be hardened by tempering. But when the invention of the Bessemer and
open-hearth processes introduced a new class of iron, “which lacked the
essential property of steel, the hardening power, yet differed from the
existing forms of wrought iron in freedom from slag,” the men interested
in the new product did not like to call it “wrought iron,” which is what
it really is, because that name would confuse it with a lower-priced
grade of metal. They ought to have coined a new word for it, but they
appropriated the name of steel—so that to-day “steel” means either true
steel or the low-carbon, slagless variety of malleable iron. The article
is divided into 133 sections, so that to analyze its contents would
swamp this chapter of the Guide, but the reader will find in it the
clearest and most authoritative account of the industry which has yet
been published.

Among articles on the commercial metals are COPPER (Vol. 7, p. 102),
LEAD (Vol. 16, p. 314), TIN (Vol. 26, p. 995), ZINC (Vol. 28, p. 981),
ALUMINIUM (Vol. 1, p. 767), NICKEL (Vol. 19, p. 658), ANTIMONY (Vol. 2,
p. 127), and, on the precious metals, GOLD (Vol. 12, p. 192), SILVER
(Vol. 25, p. 112), and PLATINUM (Vol. 21, p. 805).

The article ALLOYS, of which Sir W. C. Roberts-Austen, long chemist of
the London Mint, is the chief contributor, with its photomicrographic
illustrations, contains not only an account of the alloys already
generally used in the metal industries, but also practical information
as to the experiments which have been made recently with some of the
newly discovered rare earths. In the article METALLOGRAPHY (Vol. 18, p.
202), by the same specialist, the microscopic examination and
photography of metals and alloys is described.

Among articles on the metallic compounds are BRASS (Vol. 4, p. 433), in
which “Dutch metal,” “Mannheim gold,” “similor” and “pinchbeck” are
described; BRONZE (Vol. 4, p. 639), which deals with steel bronze,
phosphor bronze, and other combinations; FUSIBLE METAL (Vol. 11, p. 369)
is an important compound. PEWTER (Vol. 21, p. 338), by Malcolm Bell,
author of _Pewter Plate_, etc., is of historical interest, and of value
to the dealer or collector, while he who wishes to distinguish between
the older and the more modern electroplated ware is referred to the
article SHEFFIELD PLATE (Vol. 24, p. 824), also by Malcolm Bell.
ELECTROPLATING (Vol. 9, p. 237) describes the art that put an end to the
Sheffield plate industry. Other methods of coating metals are given
under GALVANIZED IRON (Vol. 11, p. 428), TIN PLATE AND TERNE PLATE (Vol.
26, p. 1000), and GILDING (Vol. 12, p. 13). The art of making gold-leaf
is described in GOLDBEATING (Vol. 12, p. 202).

In regard to manufacturing processes there are the separate articles:
FORGING (Vol. 10, p. 663), with 19 illustrations; FOUNDING (Vol. 10, p.
743), with 11 illustrations; ANNEALING, HARDENING AND TEMPERING (Vol. 2,
p. 70), and BRAZING AND SOLDERING (Vol. 4, p. 463). These four articles
are by J. G. Horner. And see WELDING (Vol. 28, p. 500), also by Mr.
Horner, with a section on _Electro-Welding_, by Elihu Thomson, inventor
of the process of electric welding and expert for the General Electric
Co. The article TOOL (Vol. 27, p. 14), another of Mr. Horner’s valuable
contributions, has 79 illustrations and possesses special interest for
the manufacturer of metal-ware as well as the dealer in hardware.

[Sidenote: Metal-Ware]

Coming now to the production of metal wares, the article METAL-WORK
(Vol. 18, p. 205), beautifully illustrated, is the work of three noted
experts. The late J. H. Middleton, Slade Professor of Fine Art,
Cambridge University, writes on _Methods of Manipulation in Metal Work_
and tells of the metal work of Greece, Italy, Spain, Germany, France,
England, Persia and Damascus. J. S. Gardner, an expert metal worker,
deals with _Modern Art Metal Work_, and J. G. Horner contributes the
section on _Industrial Metal Working_, in which he deals with _Plater’s
Work_, _Coppersmith’s Work_, _Raised Work_, _Cast Work_, _Methods of
Union and Protection of Surfaces_. In connection with the last mentioned
subject, see also JAPANNING (Vol. 15, p. 275), LACQUER (Vol. 16, p. 53),
and PAINTER-WORK (Vol. 20, p. 457). Further information about
lacquering, with valuable formulas, will be found in the article JAPAN
(Vol. 15, p. 188). Some of the ornamental forms of metal work are
described in REPOUSSÉ (Vol. 23, p. 108), by M. H. Spielmann, formerly
editor of _The Magazine of Art_; INLAYING (Vol. 14, p. 574), and
DAMASCENING (Vol. 7, p. 783). See also GRILLE (Vol. 12, p. 596).

PLATE (Vol. 21, p. 789), an article by H. R. Hall, of the British
Museum, H. Stuart Jones, director of the British School at Rome, and E.
A. Jones, author of _Old English Gold Plate_, etc., is a concise,
complete hand-book on work in silver and gold of any class other than
those of personal ornaments and coins. It is profusely illustrated with
plates and text-cuts, showing many exquisite models; and the reader can
master the details of style in different periods and countries. The
subjects of the assay of gold and silver plate and hall-marks are
discussed, the former being treated more fully in ASSAYING (Vol. 2, p.
776), by A. A. Blair, chief chemist of the U. S. Geological Survey. The
article ROMAN ART, by H. Stuart Jones, has a section devoted to _Work in
Precious Metals_ (Vol. 23, p. 483).

CUTLERY (Vol. 7, p. 671) is one of the articles pertaining specifically
to hardware manufacture and trade, in which general processes of
manufacture are described; and of allied interest are KNIFE (Vol. 15, p.
850), FORK (Vol. 10, p. 666), SPOON (Vol. 25, p. 733), SCISSORS (Vol.
24, p. 407), SHEARS (Vol. 24, p. 815), RAZOR (Vol. 22, p. 937),
CHAFING-DISH (Vol. 5, p. 800), NAIL (Vol. 19, p. 153), AXE (Vol. 3, p.
67), HAMMER (Vol. 12, p. 897), CHISEL (Vol. 6, p. 247), WIRE (Vol. 28,
p. 738), and BARBED WIRE (Vol. 3, p. 384). Articles describing all forms
of agricultural implements will be found under their respective
headings.

[Sidenote: Glassware]

GLASS (Vol. 12, p. 86) is most complete in its consideration of the
entire subject. The introductory section by H. J. Powell, of the
Whitefriars Glass Works, London, author of _Glass Making_, and W.
Rosenhain, of the National Physical Laboratory, London, deals with the
manufacture of optical glass, blown glass and mechanically-pressed
glass. The necessary qualities of each kind are stated and the newest
processes of manufacture described, with full information about
materials. The second part of the article is devoted to the _History of
Glass Manufacture_, by Mr. Powell and Alexander Nesbitt, who wrote the
well-known _Introduction_ to the South Kensington Museum Catalogue of
Glass Vessels. Egyptian, Assyrian, Roman, Venetian, Bohemian and
Oriental glass, as well as the modern types, are exhaustively described.
The article is splendidly illustrated. DRINKING VESSELS (Vol. 8, p.
580), by Dr. Charles H. Read, of the British Museum, describes old forms
of glass cups and goblets. It is most valuable for its information in
regard to styles of different countries and periods, and the
illustrations show many types.

Stained glass is the subject of the separate article GLASS, STAINED
(Vol. 12, p. 105), illustrated, by the late Lewis F. Day, author of
_Windows, a Book about Stained Glass_. It is both historical and
descriptive in its nature, deals with painted and stained glass,
contains a table of examples of important historical stained glass, and
treats of the latest progress in the art, including the productions of
La Farge and L. C. Tiffany in this country. The art of fitting and
setting of glass is described in GLAZING (Vol. 12, p. 116), illustrated,
by James Bartlett. Here we learn about the setting of window glass, the
use of glass in decoration, systems of roof glazing and the use of wire
glass.

Full information about glass for optical purposes will be found under
LENS (Vol. 16, p. 421), illustrated, by Dr. Otto Henker, of the Carl
Zeiss Factory, Jena, Germany; LIGHTHOUSE, _Optical Apparatus_ (Vol. 16,
p. 633), illustrated, by W. T. Douglass, who erected the Eddystone and
Bishop Rock lighthouses, and Nicholas G. Gedye, chief engineer to the
Tyne Improvement Commission; TELESCOPE, _Instruments_ (Vol. 26, p. 561),
illustrated, by H. Dennis Taylor and Sir David Gill; PHOTOGRAPHY,
_Photographic Objectives or Lenses_ (Vol. 21, p. 507), illustrated, by
James Waterhouse; SPECTACLES (Vol. 25, p. 617).

[Sidenote: Chinaware, Pottery and Porcelain]

To those engaged in the china ware, pottery or porcelain manufacture and
trade, the great article CERAMICS (Vol. 5, p. 703) will prove a
revelation. It is the joint product of a number of experts, both
practical and artistic, including William Burton, chairman, Joint
Committee of Pottery Manufacturers of Great Britain, Henry R. H. Hall
and Robert Lockhart Hobson, both of the British Museum, and A. Van de
Put and Bernard Rackham, both of the Victoria and Albert Museum. It is
85,000 words in length and contains over a hundred beautiful
illustrations, including six plates in colour. It deals fully with the
artistic and economic phases of the subject, the methods of manufacture,
the different varieties of ceramics, their history, decoration, etc.
Japanese ceramics are treated separately in JAPAN, _Ceramics_ (Vol. 15,
p. 183), illustrated, by the late Capt. Frank Brinkley.

CLAY (Vol. 6, p. 472), by Dr. J. S. Flett, describes the occurrence,
composition and properties of the various clays used in ceramics.

TERRACOTTA (Vol. 26, p. 653), illustrated, by William Burton and H. B.
Walters, of the British Museum, deals with the artistic use to which
baked clay is put, while TILE (Vol. 26, p. 971), illustrated, also by
William Burton, has great practical value for the present-day
manufacturer.

KAOLIN (Vol. 15, p. 672), by F. W. Rudler, of the Museum of Practical
Geology, London, deals specifically with china clay and its preparation
for the market. GILDING (Vol. 12, p. 13) contains material on the
subject of the gilding of pottery and porcelain, and PAINTING has a
section _Painting with Coloured Vitreous Pastes_ (Vol. 20, p. 484), by
Prof. G. B. Brown, of Edinburgh University, which describes the use of
these pastes in ceramics. ENAMEL (Vol. 9, p. 362), illustrated, by
Alexander Fisher, yields equally valuable information for those
concerned with the decoration of china.

In MURAL DECORATION, by Walter Crane and William Morris, there is a
section devoted to _Wall-Linings of Glazed Brick or Tiles_ (Vol. 19, p.
17). Material of great archaeological interest relating to earthenware,
etc., will be found in such articles as AEGEAN CIVILIZATION (Vol. 1, p.
245), illustrated, by D. G. Hogarth, of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford;
CRETE, _Archaeology_ (Vol. 7, p. 421), illustrated, by Arthur J. Evans,
the famous Cretan explorer, and GREEK ART (Vol. 12, p. 470),
illustrated, by Percy Gardner, the classical archaeologist.

The following is a partial list in alphabetical order of articles and
subjects in this field treated in the Britannica.


    ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES AND SUBJECTS IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
 BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO THOSE IN METAL, HARDWARE, GLASS AND
                      CHINA MANUFACTURE AND TRADE

 Adze
 Aegean Civilization
 Ainmuller, M. E.
 Alloy Steels
 Alloys
 Aluminium
 Amphora
 Andiron
 Annealing, Hardening and Tempering
 Antimony
 Anvil
 Armour Plate
 Arms and Armour
 Arretine Ware
 Assaying
 Auger
 Awl
 Axe
 Barbed Wire
 Banko Ware
 Basin
 Beaker
 Belleeck Ware
 Bidri Work
 Binocular Instrument
 Biscuit
 Bismuth
 Bizen Ware
 Bohemian Glass
 Bottle
 Bow Ware
 Bradawl
 Brass
 Brasses, Monumental
 Brazier
 Brazing and Soldering
 Bronze
 Byzantine Glass
 Caffieri, Jacques
 Candlestick
 Capo di Monte Ware
 Capronnier, J. B.
 Cast Work
 Cellini, Benvenuto
 Ceramics
 Chafing Dish
 Chalice
 Chelsea Ware
 China
 China, _Art_
 Chinese Porcelain
 Chisel
 Churn
 Clay
 Cookworthy, William
 Coperta
 Copper
 Coppersmith’s Work
 Crete
 Crown Glass
 Cup
 Cutlery
 Cultivator
 Damascening
 Damask Steel, or Damascus Steel
 Damascus Ware
 Delft Ware
 Della Robbia
 Derby Ware
 Doulton, Sir Henry
 Dresden, or Meissen, Ware
 Drinking Vessels
 Dwight, John
 Electrolier
 Electroplating
 Electrum
 Enamel Painting
 Etruscan Ware
 Faience
 Fender
 File
 Finiguerra, Maso
 Fireback
 Firing
 Fire-irons
 Flint Glass
 Fork
 Forging
 Founding
 Fusible Metal
 Galvanized Iron
 German (or Nickel) Silver
 Gilding
 Gimlet
 Girandole
 Glass
 Glass, Ancient
 Glass-blowing Machine
 Glass Cutting and Engraving
 Glass, Painted
 Glass-press
 Glass, Stained
 Glazes
 Glazing
 Goblet
 Gold
 Gold and Silver Thread
 Goldbeating
 Gouge
 Gombroon Ware
 Gouthière, Pierre
 Graffito Ware
 Grate
 Greek Art
 Grille
 Hall-marks
 Hammer
 Harrow
 Hatchet
 Henri-Deux, Oiron, or St. Porchaire Ware
 Hispano-Moresque Ware
 Hizen Ware
 Hoe
 Horseshoes
 Ingot
 Inlaying
 Invar
 Iron and Steel
 Iron Work
 Izumo Ware
 Japan, _Ceramics_
 Japanning
 Jug
 Kaolin
 Kashi
 Kiln
 Kioto Ware
 Knife
 Kuang-Yao
 Kuft Work
 Kutani Ware
 Lacquer
 La Farge, John
 Lang-Yao
 Latten
 Lead
 Lens
 Lighthouse Apparatus, Optical
 Lock
 Lubricants
 Lustred Ware
 Majolica
 Meissonier, J. A.
 Medal
 Metal
 Metallography
 Metallurgy
 Metal Work
 Mezza Majolica
 Minoan, or Kamares, Ware
 Mirror
 Monstrance
 Morel-Ladeuil, L.
 Mural Decoration
 Nail
 Needle
 Nickel
 Niello
 Ormolu
 Owari Ware
 Painter-work
 Palissy, Bernard
 Palissy Ware
 Painting
 Pen
 Persian Pottery
 Pewter
 Photographic Objectives or Lenses
 Pin
 Pitcher
 Plaque
 Plate
 Plated Ware
 Plate-glass
 Plater’s Work
 Platinum
 Plough
 Porcelain
 Pot-hook
 Potteries, The
 Potter’s Marks
 Potter’s Wheel
 Pottery
 Protection of Surfaces
 Raised Work
 Rake
 Razor
 Reaper
 Repoussé
 Roman Art
 Rookwood Ware
 Royal Copenhagen Ware
 Royal Worcester Ware
 Salt Glaze
 Salver
 Samovar
 Saracenic Glass
 Satsuma Ware
 Saw
 Scissors
 Sconce
 Screen
 Screw
 Scythe
 Sèvres Porcelain
 Shears
 Sheet Glass
 Sheffield Plate
 Shovel
 Shuttle
 Sieve
 Silver
 Smith
 Solder
 Spade
 Spectacles
 Spit
 Spoon
 Spade
 Stone Ware
 Table-ware
 Takatori Ware
 Tanagra Figures
 Tankard
 Tazza
 Telescopic Instruments
 Terracotta
 Thrasher
 Tiffany, C. L.
 Tiffany Glass
 Tiles
 Tin
 Tinker
 Tin and Terne Plate
 Tongs
 Tool
 Torchère
 Tray
 Tripod
 Trivet
 Tube-making, Glass
 Turkish Pottery
 Tweezers
 Trowel
 Vacuum Cleaner
 Vase
 Venetian Glass
 Wedgewood, Josiah
 Wedgewood Ware
 Whitefriars Glass
 Wire
 Wired Glass
 Yatsushiro Ware
 Yi-Hsing-Yao
 Zinc




                              CHAPTER VIII
              FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF FURNITURE


[Sidenote: Art and Industry]

When you think of your home, making a picture in your mind of the
familiar surroundings associated in your memory with your greatest
pleasures, you are really thinking of furniture. Tradition makes the
dwelling itself the tangible symbol of home, because when a primitive
tribe ceased to be wanderers, the walls that excluded wild beasts and
inclement weather and gave privacy were conspicuous evidences of a
change for the better. But in our higher civilization our way of
thinking has changed. Nothing seems to us more desolate than the bleak
surfaces and harsh angles of an unfurnished house. Colour and softness
and the curved lines which we instinctively love because they suggest
softness come into the dwelling with furniture, and culture has
progressed so far that the chair or bed must be a delight to the eye as
well as to the weary limbs, that the dinner table and the bookcase must
be so designed as to enhance the satisfaction we find in refreshing body
and mind. You would not get so much pleasure as you do from your
Encyclopaedia Britannica if its paper and print and pictures and the
colour and texture of the bindings did not make it one of the chief
adornments of your home; the volumes might be just as useful in a less
pleasing guise, but you would not feel the same affection for the book.

[Sidenote: Form and Embellishment]

To satisfy the spirit of home-love and house-pride in the making of
furniture is an art, and the idea that furniture can only be artistic
when it is made by hand, from a design that is to be used but once, is
as nonsensical as it would be to say that a beautiful etching is not
true art because a press produces it and others like it. “Fine art is
everything which man does or makes _in one way rather than another_ ...
in order to express and arouse emotion ... with results independent of
direct utility.” These words from Sir Sidney Colvin’s delightful
Britannica article FINE ARTS (Vol. 10, p. 361), and another passage (p.
370), in which he speaks of “the artificers who produce wares primarily
for use, in a form, or with embellishments, that have the _secondary
virtue of giving pleasure_,” might well be quoted to the supercilious
and superficial critic who condemns every product which machinery has
brought within the reach of the less fortunately situated. Furniture,
made in one form rather than another, because that one form gives
greater pleasure, is artistic furniture whether it is made of machined
pine chemically stained or of handworked and hand-polished rosewood. The
manufacturer and dealer who ingeniously minimize the cost of production
and distribution are benefiting the public just as truly as did Thomas
Chippendale, “at once an artist and a prosperous man of business,” or
Thomas Sheraton, “the great artistic genius who lived in chronic
poverty.” The adaptation and variation of their ideas, under modern
conditions of manufacture, have given pleasure to tens of thousands for
every one whose home was enriched by the original products.

[Sidenote: Related Subjects]

We have, then, in the furniture business, the combination of an art with
an industry of the most practical and useful kind, and this art is one
which does more than any other to “express and arouse” the
home-cherishing emotions which solidify family life. The principles
which underlie architecture, sculpture, painting, metal work, embroidery
and the weaving of patterns all affect the design of furniture, since
its contours and surfaces are obtained by the application of the
structural and decorative laws of all of them, and it might therefore be
said that the only course of reading in the Britannica which could fully
justify the title of this chapter would be one which covered all these
diverse fields. The reader can, however, with the assistance of other
chapters of this Guide, easily find his way to the Britannica’s articles
on each of these allied subjects, and an indication of the articles
dealing specifically with furniture will at any rate serve his primary
purpose.

[Sidenote: “Art Nouveau” School]

The keystone article FURNITURE (Vol. 11, p. 363) is by James
Penderel-Brodhurst, one of the greatest of living authorities, to whom
many of the subsidiary articles are also due. The 37 illustrations on
plate paper include two large views of the most famous and resplendent
piece of furniture ever constructed, the cylinder desk, now in the
Louvre Museum in Paris, made for Louis XV by a number of
“artist-artificers,” the chief among them Oeben and Riesener, with
bronze mounts by Duplessis, Winant and Hervieux. The article explains
the scanty attention paid to furniture in ancient Egypt, Rome and
Greece, and throughout the Middle Ages in Western Europe, as due to the
routine of life in centuries during which people spent their days in the
open air, and went to bed as soon as it was dark, therefore needing but
few household appliances. The Renaissance was the first era of sumptuous
and elaborately varied furniture; and it was not until the 18th century
that the art of the cabinet-maker was fully developed. The English
periods of Queen Anne and early Georgian craftsmanship and the reigns of
Louis XV and Louis XVI brought the development to its high-water-mark.
Since then, there has been no really new departure except the “art
nouveau” school, which professed to be free from all traditions and to
seek inspiration from nature alone. The revolution which was thus
attempted was not successful, and the permanent influence of the
movement will, in all probability, be less notable for its effect upon
style than for the very great service it rendered in reviving the use of
oak. Lightly polished, fumed or waxed, this wood, which was so long
neglected, is the most effective that can be employed at moderate cost.

[Sidenote: Beds]

The oldest and most indispensable of all furnishings is treated in the
article BED (Vol. 3, p. 612). The Egyptians had high bedsteads to which
they ascended by steps, and the Assyrians, Medes and Persians followed
the same custom. The Greek bed had a wooden frame, with a board at the
head, and bands of hide laced across, upon which skins were laid. At a
later period, as vase-paintings show, the Greeks used folding beds.
Another ancient application of an idea commonly supposed to be of modern
origin is found in the Roman use of bronze beds, and metal is so much
more sanitary than wood for this purpose that it seems strange it was
afterwards discarded for many centuries. The bed of the Emperor
Eliogabalus was of solid silver, with counterpane and hangings of purple
embroidered in gold. In Pompeii wall-niches for beds, like those still
used in Holland, are found, and were apparently closed by sliding
partitions as well as by curtains. To our modern ideas, this arrangement
seems to have been disgustingly devoid of ventilation, but the
four-poster, with its “tester” roof and its curtains, which was widely
used until the middle of the 19th century, was not much better.
Mattresses developed very slowly, for in the 18th century pea-shucks and
straw were the stuffing materials employed in houses of prosperous
people, and hair had not come into use. The article gives a full and
interesting account of the quaint custom, instituted by Louis XI of
France, and followed by many of his royal successors, of a sovereign
remaining in bed while he received the visits of his ministers and
courtiers.

[Sidenote: Chests and Chairs]

The chair, to us the commonest of objects, did not come into general use
until, as the articles BENCH (Vol. 3, p. 715) and STOOL (Vol. 25, p.
967) indicate, these two had long been the usual seats. The CHEST (Vol.
6, p. 106) was also used as a seat, and was the original form of
wardrobe before hanging space and drawers were provided. The
ecclesiastical chests, of great length in order that they might contain,
without folding, church vestments stiff with embroidery, are the most
ornate of all the models of furniture which have been preserved from the
13th and 14th centuries. The article CHAIR (Vol. 5, p. 801) shows that
chairs were everywhere uncommon until the middle of the 16th century;
and it was not until the 17th was well advanced that upholstery began to
be employed for them. The typical Louis XVI chair, with its oval back
and ample seat, descending arms, round-reeded legs and gay tapestry was
the most beautiful and elaborate model that has ever been devised. But
it was the original Chippendale design and the still lighter patterns of
Hepplewhite, Sheraton and Adam that gave us the slender, compact and
easily moved chairs which will always be the more numerous. It is
interesting to observe that the revolving chair, commonly regarded as an
office convenience of modern origin, has a pedigree of no less than four
centuries.

[Sidenote: Bookcases and Desks]

It would seem that the old English makers of furniture went somewhat
astray when they gave themselves the general designation, still
surviving, of “cabinet-makers”; for we learn from the article CABINET
(Vol. 4, p. 918) that the elaborate cabinets which have come down to us
from the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries are almost invariably of Italian,
Dutch and French origin, and it was in other branches of work that the
English were most successful. THE CUPBOARD (Vol. 7, p. 634) was used to
contain books long before the BOOKCASE (Vol. 4, p. 221) had assumed a
distinct form, and in the earlier bookcases the volumes were either
placed on their sides, or, if upright, were ranged with their backs to
the wall and their edges outwards. Until printing had cheapened books,
it was not the custom to mark the title on the back, and the band of
leather which closed the volume, like the strap on an old-fashioned
wallet, bore the inscription. Sheraton’s satinwood bookcases were among
the most elegant of all his pieces. The DESK (Vol. 8, p. 95) about the
year 1750 had assumed the form which is now described as a library
table—a flat top with a set of drawers on each side of the writer’s
knees, when its vogue was interrupted by the invention of the
cylinder-top desk. At first the cover was a solid piece of curved wood,
but the “tambour,” or series of slats mounted on canvas proved more
serviceable; and the American roll-top desk is now exported to all parts
of the world. Other articles dealing with individual pieces of furniture
are WARDROBE (Vol. 28, p. 323), SIDEBOARD (Vol. 25, p. 38), DRESSER
(Vol. 8, p. 577), CHEFFONIER (Vol. 6, p. 22), CRADLE (Vol. 7, p. 360),
BUFFET (Vol. 4, p. 757), and MIRROR (Vol. 18, p. 575).

[Sidenote: Technical Articles]

Of the more technical articles TIMBER (Vol. 26, p. 978) shows the
comparative advantages of all the varieties of wood used for furniture;
and, as the list at the end of this chapter shows, there is a separate
article on each kind. TOOL (Vol. 27, p. 14), by J. G. Horner, is of
great importance. It would fill 75 pages of this Guide, and contains 79
illustrations. The furniture maker will find in it complete information
about all the hand tools and machine tools used in the industry. JOINERY
(Vol. 15, p. 476), by James Bartlett, describes, with practical
diagrams, every variety of joint and dovetail. Sound guidance for the
workshop will be found in GLUE (Vol. 12, p. 143), PAINTER-WORK (Vol. 20,
p. 457), LAC (Vol. 16, p. 35), LACQUER (Vol. 16, p. 53), in regard to
which there is also information in the article JAPAN (Vol. 15, p. 188),
FRENCH POLISH (Vol. 11, p. 154), WEAVING, _Industrial Technology_ (Vol.
28, p. 440), DYEING (Vol. 8, p. 744), by Profs. J. J. Hummel and Edmund
Knecht; REP (Vol. 23, p. 105), TAPESTRY (Vol. 26, p. 403), with numerous
illustrations, by A. S. Cole; SILK, _Manufacture_ (Vol. 25, p. 102);
PLUSH (Vol. 21, p. 857), VELVET (Vol. 27, p. 979), MARBLE (Vol. 17, p.
676), by J. S. Flett; ONYX (Vol. 20, p. 118); and ALABASTER (Vol. 1, p.
466).

[Sidenote: Decoration and Ornament]

[Sidenote: Biographical Articles]

Although wood, ivory, precious stones, bronze, silver and gold have been
used from antiquity for the decorations of furniture, the modern maker
will be more concerned with WOOD-CARVING (Vol. 28, p. 791), illustrated,
by F. A. Crallan, author of _Gothic Wood-carving_. In this article
materials and methods are described, and there is much information as to
the domestic use of wood-carving. The article will be most valuable to
manufacturers and dealers who have to do with church fittings. GILDING
(Vol. 12, p. 13) and CARVING AND GILDING (Vol. 5, p. 438) impart
knowledge of a practical nature as to these processes. The art of
inlaying is described in MARQUETRY (Vol. 17, p. 751) and BOMBAY
FURNITURE (Vol. 4, p. 185); see also VENEER (Vol. 27, p. 982). Materials
other than wood used for inlaying are described, as, for example, PEARL
(Vol. 21, p. 25) for pearl and mother of pearl; IVORY (Vol. 15, p. 92),
LAPIS LAZULI (Vol. 16, p. 199), TORTOISESHELL (Vol. 27, p. 71), BRASS
(Vol. 4, p. 433), etc. The mention of the last two materials naturally
suggests the name of BOULLE and the Britannica’s biography of that
artist. Such biographies, as anyone interested in the subject knows, are
most difficult to find, and they are included in much detail in the new
Britannica. BOULLE (Vol. 4, p. 321) was the most distinguished of modern
cabinet-makers before the middle of the 18th century; and, beginning
with that date, both France and England produced a number of men whose
renown is scarcely less than that of the great painters, sculptors,
architects or musicians of the period. The Britannica’s accounts of
their lives, ideas and work will be of much value and interest to those
who make or deal in furniture. For the French schools we get the
essential facts about, for example, OEBEN (Vol. 20, p. 11), to whom
Louis XV’s famous desk owes its general plan; RIESENER (Vol. 23, p.
324), his more celebrated pupil, who completed the desk; RÖNTGEN, DAVID
(Vol. 23, p. 693), the maker of “harlequin furniture,” several of whose
ingenious mechanical devices are described; and GOUTHIÈRE (Vol. 12, p.
291), the metal-worker whose furniture mounts are among the most noted
art products of the Louis XV and XVI periods. CHIPPENDALE (Vol. 6, p.
237), with whom arose the marvellously brilliant school of English
cabinet-makers, is the subject of a biography describing fully the
characteristics of his designs; and the history of this school is
continued under such headings as HEPPLEWHITE (Vol. 13, p. 305), whose
taste at its best “was so fine and so full of distinction, so simple,
modest and sufficient that it amounted to genius”; ADAM, ROBERT (Vol. 1,
p. 172), who left so deep and enduring a mark upon English furniture,
and SHERATON (Vol. 24, p. 841), “the most remarkable man in the history
of English furniture,” whose extravagant creations marked the end of the
great school. Many other biographies are included in the list appended.


      ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES, INCLUDING BIOGRAPHIES, IN THE
  ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA WHICH ARE OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO FURNITURE
                       MANUFACTURERS AND DEALERS

 Acacia
 Adam, Robert
 Agate
 Ailanthus
 Alabaster
 Alder
 Algum
 Arabesque
 Arbor Vitae
 Armoire
 Arts and Crafts
 Ash
 Bahut
 Bamboo
 Baroque
 Barry, Sir Charles
 Basin-stand
 Basket
 Bed
 Beech
 Bérain, Jean
 Birch
 Bombay Furniture
 Bonheur du Jour
 Bookcase
 Boulle, André Charles
 Box
 Boxwood
 Brass
 Brocade
 Buffet
 Carving and Gilding
 Casket
 Cassone
 Casuarina
 Cedar
 Chair
 Cheffonier
 Chenille
 Cherry
 Chest
 Chestnut
 Chintz
 Chippendale, Thomas
 Coco-nut Palm
 Coffer
 Console
 Copal
 Copeland, Henry
 Corduroy
 Cradle
 Crash
 Cressent, Charles
 Cretonne
 Crunden, John
 Cryptomeria
 Cupboard
 Curtain
 Cushion
 Cypress
 Damask
 Dammar
 Date Palm
 Design
 Desk
 Divan
 Dresser
 Dumb-Waiter
 Duramen
 Dyeing
 Ebony
 Electroplating
 Elm
 Embossing
 Encoignure
 Etagère
 Fir
 Footman
 Frame
 French Polish
 Furniture
 Gilding
 Gillow, Robert
 Glue
 Gouthière, Pierre
 Halfpenny, William
 Hazel
 Hepplewhite, George
 Hickory
 Holly
 Huon Pine
 Ince, William
 Ingle-nook
 Inlaying
 Iron
 Ivory
 Japan, _Art_
 Japanning
 Jarrah Wood
 Johnson, Thomas
 Juniper
 Kauri Pine
 Lac
 Lacquer
 Lampstand
 Lapis Lazuli
 Larch
 Leather
 Leather, Artificial
 Le Pautre, Jean
 Lime, or Linden
 Linen-press
 Liquidambar
 Lock
 Lock, Matthias
 Lowboy
 Mahogany
 Mammee Apple
 Manwaring, Robert
 Maple
 Maple, Sir John B.
 Marble
 Marot, Daniel
 Marquetry
 Mastic, or Mastich
 Mayhew, Thomas
 Meissonier, J. A.
 Mirror
 Moreton Bay Chestnut
 Morris, William
 Nettle Tree
 Oak
 Oeben, J. F.
 Olive
 Onyx
 Ormolu
 Ornament
 Osier
 Ottoman
 Overmantel
 Painter-work
 Pearl
 Pergolesi, M. A.
 Pigments
 Pine
 Plane
 Plush
 Prie-dieu
 Rep
 Resin
 Riesener, J. H.
 Rococo
 Röntgen, David
 Rosewood
 Rousseau de la Rottière, J. S.
 Sabicu Wood
 Satin Wood
 Screen
 Sequoia
 Settee
 Settle
 Shearer, Thomas
 Sheraton, Thomas
 Sideboard
 Silk
 Sofa
 Spruce
 Stall
 Stool
 Table
 Tallboy
 Tapestry
 Tea-caddy
 Teak
 Tea-poy
 Textile Printing
 Throne
 Ticking
 Timber
 Tortoiseshell
 Tray
 Triclinium
 Tripod
 Turpentine
 Upholsterer
 Varnish
 Velvet
 Velveteen
 Vernis Martin
 Walnut
 Wardrobe
 Washstand
 Weaving
 What-not
 Willow
 Window-cornice
 Window-seat
 Wine Table
 Wood-carving




                               CHAPTER IX
      FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF LEATHER AND LEATHER GOODS


The purpose of the department of the Guide in which this chapter
appears, addressed to persons engaged in certain important occupations,
is not only to show them how Britannica-reading will enlarge their
knowledge of some aspects and relations of their business, but also to
show how Britannica-reading will help them to realize the importance of
_educating the general public_ in regard to that business. This
education of the public is not necessarily confined to advertising,
although the best form of advertising that can be used by anyone who
sells a good article, or an article that is good at its price, is
probably to tell the public what it really is and how it is really made.
In the direct personal intercourse between salesman and purchaser there
is opportunity for the imparting of information which, if it possesses
genuine interest, will be gladly received and will stimulate trade. Mere
praise of an article is uninteresting and unconvincing; while facts that
explain _why_ that article is adapted to a particular use, and _why_ it
is better than another article sold at a lower price will always receive
attention.

[Sidenote: About Selling Leather Goods]

All this is especially true of leather goods, for the public ignorance
on the subject of leather is abysmal. Nothing is more universally used,
yet ninety-nine out of a hundred who use it not only do not know what
lies beneath the surface of it, but do not know that there is any
difference in value between a natural grain surface and a mechanically
grained false surface, and it is quite certain that nearly all the men
and women who walk out of a store after buying skiver would be
nonplussed if they were asked whether the upper or lower part of a split
skin was the best.

Both the leather merchant and the public would be delighted to hear some
of the curious things that the Britannica tells about leather, which is,
from any point of view, one of the most interesting of all commodities;
although few of those who use it, and perhaps as few of those who deal
in it, ever stop to think how curious a relation there is between the
original nature of the material and the qualities of the finished
product. In cattle and sheep, the hide is a garment that covers every
part of the body but the feet. Adapted to our own use, its most
important service as a garment is to cover our feet. It is so far a
natural product that no imitation of it possesses any of its chief
merits, and yet so far an artificial product that when the hide has been
removed from an animal, it requires treatment in order that it may not
lose the flexibility which makes it, for a thousand purposes, more
valuable than wood or metal, and in order that it may not decay.

[Sidenote: What Skin Is]

Skin is waterproof because its surface consists of scales, and although
in most quadrupeds, as in man, these scales are so small as to be
invisible, they will so resist the entrance of any tan liquor or other
preservative fluid that they must be scraped away before the skin can be
treated. Under these horny scales there is a layer of soft cells, and
under this a membrane which makes the natural grain surface of leather.
Under this, again, lies the “true” skin, in In the upper of these two,
the white fibres lie parallel with the grain. In the lower, the white
fibres, which are here coarser, lie in bundles, bound together by yellow
fibres, so that this layer is really a woven fabric. The spaces in the
weave are filled with a soft jelly, and the fibres do not multiply among
themselves, as cells do, but are developed, as they are needed, from
this jelly. Tan liquor has the peculiar property of converting this
jelly into a “leathery” substance, which although it does not then
assume the shape of fibres, becomes nearly as tough as the fibres
themselves, and thus makes leather more solid and stronger than the
original skin; and the virtue of leather depends largely on the presence
of this jelly. [Sidenote: Naturally Woven Fibres] two layers. The body
of an old bull will have absorbed it, just as fat is absorbed in old
age, so that the spaces in the weave of the fibre are left vacant, and
(as the scaly outer surface of the skin has been scraped away to admit
the tan liquor) any water with which the hide comes into contact will be
soaked up. That is why old bull leather is not waterproof and is lacking
in substance. Again, the weave of this innermost layer of skin, lying
next to the flesh, varies in different animals. In sheepskin the fibres
are very loosely woven, and for this reason great care is needed in
preparing the leather, and when the skin is split, the under half is
only fit for the light usage to which “chamois” leather is restricted.
But however the quality, surface or thickness of the skin may differ,
its true structure is the same in all animals used for leather, save the
horse, which is exceptional in possessing, over the loins, a third skin,
very closely woven and very greasy, which makes horsehide taken from
this part of the body peculiarly waterproof, pliable and durable.

As you are in the leather business, you probably knew all these facts
already, but perhaps they were not arranged in your mind in a form in
which you could explain them to others as clearly as you will be able to
do after reading the articles in the Britannica from which this general
statement is summarized. And when you are reading about any other
business, or about any other subject of any kind, you will find that the
Britannica _goes to the root of the subject_ in the same thorough way in
which it deals with the fibres and the jelly that make up the substance
of leather. Now for the articles in detail—or the principal ones; the
others are sufficiently indicated by the list at the end of this
chapter.

SKIN (Vol. 25, p. 188), by Dr. F. G. Parsons, vice-president of the
Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland, with illustrations from
microscopic enlargements, covers the comparative anatomy of the skin in
all groups of animals, and the process of skin development in the
embryo. The articles mentioned in the chapter _For Stock-Raisers_ tell
you about the domestic animals whose hides are chiefly used for leather.
The chapter on _Zoology_ in this Guide gives a list of the articles on
the other animals whose skins are tanned for fancy leathers. The main
article LEATHER (Vol. 16, p. 330), equivalent to 50 pages of this Guide,
is by Dr. James G. Parker, principal of the Leathersellers’ Technical
College, London, and author of _Principles of Tanning_ and other
standard trade text-books. After explaining the distinctions between
tanned, tawed, and chamoised leathers, it takes up the subject of
sources and qualities of hides and skins, and describes the structure of
skin in relation to the finished product. The characteristics and
peculiarities of hides and skins from different parts of the world are
thoroughly explained. We learn why hides from animals bred in
mountainous districts are the best, and where the finest sheep- and
goat-skins come from.

[Sidenote: Processes of Tanning]

_Tanning Materials_ is the subject of the next section. These are
classified into pyrogallols, catechols, and subsidiary materials; and
the article describes their composition and preparation by grinding,
with explicit directions for their testing, including the latest
official method of the International Association of Leather Trades
Chemists. The processes of making heavy leathers are next discussed. We
learn the many ways of cleaning, softening, depilating, and
fellmongering (or dewooling) by liming, rounding and scudding, and
finally the process of actual tanning in its three steps of colouring,
handling, and laying away. In connection with depilation, it is
interesting to note that it has been discovered that it is not the lime
but the action of bacteria in the lime which causes the hair to fall
out. The finishing of sole leather, harness leather and other grades is
explained, also the theory of the formation of the “bloom” and its
removal, as well as the process of “scouring.” The art of _Currying_ has
a section to itself, and the preparations for tanning or dressing hides
for trunks and suit cases by bating, puering, scudding, plumping,
drenching and splitting, receive detailed attention. The tanning of
light leathers, and all the varieties of basils, skivers, Russia
leather, seal, alligator, snake, frog and kangaroo leathers, Japan and
enamel leathers are fully treated. _Tawing_, _Wooling_, _Dressing_,
_Chrome Tanning_, _Combination Tannages_, _Oil Tanning_ (Chamoising),
_Preller’s Helvetia_ or _Crown Leather_, _Transparent Leather_,
_Parchment_, _Tar and Peat Tanning_, _Dyeing_, _Staining_ and
_Finishing_, _Glove Leathers_, and _Bookbinding Leathers_ are some of
the other sections of this excellent treatise. LEATHER, ARTIFICIAL (Vol.
16, p. 345) is a separate article.

[Sidenote: Chemistry of Leather Manufacture]

TANNIN, or TANNIC ACID (Vol. 26, p. 399) is a general account of the
vegetable products which have the property of converting raw hide into
leather. Specific information about the materials from which the
pyrogallol tannins are obtained will be found under MYROBALANS (Vol. 19,
p. 114), CHESTNUT (Vol. 6, p. 112), DIVIDIVI (Vol. 8, p. 332), SUMACH
(Vol. 26, p. 70), OAK (Vol. 19, p. 931), GALLS (Vol. 11, p. 422) a full
and interesting account of the insect produced vegetable excrescence
which yields a high percentage of tannin, by Francis H. Butler, of the
Royal School of Mines; and WILLOW (Vol. 28, p. 688). For the catechol
tannins see HEMLOCK (Vol. 13, p. 262), CATECHU (Vol. 5, p. 507),
MANGROVE (Vol. 17, p. 572), MIMOSA (Vol. 18, p. 500), LARCH (Vol. 16, p.
211), BIRCH (Vol. 3, p. 958), which yields the empyreumatic oil used in
the preparation of Russia leather, to which the pleasant odor is due.

There are numerous articles in the Britannica on the chemicals used in
the process of tawing, chrome tanning, etc., such as ALUM (Vol. 1, p.
766), ACETIC ACID (Vol. 1, p. 135), GLAUBER’S SALT (Vol. 12, p. 114),
BICHROMATES AND CHROMATES (Vol. 3, p. 912).

[Sidenote: Dyeing]

The chief classes of dyes used for leather are the acid; basic, or
tannic; direct, or cotton; and mordant dyes, and these are described at
great length in a valuable article DYEING (Vol. 8, p. 744), equivalent
to 20 pages of this Guide, by the late J. J. Hummel, professor of
Dyeing, University of Leeds, and Dr. Edmund Knecht, professor of
Technological Chemistry, University of Manchester. The section on the
_Theory of Dyeing_ shows how the dyeing property of a substance depends
upon its chemical composition. Separate articles go more deeply into the
chemistry of dyeing materials used with leather, and some of the more
important of these are SULPHONIC ACIDS (Vol. 26, p. 60), SULPHURIC ACID
(Vol. 26, p. 65), FORMIC ACID (Vol. 10, p. 668), ANTIMONY (Vol. 2, p.
127), TITANIUM (Vol. 26, p. 1017), IRON (Vol. 14, p. 796), LOGWOOD (Vol.
16, p. 922), FUSTIC (Vol. 11, p. 375), BRAZIL WOOD (Vol. 4, p. 463), and
TUMERIC (Vol. 27, p. 474). Comparatively few of the coal-tar colours
have as yet been adapted to leather manufacture, but their
characteristics are discussed in such articles as AZO-COMPOUNDS (Vol. 3,
p. 81), ANILINE (Vol. 2, p. 47), INDULINES (Vol. 14, p. 507), FUCHSINE
(Vol. 11, p. 273), and SAFRANINE (Vol. 23, p. 1000).

[Sidenote: Special Leathers]

PARCHMENT (Vol. 20, p. 798), by Sir E. Maunde Thompson, Principal
Librarian, British Museum, is an interesting historical account of the
skins and their preparation. Their use as writing material was
widespread at a very early period. “The Jews made use of them,” says the
article “for their sacred books, and it may be presumed for other
literature also; and the old tradition has been maintained down to our
own day, requiring the Synagogue rolls to be inscribed on this
time-honoured material.” The difference between parchment and vellum is
explained. SHAGREEN (Vol. 24, p. 769) tells about a species of untanned
leather used for ornamental purposes. It is a curious fact that the
addition of the word “chagrin,” for anxiety or annoyance, to the English
language was due to the unpleasant sensation that came from touching the
rasping surface of this leather. Stamped leather for wall hangings is
described in the section _Stamped Leather_ of the article MURAL
DECORATION (Vol. 19, p. 19), by William Morris and Walter Crane. SHOE
(Vol. 24, p. 992) contains an illustrated section on the _Manufacture of
Leather Shoes_. SADDLERY AND HARNESS (Vol. 23, p. 988), by Cecil
Weatherly, and GLOVE (Vol. 12, p. 135) are treated both from an
historical and a practical point of view. BOOKBINDING (Vol. 4, p. 216),
illustrated, by C. J. H. Davenport, of the British Museum, has a great
deal of interesting information about the leathers used in this art. The
flexible binding, which has been applied for the first time on a large
scale in the new Britannica, originated when vellum instead of paper was
used for books, and it possesses the great advantage that a volume sewed
in this way can be opened flat, and lies flat without being held.


   ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES AND OF SUBJECTS IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA
 BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO THOSE IN THE MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF
                       LEATHER AND LEATHER GOODS

 Acetic Acid
 Acid dyes
 Aldehyde tanning
 Algarobilla
 Alligator Leather
 Alum
 Angols
 Aniline
 Antimony
 Azo Compounds
 Barkometer
 Basic, or Tannin dyes
 Basils
 Bates
 Bating
 Bichromates and Chromates
 Birch
 Bleaching
 Bloom
 Bookbinding
 Bookbinding Leathers
 Bottle-tanning
 Brazil Wood
 Canaigre
 Catechols
 Catechu
 Chamoising
 Chestnut
 Chestnut Oak
 Chrome Box
 Chrome Tanning
 Colouring Pits, or Suspenders
 Combination Tannages
 Crust Stock
 Currying Apparatus
 Currying Processes
 Dash-wheel
 Depilation
 Direct, or Cotton, Dyes
 Dividivi
 Dongola Leather
 Drenching
 Dressing
 Drum Dyeing
 Dusting Material
 Dyeing
 Enamel Leather
 Erodin
 Fatliquoring
 Fellmongering, or Dewooling
 Finishing
 Formic Acid
 Frog Skin
 Fuchsine
 Fustic
 Galls
 Gambier
 Glauber’s Salt
 Glazing (Glacé leather)
 Glove
 Glove Leathers
 Grinding Machinery and Leaching
 Handlers, or Floaters
 Heavy Leathers
 Hemlock
 Hide Mill, or Double-Acting Stocks
 Hide-powders
 Hides and Skins
 Indulines
 Iron
 Iron Tannage
 Janus Colours
 Japan Leather
 Kangaroo Leather
 Kaspine Leather
 Kips
 Larch
 Leather
 Leather, Artificial
 Levant Morocco
 Liming
 Logwood
 Mangrove
 Mimosa, or Golden Wattle
 Mordant dyes
 Morocco Leather
 Myrobalans
 Oak bark
 Oak wood
 Oil Tanning
 Parchment
 Payne and Pullman Process
 Peat Tanning
 Pigskin
 Portmanteau
 Power Transmission, _Belts_
 Preller’s Helvetia or Crown Leather
 Puering
 Pyrogallols
 Quebracho
 Roans
 Russia Leather
 Saddlery and Harness
 Safranine
 Sammying
 Scudding
 Seal Leathers
 Setting
 Shagreen
 Shoe
 Skin
 Skivers
 Snakeskin
 Splitting Machines
 Staining
 Sulphonic Acids
 Sulphuric Acid
 Sumach
 Sweating
 Tan Liquors
 Tanner’s Beam
 Tanner’s Hook
 Tanner’s Knives
 Tannin, or Tannic Acid
 Tawing
 Tiffany Bate
 Titanium
 Transparent Leather
 Tray Dyeing
 Turmeric
 Upper Leather
 Valonia
 Vellum
 Vidal Colours
 Waxing
 Willow
 Willow Calf
 Tannin Precipitation
 Tanning Materials
 Tar Tanning
 Wilson Scouring Machine
 Wool-rug Dressing




                               CHAPTER X
          FOR JEWELLERS, CLOCK AND WATCH MAKERS AND MERCHANTS


By long established custom, watches and the higher grade of clocks form
part of the jeweller’s stock, and he sells a few other articles of
utility, such as purses and bags, but to all intents and purposes he
shares with the artist and art-dealer the distinction of making a living
by adding pleasure to the lives of others. The very word “jewelry”
carries, in its root form, the idea of joy; and when a Senwosri
princess, 43 centuries ago, smiled happily as she raised her brown arms
to fasten the clasp of a new necklace, the jeweller of Memphis on the
Nile no doubt took his little profit, as the jeweller of Memphis on the
Mississippi takes his to-day, all the more gladly for being, in the
oriental phrase, a “Distributor of delights.” Sour philosophers have
always sneered at women for loving jewels, and most of all for piercing
their ears and noses to vary its display, but the nose-ring that
overhangs a thick Nubian lip is an expression of the same charming
instinct that makes a child diversify the arrangement of her
daisychains. And jewelry plays its part in the higher emotions as well
as in the pretty vanities; witness the engagement ring, the marriage
ring and all the uses, described in the Britannica, of jewels as
religious symbols.

[Sidenote: Specimens Reproduced]

The article JEWELRY (Vol. 15, p. 364), by A. H. Smith, the official in
charge of the great jewel collection in the British Museum, contains
nearly a hundred illustrations, half of them on plate paper, which
include examples of every period and every variety of the jeweller’s
art, and these, with the illustrations in other articles mentioned in
this chapter, are so full of interest to the jeweller’s customers that
he ought really to keep his Britannica at his place of business rather
than at his house. It is, at any rate, amusing to recall that in a
speech made by the Editor-in-chief of the Britannica, on the occasion of
a banquet given to celebrate the completion of the new edition, he
remarked that when he had chanced to take home the proof sheets of this
article, to read them at night, he carefully kept them out of his wife’s
sight lest they might suggest too tempting possibilities. The article
divides modern jewelry into three classes:

  _(1) objects in which gems and stones form the principal portions, and
  in which the work in silver, platinum or gold is really only a means
  for carrying out the design by fixing the gems or stones in the
  position arranged by the designer, the metal employed being visible
  only as a setting_;

  _(2) when gold work plays an important part in the development of the
  design, being itself ornamented by engraving (now rarely used) or
  enamelling or both, the stones and gems being arranged in
  subordination to the gold work in such positions as to give a
  decorative effect to the whole_;

  _(3) when gold or other metal is alone used, the design being wrought
  out by hammering in repoussé, casting, engraving, chasing or by the
  addition of filigree work, or when the surfaces are left absolutely
  plain but polished and highly finished_.

[Sidenote: The “Personal Art” Movement]

The second of these three classes includes the work which has completely
revolutionized the theory of design, so far as the best class of trade
is concerned, since the Paris International Exposition of 1900 first
drew general attention to the exquisite creations of Lalique and his
school. L. C. Tiffany, in the United States, and Philippe Wolfers, in
Belgium, have done more than any designers other than the French to
extend this new movement; but in England, Germany, Austria, Russia and
Switzerland there has been a notable increase of individual effort and
purpose, and a recognition of the possibilities of personal art as at
any rate an important factor in the business. Side by side with this
development new standards have been established in mechanical work.
“Nearly every kind of gold chain now made is manufactured by machinery,
and nothing like the beauty of design or perfection of workmanship could
be obtained by hand at, probably, any cost.” The article, equivalent in
length to about 35 pages of this Guide, contains a full review,
amplified by the results of the most recent excavations (some of them
undertaken expressly for the archaeological purposes of this edition of
the Britannica) of the history of jewelry, Egyptian, Assyrian, Mycenean,
Greek, Etruscan, Roman, Merovingian, Oriental and Renaissance.

[Sidenote: Rings for Love and Murder]

RING (Vol. 23, p. 349), of which Prof. Middleton, long art director of
the South Kensington Museum, is the chief contributor, is another
copiously illustrated article. Among the curious items of information it
contains, there is the unromantic origin of the engagement ring (which
may be cited by the jeweller to prove that it should always be a costly
one), the ancient Romans regarding it as a pledge to assure the donor’s
fulfilment of his promise; the fact that the modern rheumatism ring had
its medieval forerunner in the rings, blessed by the sovereign, which
were worn as a preservative against cramp; and the description of the
old poison rings, which were of two kinds: those merely affording, in
the bezel, a secret receptacle so that the poison might be always at
hand for suicide, and those provided with a hollow point to which, on
touching a spring, the venom ran as in a snake’s fang, so that the
murderer could give a fatal scratch while shaking hands with his victim.
BROOCH (Vol. 4, p. 641) traces, with many illustrations of typical
specimens, the “fibula” or safety pin from its origin in Central Europe
during the Bronze Age, through the modifications which introduced the
bow shape, providing space for thicker folds of cloth, to the modern
ornament. The long brooch is not a new fashion, for silver brooches no
less than 15 inches in length have been found in Viking hoards of the
7th, 8th and 9th centuries. EAR-RING (Vol. 8, p. 798) describes ear
“ornaments” of the most grotesque size. In Borneo the hole in the ear
lobe is stretched to a calibre of 3¾ inches, but the Masai tribes in
equatorial Africa far outdo this, stretching the lobes, year after year,
until they can wear stone ear-plugs weighing 2 lbs. 14 ozs. each, with a
diameter of 4½ inches; and they thus achieve the supreme elegance of
making the two long flaps of flesh meet above their heads. It is also
curious to note the custom of some oriental tribes of wearing one
ear-ring only. BRACELET (Vol. 4, p. 359) describes the three distinct
models worn by the Israelites, all of which the Authorized Version calls
“bracelet,” although the original Hebrew has separate names for them.
Armlets have always been conspicuous in the regalia of Eastern kings,
and the pair captured at Delhi and taken to Persia by Nadir Shah in 1739
contain jewels valued at more than $5,000,000, including the famous “Sea
of Light” diamond, which, although it weighs only 186 carats as against
the 516½ of the largest fraction into which the Cullinan stone was cut,
is unique as possessing the finest lustre of any known specimen. The 24
plate illustrations in the article SCANDINAVIAN CIVILIZATION (Vol. 24,
p. 287), by Miss B. S. Phillpotts, show some exquisite designs of
clasps, collars and pins exhumed in Denmark, Norway and Sweden, and
supposed by some authorities to antedate the oldest Egyptian jewelry.

[Sidenote: Precious Metals]

The article GOLD (Vol. 12, p. 192) is a thorough workshop treatise, as
well as a detailed study of existing mines and of the influence their
production exerts upon the “price,” if it can be so called, of a metal
which is its own standard of value. SILVER (Vol. 25, p. 112) and
PLATINUM (Vol. 21, p. 805) are treated with similar comprehensiveness.
The articles ALLOYS (Vol. 1, p. 704), ASSAYING (Vol. 2, p. 776), METAL
(Vol. 18, p. 198), METALLOGRAPHY (Vol. 18, p. 202), and METALLURGY (Vol.
18, p. 203), all by noted authorities, are full of information useful to
the jeweller. METAL-WORK (Vol. 18, p. 205), fully illustrated,
incidentally touches upon the art of the silver- and gold-smith; and
this branch of the subject is also treated in such articles as PLATE
(Vol. 21, p. 789), with over 30 typical illustrations—a most interesting
historical account, by several well-known experts, of works in gold and
silver which belong to any class other than those of personal ornament
and coins; and DRINKING VESSELS (Vol. 8, p. 580), illustrated, by Dr.
Charles H. Read of the British Museum, which discusses gold and silver
cups. Mention must also be made of the description of American work in
precious metals before the time of Christopher Columbus, in the section
_Archaeology_ of the article AMERICA (Vol. 1, p. 812), by the late Dr.
O. T. Mason, of the National Museum, Washington; also of MEXICO,
_Ancient Civilization_ (Vol. 18, p. 335), by the famous ethnologists,
Dr. E. B. Tylor of Oxford and Dr. Walter Lehmann, of the Royal
Ethnographical Museum, Munich; EGYPT, _Ancient Art_ (Vol. 9, p. 73), by
W. M. Flinders Petrie; GREEK ART (Vol. 12, p. 470), illustrated, by Dr.
Percy Gardner, of Oxford; ROMAN ART, _Work in Precious Metals_ (Vol. 23,
p. 483), illustrated, by H. Stuart Jones, director of the British School
at Rome; JAPAN, _Art, Sculpture and Carving_ (Vol. 15, p. 176), by Capt.
Frank Brinkley, author of _A History of the Japanese People_; and CHINA,
_Bronzes_ (Vol. 6, p. 215), by C. J. Holmes, formerly Slade professor of
fine art at Oxford.

FILIGREE (Vol. 10, p. 343) describes the delicate jewel work of twisted
gold and silver threads, and also the “granulated” work which consists
of minute globules of gold soldered to form patterns on a metal surface.
In India the filigree worker has retained the patterns used by the
ancient Greeks and works in the same way they did. Wandering workmen are
given so much gold, coined or rough. This is weighed, heated and beaten
into wire, and worked in the courtyard or on the verandah of the
customer’s house. The worker reweighs the complete work when finished
and is paid at a specified rate for his labor. Repoussé (Vol. 23, p.
108), by M. H. Spielmann, editor _Magazine of Art_; CHASING (Vol. 5, p.
956) and INLAYING (Vol. 14, p. 574) are other articles dealing with
certain processes in jewel work. The jeweller also must not overlook two
superb articles, MEDAL (Vol. 18, p. 1), illustrated, by M. H. Spielmann,
and NUMISMATICS (Vol. 19, p. 869), which is by three specialists, and is
most fully illustrated by designs inviting practical use. ENAMEL (Vol.
9, p. 362), illustrated, by Alexander Fisher, author of _The Art of
Enamelling on Metals_, goes very fully and practically into this
interesting subject, which is further discussed in JAPAN, _Cloisonné
Enamel_ (Vol. 15, p. 189). MOSAIC (Vol. 18, p. 883), illustrated, by
Professor Middleton and H. Stuart Jones, deals in part with the
ornamentation of jewelry by this method. In BRAZING and SOLDERING (Vol.
4, p. 463) the composition of silver solder used for jewelry is
described, and in CEMENT there is an account of _Jeweller’s_ or
_Armenian Cement_ (Vol. 5, p. 659).

[Sidenote: Precious Stones]

The article GEM treats the subject in two sections, of which the first
(Vol. 11, p. 560), by F. W. Rudler, of the Museum of Practical Geology,
London, deals with _Mineralogy_ and _General Properties_. Here are
discussed hardness, specific gravity, crystaline forms and cleavage,
colour, refraction, chemical composition, etc., and there is an
interesting section on superstitions in regard to gems, the medical and
magical powers with which they were reputed to be endowed. These beliefs
are very remarkable, and it has even been suggested by archaeologists
that jewelry did not have its origin so much in a love for personal
decoration, as in the belief that the objects used possessed magical
virtue. The article MINERALOGY (Vol. 18, p. 509), by L. J. Spencer, of
the British Museum, and editor of the _Mineralogical Magazine_, will be
found especially valuable for reference in the workshop. It gives, among
other things, the scale of hardness, and nomenclature and classification
of minerals. The crystal formation of gems as well as their optical
properties—characteristics by which the genuineness of precious stones
may be tested—are discussed and explained in the article CRYSTALLOGRAPHY
(Vol. 7, p. 569), with over 100 illustrations, also by L. J. Spencer.
The cutting of gem stones is treated under LAPIDARY AND GEM CUTTING
(Vol. 16, p. 195), by Dr. George F. Kunz, the famous gem expert to
Tiffany & Co., New York,—an article of uncommon historical interest and
practical value, in which diamond cutting is considered at much length.

The second section of the article GEM, _Gems in Art_ (Vol. 11, p. 562),
by Dr. A. S. Murray, the famous British archaeologist, and A. H. Smith,
gives an account of precious stones engraved with designs. The
illustrations show more than 90 examples, including Cretan and Mycenaean
intaglios, Greek, Phœnician and Etruscan scarabs and scarabæoids,
cameos, seals, Oriental, Christian, and modern gems. This subject is
further discussed in separate articles, such as SCARAB (Vol. 24, p.
301), by Dr. F. Ll. Griffith, the Egyptologist, an account of the
designs which, originating in Egypt during the Fourth Dynasty, have
exercised a lasting influence on the design and shape of gems; CAMEO
(Vol. 5, p. 104), INTAGLIO (Vol. 14, p. 680), SEALS (Vol. 24, p. 539),
illustrated, by Sir E. Maunde Thompson, formerly principal librarian,
British Museum, as well as in the articles on ancient and Oriental
civilizations, already mentioned.

[Sidenote: Synthetic Stones]

The artificial duplication of certain gems by chemical processes which
yield products identical in composition and physical properties with the
natural stones is a subject of growing importance to the jeweller, and
the latest developments are described in GEM, ARTIFICIAL (Vol. 11, p.
569), by Sir William Crookes. This famous chemist and authority on
precious stones does not hesitate to declare that although the
artificial diamonds so far produced have been microscopic in size,
scientists have now found the right method and that “there is no reason
to doubt that, working on a larger scale, larger diamonds will result.”
The artificial production of rubies, sapphires, Oriental emeralds,
amethysts, topazes and zircons is also discussed. Descriptions of the
several gem stones are found under their respective headings, for
example DIAMOND (Vol. 8, p. 158), illustrated, by H. A. Miers, principal
of the University of London, and former editor of the _Mineralogical
Magazine_. Here are given its scientific characters, its uses
(especially for faceting softer precious stones), distribution, and
mining, and the wonderful history of the most famous diamonds of the
world. RUBY (Vol. 23, p. 812), the most valued of gem stones, is often
called “Oriental ruby” to distinguish it from SPINEL (Vol. 25, p. 684),
an aluminate stone of inferior hardness, density and value. It is
interesting to note that many historic stones described as monster
rubies were really spinels. The great ruby set in the Maltese Cross in
front of the Imperial State Crown of England is a spinel. SAPPHIRE (Vol.
24, p. 201) was known to the Greeks as “hyacinthus,” and the present
name was formerly applied to lapis lazuli. ASTERIA or STAR STONE (Vol.
2, p. 792) tells how the luminous star comes to be seen in sapphires,
rubies and topazes. The name EMERALD (Vol. 9, p. 332) is used for a
number of stones, of which the most valued is not a true emerald at all;
see CORUNDUM (Vol. 7, p. 207). The same is true of the TOPAZ (Vol. 27,
p. 48), the more prized Oriental topaz being a yellow corundum, harder
and denser than the stone from which it takes its name. “Scotch” or
“Spanish” topazes are yellow or smoke-tinted quartz, or cairngorm. The
AMETHYST (Vol. 1, p. 852) is violet or purple quartz, and the sapphire
of a purple colour is often called an Oriental amethyst. The many
varieties of the beautiful ZIRCON (Vol. 28, p. 989), such as HYACINTH
(Vol. 14, p. 25) and JARGOON (Vol. 15, p. 276) are carefully described
and distinguished. These valuable articles on the precious stones have
been contributed by F. W. Rudler, of the Museum of Practical Geology,
London. PEARL (Vol. 21, p. 24) discusses the results of the latest
researches on the cause of pearl formation, and gives a graphic account
of pearl-fishing.

[Sidenote: Semi-Precious Stones]

The material in the Britannica on the semi-precious stones is as
complete. There are many articles, specified in the list at the end of
this chapter. ALEXANDRITE (Vol. 1, p. 576) is remarkable for its
property of appearing dark green by daylight, and red by candle-light,
which makes it especially popular in Russia where green and red are the
military colors; CHRYSOBERYL (Vol. 6, p. 320), of which alexandrite is a
variety; CHRYSOLITE (Vol. 6, p, 320), often mistaken for chrysoberyl;
PERIDOT (Vol. 21, p. 147), like chrysolite, a variety of olivine; BERYL
(Vol. 3, p. 817), much prized by the ancients as a gem stone, and of
which the EMERALD (see above) and the AQUAMARINE (Vol. 2, p. 237) are
the chief “precious” varieties; TOURMALINE (Vol. 27, p 103), the
remarkable stone of as much interest to the physicist as to the
jeweller, on account of its optical and electrical properties; and
RUBELLITE (Vol. 23, p. 804), its much prized red variety GARNET (Vol.
11, p. 470), together with ALMANDINE (Vol. 1, p. 712), which, when cut
with a convex face is known as carbuncle; CINNAMON-STONE (Vol. 6, p.
376), the light red garnet, so easily mistaken for a variety of zircon
(the article tells how to distinguish them); DEMANTOID (Vol. 7, p. 979),
the green garnet from the Urals, and PYROPE (Vol. 22, p. 695), usually
known as Bohemian garnet; JADE (Vol. 15, p. 122), which occupies in
China the highest place as a jewel, and whose many varieties are here
clearly distinguished; JET (Vol. 15, p. 358); HAEMATITE (Vol. 12, p.
804); MOONSTONE (Vol. 18, p. 807); CAT’S-EYE (Vol. 5, p. 537), a term
applied to several distinct minerals of which CROCIDOLITE (Vol. 7, p.
477) has recently become very popular; OPAL (Vol. 20, p. 120), an
article in which the brilliant flashes of colour in this stone are
explained; QUARTZ (Vol. 22, p. 715), with its many ornamental varieties
such as AGATE (Vol. 1, p. 368), AMETHYST (Vol. 1, p. 852), AVENTURINE
(Vol. 3, p. 54), BLOODSTONE (Vol. 4, p. 85), CAIRNGORM (Vol. 4, p. 952),
CARNELIAN (Vol. 5, p. 365), CHALCEDONY (Vol. 5, p. 803), CHRYSOPRASE
(Vol. 6, p. 320), HELIOTROPE (Vol. 13, p. 232), MOCHA STONE (Vol. 18, p.
637), ONYX (Vol. 20, p. 118), ROCK-CRYSTAL (Vol. 23, p. 433), SARD (Vol.
24, p. 209), and SARDONYX (Vol. 24, p. 2.18).

[Sidenote: Watches and Clocks]

The article WATCH (Vol. 28, p. 362), illustrated, by Lord Grimthorpe,
the great authority on watches and clocks, and Sir H. H. Cunynghame,
vice-president of the British Institute of Electrical Engineers, is full
of interest. There is a very valuable historical account beginning with
the invention of portable time pieces in the 15th century. The parts of
a modern watch are described, with details as to the mainspring,
different types of escapement, the balance-wheel and hair-spring,
compensation adjustments and secondary compensation. Methods of
correcting temperature errors are discussed, and a simple means for
demagnetizing a watch which has been near a dynamo is given. The proper
materials used for jewelled bearings are described in the articles
DIAMOND, CORUNDUM, etc. LUBRICANTS (Vol. 17, p. 88) contains a valuable
paragraph on the properties and preparation of the fluid oils used on
the spindles of watches and clocks.

The article CLOCK (Vol. 6, p. 536) is by the same distinguished
authorities as WATCH, with an additional section on _Decorative Aspects_
(p. 552), by James Penderel-Brodhurst. It is equivalent to 55 pages of
this Guide and is fully illustrated. Among the topics considered are the
earliest clocks and their gradual improvement; the essential components
of a clock; the mechanics of the pendulum; methods of compensation,
including the use of the new nickel-steel alloy—described in the article
INVAR (Vol. 14, p. 717)—the barometrical error, and methods of
counteraction; suspension of pendulums; balance, anchor, dead, pinwheel,
detached or free, and gravity escapements; the remontoire systems for
abolishing errors in the force driving the escapement; testing of
clocks; clock wheels; striking mechanism; the watchman’s clock, church
and turret clocks, electrical clocks, miscellaneous clocks, including
magical clocks and other curious designs. The section on _Decorative
Aspects_ tells about styles of cases and mountings, the origin and
development of the “grandfather” clock, etc. In connection with
long-period clocks, attention should be given to the new and ingenious,
if not commercially practical, device invented by the Hon. R. J. Strutt.
Electrified particles emitted by a radioactive substance separate two
strips of gold leaf, and these, falling together after the charge has
been conducted away upon contact with metal, are extended again, the
process being constantly repeated. If some way could be found to utilize
this motion to work an escapement, we should have a clock that would go
on indefinitely, since 1000 years must elapse before even half the small
amount of radium used has disappeared. A description of this so-called
“radium” clock will be found in PERPETUAL MOTION (Vol. 21, p. 181).


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL
INTEREST TO MANUFACTURERS OF AND DEALERS IN JEWELRY, CLOCKS, AND WATCHES

 Agate
 Aigrette
 Aiguillette
 Albite
 Alexandrite
 Alloys
 Almandine
 Amazon-stone
 Amber
 America, _Archaeology_
 Amethyst
 Andalusite
 Anhydrite
 Apatite
 Apostle Spoons
 Aquamarine
 Arabesque
 Arts and Crafts
 Assaying
 Asteria, or Star-stone
 Aventurine
 Axinite
 Azurite
 Bead
 Benitoite
 Beryl
 Beryllonite
 Biddery
 Bloodstone
 Bort
 Bracelet
 Brazing and Soldering
 Britain, _Ornaments_
 Bronzite
 Brooch
 Cairngorm
 Cameo
 Campani-Alimenis, M.
 Carbonado
 Carnelian
 Cat’s-eye
 Cellini, Benvenuto
 Cement
 Chain
 Chalcedony
 Chasing
 Chessylite
 China, _Art_
 Chrysoberyl
 Chrysolite
 Chrysoprase
 Cinnamon-stone
 Clock
 Collar
 Congreve, Sir William
 Coral
 Corundum
 Costume
 Cressent, Charles
 Crocidolite
 Cross
 Crown
 Crystallography
 Cyanite
 Demantoid
 Diallage
 Diamond
 Dioptase
 Drinking Vessels
 Dumortierite
 Ear-ring
 Egypt, _Ancient Art_
 Electroplating
 Emerald
 Emery
 Enamel
 Epidote
 Euclase
 Felspar
 Filigree
 Finiguerra, Maso
 Fluorescence
 Fluor-spar
 Franklin, Benjamin
 Galileo Galilei
 Garnet
 Gem
 Gem, Artificial
 Gold
 Gold beating
 Göthite
 Gouthière, Pierre
 Greek Art
 Grimthorpe, 1st Baron
 Haematite
 Hiddenite
 Hyacinth, or Jacinth
 Hypersthene
 Inlaying
 Intaglio
 Invar
 Iolite
 Ivory
 Jade
 Japan, _Art_
 Jargoon
 Jasper
 Jet
 Jewelry
 Knighthood and Chivalry
 Kunzite
 Labradorite
 Lapidary and Gem Cutting
 Lapis Lazuli
 Leucite
 Line-engraving
 Lubricants
 Malachite
 Marot, Daniel
 Meissonier, J. A.
 Medal
 Metal
 Metallography
 Metallurgy
 Metal-Work
 Mexico, _Ancient Civilization_
 Microcline
 Mineral Deposits
 Mineralogy
 Miniature
 Mint
 Mocha-stone
 Monogram
 Monteith
 Moonstone
 Morel-Ladeuil, Léonard
 Mosaic
 Nepheline
 Niello
 Numismatics
 Oligoclase
 Olivine
 Onyx
 Opal
 Orthoclase
 Palladium
 Paste
 Pearl
 Peridot
 Perpetual Motion
 Phenacite
 Phosphorescence
 Plagioclase
 Plate
 Plated Ware
 Platinum
 Pollaiuolo
 Prehnite
 Pyrope
 Pyroxene
 Quartz
 Regalia
 Repoussé
 Ring
 Rock-crystal
 Roman Art
 Rubellite
 Ruby
 Sapphire
 Sard
 Sardonyx
 Scandinavian Civilization
 Scarab
 Seals
 Sheffield Plate
 Silver
 Sphene
 Spinel
 Spodumene
 Staurolite
 Sunstone
 Tassie, James
 Tiffany, C. L.
 Time, Measurement of
 Time, Standard
 Topaz
 Tourmaline
 Turquoise
 Variscite
 Vesuvianite
 Watch
 Weighing Machines
 Weights and Measures
 Wyon, Thomas
 Zircon
 Zoisite




                               CHAPTER XI
  FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY AND SUPPLIES


[Sidenote: Construction and Operation]

Electrical machinery and supplies include three main groups of
appliances: The apparatus by which electricity is originally generated;
the apparatus by which current is transmitted and, if necessary,
modified before it is used; and the infinitely various appliances for
its final employment. In connection with any one of the latter,
information may be needed as to its structure and its mechanical or
electrochemical method of operation, or as to its uses, and in the
treatment of these two aspects of a vast number of subjects the
advantages of the encyclopaedic plan of the Britannica are obvious. One
article will explain the method by which the same principles are applied
to a number of different machines. Another article will deal with a
group of appliances all used for similar purposes; and a reference to
the Index of 500,000 entries (Vol. 29) will at once guide the reader who
turns to the name of any electrical appliance to either kind of
information he desires at the moment, whether he wants to know how the
machine is made and operated, or what kind of work it does and how
efficiently it does it.

The reader to whom this chapter is addressed is already familiar with
the general subject of electricity, but he may at any moment desire to
review or to supplement his general knowledge in connection with some
new appliance which, for the first time, applies to commercial use one
of the many and intricate laws of electrical vibration. The whole
subject of the nature and action of electricity is outlined in the
article ELECTRICITY (Vol. 9, p. 179), by Prof. J. A. Fleming, of the
University of London, one of the world’s foremost authorities. In a
space equivalent to hardly more than 30 pages of this Guide, the field
covered in detail by many other articles is so concisely and clearly
surveyed that you get a complete view of the theoretical and practical
developments by which electrical science and industry have reached their
present position. The same contributor then considers ELECTROSTATICS
(Vol. 9, p. 240) and ELECTROKINETICS (Vol. 9, p. 210); and, in
CONDUCTION, ELECTRIC (Vol. 6, p. 855), deals with metallic,
non-metallic, dielectric and gaseous conductors. One section of this
article is by Sir J. J. Thomson, winner, in 1906, of the Nobel Prize for
Physics. The form in which metal is chiefly employed for the conduction
of electricity is the subject of a separate article, WIRE (Vol. 28, p.
738); and the articles on the individual metals deal with their
electrical properties.

[Sidenote: Batteries and Dynamos]

The whole subject of the chemical production of electricity is discussed
in ELECTROLYSIS (Vol. 9, p. 217), by W. C. D. Whetham, of the technical
staff of Cambridge University. BATTERY (Vol. 3, p. 531), fully
illustrated, deals with all the forms of primary battery, and
ACCUMULATOR (Vol. 1, p. 126), also illustrated, by Walter Hibbert, of
the London Polytechnic, with all the secondary types. The alkaline
accumulators, of which the Edison apparatus is a well known type, are
the subject of a special section. Turning to mechanically produced
electricity, the first article to read is ELECTROMAGNETISM (Vol. 9, p.
226). This brings you naturally to the article DYNAMO (Vol. 8, p. 764),
by C. C. Hawkins, author of one of the best practical text-books on the
subject. This copiously illustrated article, in length equivalent to 50
pages of this Guide, discusses _continuous current dynamos_,
_lap-winding_, _commutators_, _field-magnets_, _forgings and castings
for magnets_, _air-gaps_, _armature cores_, _carbon brushes_, _cooling
surfaces_ and _alternators_.

Having thus covered the subject of obtaining current, the group of
articles next to be considered is that dealing with its measurement and
the examination of resistances. The general article UNITS, PHYSICAL
(Vol. 27, p. 740), contains a section on _electrical units_. Then come
POTENTIOMETER (Vol. 22, p. 205); METER, ELECTRIC (Vol. 18, p. 291);
VOLTMETER (Vol. 28, p. 206), illustrated; AMPEREMETER (Vol. 1, p. 879),
illustrated; OHMMETER (Vol. 20, p. 34); WATTMETER (Vol. 28, p. 419);
GALVANOMETER (Vol. 11, p. 428), illustrated; ELECTROMETER (Vol. 9, p.
234), illustrated; ELECTROSCOPE (Vol. 9, p. 239), illustrated;
WHEATSTONE’S BRIDGE (Vol. 28, p. 584), illustrated; and OSCILLOGRAPH
(Vol. 20, p. 347), illustrated.

[Sidenote: Lighting Appliances]

The commercial supply of current is covered by a series of articles of
which the first to be read is ELECTRICITY SUPPLY (Vol. 9, p. 193), to
which Emile Garcke, the famous electrical engineer, contributes a
section. POWER TRANSMISSION, _Electrical_ (Vol. 22, p. 233), is by Louis
Bell, chief engineer of the General Electric Co., Boston; and contains
full details as to the use of both two-phase and three-phase generators
in transmission. INDUCTION COIL (Vol. 14, p. 502) and TRANSFORMERS (Vol.
27, p. 173) are both fully illustrated. LIGHTING, _Electric_ (Vol. 16,
p. 659) deals with arc, incandescent and vapour lamps, and with wiring.
The section on household work gives excellent practical information
about the best arrangements of lights. A special class of electric light
supplies is discussed in LIGHTHOUSE (Vol. 16, p. 627), by W. T.
Douglass, who erected the new Eddystone and the Bishop’s Rock lights,
and by N. G. Gedye, another practical expert.

The appliances used to convert current back again into the mechanical
energy from which it had been derived are described in the article
MOTORS, ELECTRIC (Vol. 18, p. 910). This article divides continuous
current motors into five classes: _Separately excited_; _series-wound
constant current_; _series-wound constant potential_; _series-wound
interdependent current and potential_; and _shunt-wound constant
potential_. Alternating current motors are similarly classified as
_Synchronous constant potential_; _induction-polyphase constant
potential_; _induction monophase constant potential_; _repulsion
commutating_, and _series-commutating_.

[Sidenote: Trolley Cars and Railroads]

Machinery for applying electric power to transportation, both for
trolley cars and heavy railroad traffic, is described in the article
TRACTION (Vol. 27, p. 118), by Prof. Louis Duncan, who designed the
first electric locomotives employed with large loads—those introduced in
1895 by the Baltimore & Ohio R.R. for its track in the tunnel under
Baltimore. The article gives, with many mechanical diagrams, accounts of
the appliances by which the current is taken from trolley wires,
conduits and third rails, and of the types of motors and controllers
employed. CRANE (Vol. 7, p. 368), by Walter Pitt, describes the peculiar
type of “crane-rated” motor, by the aid of which steam and hydraulic
cranes can be displaced. The electric furnaces used for the reduction of
ores and for manufacturing processes in which exceptionally high
temperatures are required, are treated in ELECTROMETALLURGY (Vol. 9, p.
232), by W. G. M’Millan, lecturer on metallurgy at Mason College,
Birmingham. Electric machinery for the refining of metals is dealt with
in the article ELECTROCHEMISTRY (Vol. 9, p. 208). Under SURGICAL
INSTRUMENTS (Vol. 26, p. 133) there is a description of the apparatus
used for cautery and for illuminating parts of the interior of the body.
The appliances used in ELECTROTHERAPEUTICS are dealt with under that
heading (Vol. 9, p. 249). Information as to other medical and surgical
apparatus will be found under RÖNTGEN RAYS (Vol. 23, p. 694), X-RAY
TREATMENT (Vol. 28, p. 887), by Dr. H. L. Jones, of St. Bartholomew’s
Hospital, London; and FLUORESCENCE (Vol. 10, p. 575), by Prof. J. R.
Cotter, of Trinity College, Dublin.

[Sidenote: Telegraph and Telephone]

TELEGRAPH (Vol. 26, p. 510), equivalent in length to 70 pages of this
Guide, and fully illustrated, is by a number of contributors, and
discusses both land lines and submarine cables. The section on
instruments, by H. R. Kempe, electrician to the General Post Office,
London, includes a full description of the transmitters and receivers
employed in the various systems of wireless telegraphy. TELEPHONE (Vol.
26, p. 547) deals with the fixed and portable instruments, the batteries
and switchboards, the new automatic exchange “selectors,” and with
special applications of the microphone.

A number of other electric appliances are discussed in separate
articles, such as BELL (Vol. 3, p. 692), by H. M. Ross, in which burglar
alarm devices are described; and VENTILATION, _Fan_ (Vol. 27, p. 1011),
by James Bartlett; while sparking plugs and other ignition appliances
are treated under OIL ENGINE (Vol. 20, p. 35).

There are also a number of appliances used mostly in experimental and
educational work. Such, for instance, are ELECTRICAL OR ELECTROSTATIC
MACHINE (Vol. 9, p. 176), with many illustrations; ELECTROPHORUS (Vol.
9, p. 237), and LEYDEN JAR (Vol. 16, p. 528).

The metals, chemicals and other materials sold by dealers in electrical
supplies, and their properties and uses, are described in COPPER (Vol.
7, p. 102), ZINC (Vol. 28, p. 981), LEAD (Vol. 16, p. 314), SULPHURIC
ACID (Vol. 26, p. 65), SODIUM, _Compounds_ (Vol. 25, p. 341); CHROMIUM
(Vol. 6, p. 296); NITROGEN, _Compounds_ (Vol. 19, p. 715); SAL AMMONIAC
(Vol. 24, p. 59), BICHROMATES AND CHROMATES (Vol. 3, p. 912), CARBON
(Vol. 5, p. 305), RUBBER (Vol. 23, p. 795), and GUTTA PERCHA (Vol. 12,
p. 743).

The following is a partial list, in alphabetical order, of articles of
peculiar interest to dealers in electrical supplies.

 Accumulator
 Amperemeter, or Ammeter
 Armature
 Battery
 Bell
 Bichromates and Chromates
 Carbon
 Chromium
 Condenser
 Conductor, Electric
 Copper
 Dielectric
 Dynamo
 Electricity
 Electrical, or Electrostatic, Machine
 Electricity Supply
 Electrokinetics
 Electrolysis
 Electromagnetism
 Electrometer
 Electrophorus
 Electroscope
 Electrotherapeutics
 Fluorescence
 Fuze, or Fuse
 Galvanometer
 Gutta Percha
 Induction Coil
 Lead
 Leyden Jar
 Lighting
 Meter, Electric
 Motors, Electric
 Nitrogen, _Compounds_
 Ohmmeter
 Oil Engine
 Oscillograph
 Potentiometer
 Power Transmission
 Röntgen Rays, _Apparatus_
 Rubber
 Sal Ammoniac
 Sodium, _Compounds_
 Sulphuric Acid
 Surgical Instruments
 Telegraph
 Telephone
 Thermometry, _Electrical_
 Traction, _Electric_
 Tramway
 Transformers
 Units, Physical
 Vacuum Tube
 Ventilation
 Voltmeter
 Wattmeter
 Wheatstone’s Bridge
 Wire
 Zinc




                              CHAPTER XII
         FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF CHEMICALS AND DRUGS


[Sidenote: A Factor in All Industries]

The chemical and drug industry is not only in itself an enormous
business, but it supplies essential materials for almost every branch of
manufacturing. Chemical products are employed in our buildings, our
clothing, our food; we come into the world and go out of the world with
the odour of chemicals about us. The manufacturer or dealer cannot
analyze all the influences that affect his market, and when he tries, as
he must, to consider the future of the trade, to reckon with the
channels of demand that will arise in the course of new applications of
chemical products, he is facing all the problems of all the industries.

The variety of raw materials from which chemical products are derived,
and the activity with which new sources are discovered and developed,
are almost as bewildering. Only a century has passed since coal-tar was
first distilled, and to-day no chemist would venture to fix the limits
of its industrial possibilities. Electrolysis has been in use since
1804, and yet the future of the world’s wheat supply probably depends
upon processes, as yet hardly beyond the experimental stage, of
utilizing atmospheric nitrogen.

In connection with so comprehensive an industry, the uses of the
Britannica are so manifold that this whole Guide might be devoted to
them. Articles on every manufacturing process touch upon the use of
chemicals. The articles on countries, states and cities are full of
relevant information; and there is hardly a scientific article that
would not be helpful. But the 40 general articles on chemistry, the 350
on chemical compounds, and the 75 on manufactured products call most
immediately for attention; and, with the aid of other chapters in the
Guide, the reader who desires to go further will easily find his way.

[Sidenote: Articles on Chemicals]

The article CHEMISTRY (Vol. 6, p. 33), equivalent to 135 pages of this
Guide, is divided into 6 sections. The first, _History_, traces the
general trend of the science from its infancy to the foundations of the
modern theory. The second section, _Principles_, treats of nomenclature,
formulæ, chemical equations and chemical changes. It provides a brief
but complete introduction to the terminology and methods of the chemist,
and there is not a line in it which will not prove of value in some way
or other to the chemical manufacturer. Sections 3 and 4 are devoted to
_Inorganic and Organic Chemistry_, giving a history of the subjects and
the principles underlying the structure of compounds, with cross
references to all articles dealing with their preparation and
properties. Sections 5 and 6 deal, respectively, with _Analytical_ and
_Physical Chemistry_.

Dr. Walter Nernst, professor of physical chemistry, University of
Berlin, is the author of CHEMICAL ACTION (Vol. 6, p. 26), which deals
specifically with the nature of chemical forces and deduces the laws of
chemical statics and kinetics. Of interest and importance in connection
with the manufacture of chemicals is SOLUTION (Vol. 25, p. 368), by W.
C. D. Whetham, of Cambridge University, author of _Theory of Solution_,
etc. Another theoretical article which will be found widely useful is
THERMOCHEMISTRY (Vol. 26, p. 804), by Prof. James Walker, of Edinburgh
University. For further details see the chapter on CHEMISTRY in this
Guide.

[Sidenote: Manufacture of Chemicals]

It is possible here to mention only a small amount of the material
dealing with the manufacture of chemicals. At the end of this chapter
there is a fuller alphabetical list. It may be noted, however, that the
articles on the elements, metallic and non-metallic, give much
consideration to their compounds, how these are made and how used in the
arts and in medicine. But in addition to this there are many noteworthy
contributions dealing with chemical manufacture. For instance, ALKALI
MANUFACTURE (Vol. 1, p. 674), by Dr. Georg Lunge, professor of technical
chemistry, Zurich Polytechnic, 11 pages in length and with 10
illustrations. The chief processes described are the Leblanc,
ammonia-soda, and electrolytic, together with others dependent upon
them. The facts about the manufacture of the carbonate, hydrate, and
sulphate of soda, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, etc., are fully given.
POTASSIUM (Vol. 22, p. 197) treats of the commercial compounds of this
metal in the same manner. NITROGEN (Vol. 19, p. 714) explains the new
process for the commercial manufacture of nitric acid from atmospheric
air—a matter of enormous industrial importance—and also the conversion
of nitrogen into ammonia, which has been done successfully only within
the past few years.

The manufacture of chemical products by the use of electricity is the
subject of ELECTROCHEMISTRY (Vol. 9, p. 208), and a still larger field
is covered by ELECTROMETALLURGY (Vol. 9, p. 232). Both of these valuable
articles are by W. G. M‘Millan, formerly secretary of the Institute of
Electrical Engineers of Great Britain. SULPHURIC ACID (Vol. 26, p. 65),
illustrated, by Dr. Lunge, describes the properties, reactions and
manufacture of the most important of all chemicals, including the more
modern contact processes.

[Sidenote: Drugs, Origin and Manufacture]

As a key to the subject of the origin and manufacture of drugs, the
article PHARMACOLOGY (Vol. 21, p. 347), by Dr. Ralph Stockman, professor
of materia medica and therapeutics in the University of Glasgow,
presents a great amount of interesting and valuable information on the
action of chemical substances (apart from foods) on all kinds of
animals, from bacteria up to man. A short history of pharmacology is
given and a large part of the article concerns the action of drugs.
There is also a classification of drugs according to the latest and most
scientific methods into twenty-eight groups, describing the effects of
each group. An appendix to the article, by Dr. H. L. Hennessy, is
entitled _Terminology in Therapeutics_, and is a general explanation of
the common names used in the therapeutic classification of drugs.

Since therapeutics is concerned with the remedial power of drugs and the
conditions under which they are to be used, the article THERAPEUTICS
(Vol. 26, p. 793), by Dr. Sir Lauder Brunton, of St. Bartholomew’s
Hospital, London, and author of the well-known treatise, _Modern
Therapeutics_, should not be overlooked, nor POISON (Vol. 21, p. 893),
by Dr. Sir Thomas Stevenson, lecturer on chemistry and forensic medicine
at Guy’s Hospital, London, wherein all poisons are classified and their
antidotes are indicated.

PHARMACY (Vol. 21, p. 355), by E. M. Holmes, of the Pharmaceutical
Museum, London, is largely historical in its nature, and yields much
interesting and valuable information about the pharmacist. We learn that
an Egyptian papyrus of the date 2300 B.C. gives direction as to the
preparation of prescriptions, and that diachylon plaster, invented by
Menecrates in A.D. 1, is used for the same purposes to-day. A great deal
of curious knowledge about ancient remedies, such as the thigh bone of a
hanged man, moss grown on a human skull, the ashes of the head of a
coal-black cat, etc., renders this article especially entertaining.
PHARMACOPŒIA (Vol. 21, p. 353), also by Mr. Holmes, tells about the
pharmacopœias in use in different countries, the standardization of
drugs, etc.

In the list at the end of this chapter are noted the numerous separate
articles on drugs, their preparation and use that appear in the
Britannica. Mention should be made of the articles on the elements, such
as IRON (Vol. 14, p. 799), ARSENIC (Vol. 2, p. 653), MERCURY (Vol. 18,
p. 158), IODINE (Vol. 14, p. 725), BROMINE (Vol. 4, p. 633), SODIUM
(Vol. 25, p. 343), POTASSIUM (Vol. 22, p. 200), MAGNESIUM (Vol. 17, p.
321), BISMUTH (Vol. 4, p. 11). Separate sections dealing with
pharmacology are found in the articles on very many plants, such as ALOE
(Vol. 1, p. 720), ANISE (Vol. 2, p. 55), ARROWROOT (Vol. 2, p. 649),
_Iceland Moss_ (Vol. 14, p. 241), CINCHONA (Vol. 6, p. 369), COCA (Vol.
6, p. 614), COLCHICUM (Vol. 6, p. 661), DANDELION (Vol. 7, p. 801), HOP
(Vol. 13, p. 678), HOREHOUND (Vol. 13, p. 692), LOBELIA (Vol. 16, p.
837), MINT (Vol. 18, p. 557), MUSTARD (Vol. 19, p. 97), PEPPERMINT (Vol.
21, p. 128), etc.

[Sidenote: Biographies of Eminent Scientists]

The scientific biographies include not a few subjects which will be of
interest, owing to familiarity with the names, to those engaged in the
chemical and drug business. Among these are LISTER, BARON JOSEPH L.
(Vol. 16, p. 777), to whose work and teaching the present importance of
the manufacture of antiseptics is largely due; PASTEUR, LOUIS (Vol. 20,
p. 892); CURIE, PIERRE, and MME. MARIE CURIE (Vol. 7, p. 644), the
physicists who first announced the existence of radium; LIEBIG, BARON J.
VON (Vol. 16, p. 590), the great physiological chemist; LUNGE, GEORG
(Vol. 17, p. 126), the noted expert in technical chemistry, already
mentioned as a contributor to the Britannica, and GLAUBER, J. R. (Vol.
12, p. 114), the German chemist who made a living chiefly by the sale of
secret chemical and medicinal preparations.


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL
 INTEREST TO THOSE ENGAGED IN THE MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF CHEMICALS AND
                                 DRUGS

 Abel, Sir Frederick A.
 Acacia
 Acenaphthene
 Acetic Acid
 Aceto-Acetic Ester
 Acetone
 Acetophenone
 Acetylene
 Achard, F. C.
 Acid
 Acid Amides
 Aconite
 Acorus Calamus
 Acridine
 Adenine
 Adipocere
 Affinity, Chemical
 Albumin, or Albumen
 Alcohol
 Alcohols
 Aldehydes
 Alembic
 Algaroth, Powder of
 Alizarin
 Alkahest
 Alkali
 Alkali Manufacture
 Alkaline Earths
 Alkaloid
 Alkanet
 Allantoin
 Alloxan
 Alloxantin
 Allyl Alcohol
 Almond
 Aloe
 Alum
 Aluminium
 Amidines
 Amines
 Ammonia
 Ammoniacum
 Amygdalin
 Amyl Alcohols
 Amyl Nitrite
 Anaesthesia and Anaesthetics
 Analysis
 Anatto
 Andrews, Thomas
 Angelica
 Aniline
 Animé
 Anise
 Anthracene
 Anthraquinone
 Antimony
 Antipyrine
 Antiseptics
 Apothecary
 Araroba Powder
 Archil
 Argol
 Aristolochia
 Arnica
 Arrowroot
 Arsenic
 Asafetida
 Asparagine
 Aspen
 Asphodel
 Azo Compounds
 Azoximes
 Baeyer, Adolf von
 Balard, Antoine J.
 Balsam
 Barium
 Base
 Baumé, Antoine
 Bdellium
 Becher, J. J.
 Bell, Jacob
 Belladonna
 Benzaldehyde
 Benzine
 Benzidine
 Benzoic Acid
 Benzoin
 Benzophenone
 Benzyl Alcohol
 Berberine
 Bergman, Torbern Olof
 Berthelot, M. P. E.
 Berthollet, C. L.
 Beryllium, or Glucinum
 Berzelius, J. J.
 Betaine
 Betel Nut
 Bhang
 Bibirine or Bebeerine
 Bichromates and Chromates
 Bismuth
 Bittern
 Black, Joseph
 Borage
 Borax
 Boric Acid or Boracic Acid
 Boron
 Boussingault, J. B. J. D.
 Brande, William Thomas
 Bromine
 Brown, S. M.
 Brucine
 Buchu
 Bunsen, P. W. von
 Butyl Alcohols
 Butyric Acid
 Cadmium
 Caesium
 Caffeine
 Cajuput Oil
 Calabar Bean
 Calcium
 Calomel
 Calvert, F. Crace
 Camphors
 Cannizzaro, Stanislao
 Cantharides
 Capsicum
 Capsule
 Caraway
 Carbazol
 Carbide
 Carbohydrate
 Carbolic Acid
 Carbon
 Carbonates
 Carbon Bisulphide
 Carbonic Acid
 Cardamon
 Carvacrol
 Cassia
 Castor Oil
 Catalysis
 Catechu
 Caustic
 Cavendish, Henry
 Cayenne Pepper
 Cellulose
 Cerium
 Chamomile, or Camomile Flowers
 Charcoal
 Chemical Action
 Chemistry
 Chevreul, M. F.
 Chloral
 Chlorates
 Chlorine
 Chloroform
 Chlorpicrin
 Chromium
 Chrysene
 Cimicifuga
 Cinchona
 Cinnamic Acid
 Cinnamon
 Cinnolin
 Citric Acid
 Clark, Thomas
 Cloves
 Coal-tar
 Cobalt
 Coca, or Cuca
 Cocaine
 Coco-nut Palm
 Cod-liver Oil
 Colchicum
 Colcothar
 Collodion
 Colocynth
 Colt’s-Foot
 Columbium
 Combustion
 Condenser
 Conine
 Copaiba
 Copal
 Copper
 Copperas
 Coriander
 Corrosive Sublimate
 Coumarin
 Coumarones
 Creosote
 Cresols
 Crookes, Sir William
 Crotonic Acid
 Croton Oil
 Crystallization
 Cubebs
 Cumin
 Curie, Pierre
 Cyanamide
 Cyanic Acid and Cyanates
 Cyanide
 Cyanogen
 Cytisine
 Dalton, John
 Dammar
 Dandelion
 Daniell, John F.
 Davy, Sir Humphry
 Decolourizing
 Depilatory
 Dessication
 Dewar, Sir James
 Dextrine
 Diazo Compounds
 Didymium
 Digitalis
 Dill
 Diphenyl
 Disinfectants
 Distillation
 Dividivi
 Döbereiner, J. W.
 Dragon’s Blood
 Drug
 Dulong, Pierre Louis
 Dumas, J. B. A.
 Durene
 Earth
 Ecgonine
 Elaterium
 Elecampine
 Electrochemistry
 Electrolysis
 Electrometallurgy
 Element
 Elixir
 Elm
 Epsom Salts
 Equivalent
 Erbium
 Erdmann, Otto Linné
 Ergot, or Spurred Rye
 Erythrite
 Esters
 Ether
 Ethers
 Ethyl
 Ethyl Chloride
 Ethylene
 Eucalyptus
 Eugenol
 Euphorbium
 Eupion
 Europium
 Fehling, Hermann von
 Fennel
 Fenugreek
 Fig
 Filter
 Fir
 Fischer, Emil
 Fittig, Rudolf
 Flamel, Nicolas
 Flavin
 Fluoranthene
 Fluorene
 Fluorescein
 Fluorine
 Formalin, or Formaldehyde
 Formic Acid
 Formula
 Fourcroy, A. F., Comte de
 Foxglove
 Frankland, Sir Edward
 Frémy, Edmond
 Fresenius, Karl R.
 Friedel, Charles
 Fructose, or Fruit-sugar
 Fuchs, Johann N. von
 Fulminic Acid
 Fumaric and Maleic Acids
 Fumitory
 Furazanes
 Furfurane
 Fusel Oil
 Gadolinium
 Galangal
 Galbanum
 Gallic Acid
 Gallium
 Gamboge
 Gannal, J. N.
 Garlic
 Gay-Lussac, J. L.
 Geber
 Gelatin
 Gelsemium
 Gentian

 Geoffroy, E. F.
 Gerhardt, Charles F.
 Germanium
 Gibbs, Oliver Wolcott
 Gilbert, Sir Joseph H.
 Ginger
 Ginseng
 Gladstone, John Hall
 Glaser, Christopher
 Glauber, Johann R.
 Glauber’s Salt
 Glucinum
 Glucose
 Glucoside
 Glutaric Acid
 Glycerin, or Glycerol
 Glycols
 Gmelin (family)
 Gold
 Graham, Thomas
 Grains of Paradise
 Greenheart
 Guaco, Huaco or Guao
 Guaiacum
 Guanidine
 Guarana
 Guelder Rose
 Guimet, Jean B.
 Gum
 Guyton de Morveau, Baron
 Harcourt, W. Vernon
 Hartshorn, Spirits of
 Hashish
 Hellebore
 Helmont, Jean B. van
 Hemp
 Henbane
 Henna
 Henry, William
 Herb
 Hippuric Acid
 Hofmann, A. W. von
 Homberg, William
 Homoeopathy
 Hop
 Horehound
 Houseleek
 Hydantoin
 Hydracrylic Acid
 Hydrastine
 Hydrate
 Hydrazine
 Hydrazone
 Hydrocarbon
 Hydrochloric Acid
 Hydrogen
 Hydroxylamine
 Hyposulphite of Soda
 Hyssop
 Iatrochemistry
 Iceland Moss
 Imidazoles, or Glyoxalines
 Indazoles
 Indene
 Indicator
 Indigo
 Indium
 Indole
 Indulines
 Inulin
 Iodine
 Iodoform
 Ipecacuanha
 Iron
 Isatin
 Isomerism
 Isoxazoles
 Jaborandi
 Jalap
 Juniper
 Kámalá
 Kekulé, F. August
 Kelp
 Kermes
 Ketenes
 Ketones
 Kino
 Klaproth, M. H.
 Kolbe, A. W. Hermann
 Kopp, Hermann F. M.
 Kousso
 Kunkel, or Kunckel von Lowenstjern, J.
 Lactic Acid
 Lactones
 Laevulinic Acid
 Lanolin
 Lanthanum
 Laudanum
 Lavender
 Lavoisier, A. L.
 Lead
 Le Blanc, Nicolas
 Lemery, Nicolas
 Lemon
 Liebig, Baron J. von
 Lime
 Linseed
 Liquorice
 Lister, Baron
 Lithium
 Litmus
 Lobelia
 Lunge, Georg
 Madder
 Magnesium
 Magnus, H. G.
 Malic Acid
 Mallow
 Malonic Acid
 Malt
 Mammee Apple
 Mandelic Acid
 Mandrake
 Manganese
 Mangosteen
 Manna
 Marggraf, Andreas S.
 Marignac, Jean C. G. de
 Mastic
 Mayow, John
 Medical Jurisprudence
 Medicine
 Mellitic Acid
 Mandeléeff, Dmitri I.
 Mercaptans
 Mercury
 Mesoxalic Acid
 Methyl Alcohol
 Meyer, J. Lothar
 Meyer, Victor
 Microcosmic Salt
 Mineral Waters
 Mint
 Mitscherlich, E.
 Mohr, K. Friedrich
 Moissan, Henri
 Molybdenum
 Mond, Ludwig
 Morphine
 Mucic Acid
 Murexide
 Murray, John
 Musk
 Muspratt, J. and J. S.
 Mustard
 Mustard Oils
 Myrrh
 Myrtle
 Naphtha
 Naphthalene
 Naphthols
 Naphthylamines
 Nepenthes
 Newlands, John A. R.
 Nickel
 Nightshade
 Niobium
 Nitre
 Nitric Acid
 Nitrobenzene
 Nitro Compounds
 Nitrogen
 Nitroglycerin
 Nobel, Alfred B.
 Nux Vomica
 Officinal
 Oils
 Olefine
 Oleic Acid
 Opium
 Orcin
 Orpiment
 Orris-root
 Oxalic Acid
 Oxazoles
 Oxide
 Oximes
 Oxygen
 Oxyhydrogen Flame
 Palladium
 Palmitic Acid
 Paraffin
 Paraldehyde
 Pasteur, Louis
 Pelouze, T. Jules
 Pennyroyal
 Peppermint
 Pepsin
 Perfumery
 Perkin, Sir W. H.
 Pettenkofer, Max J. von
 Pharmacology
 Pharmacopoeia
 Pharmacy
 Phenacetin
 Phenanthrene
 Phenazine
 Phenol
 Phenolphthalein
 Phosphates
 Phosphorus
 Phthalazines
 Phthalic Acids
 Picene
 Picric Acid
 Picrotoxin
 Pilocarpine
 Pimento
 Pine
 Piperazin
 Piperine
 Piperonal
 Platinum
 Plattner, K. F.
 Podophyllin
 Poison
 Polymethylenes
 Pomade
 Potashes
 Potassium
 Priestley, Joseph
 Primuline
 Propiolic Acid
 Propyl Alcohols
 Proust, Joseph Louis
 Prout, William
 Prussic Acid
 Pumice
 Purin
 Purslane
 Pyrazines
 Pyrazoles
 Pyrene
 Pyrethrum
 Pyridine
 Pyrimidines
 Pyrocatechin
 Pyrogallol
 Pyrones
 Pyrophorous
 Pyrrol
 Pyruvic Acid
 Quassia
 Quercitron
 Quinazolines
 Quinine
 Quinoline
 Quinones
 Quinoxalines
 Radium
 Ramsay, Sir William
 Raoult, François M.
 Rare Earths
 Regnault, H. V.
 Resorcin
 Retene
 Rhamnus Purshiana
 Rhatany, or Krameria Root
 Rhodium
 Rhubarb
 Richter, J. B.
 Roebuck, John
 Roscoe, Sir H. E.
 Rose
 Rouelle, G. F.
 Rouge
 Rubidium
 Ruthenium
 Saccharic Acid
 Saccharin
 Safflower
 Saffron
 Safranine
 Sainte-Claire Deville, E. H.
 Sal Ammoniac
 Salep
 Salicin, Salicinum
 Saliscylic
 Salt
 Saltpetre
 Samarium
 Sandalwood
 Sandarach
 Santonin
 Sarsaparilla
 Scammony
 Scandium
 Scheele, K. W.
 Schlippe’s Salt
 Schönbein, C. F.
 Schützenberger, P.
 Senega
 Senna
 Sesame
 Silica
 Silicon
 Silliman, Benjamin
 Silver
 Snake-root
 Soap
 Soap-bark
 Sodium
 Solution
 Spectroscopy
 Spikenard, or Nard
 Spirits
 Sponges
 Squill
 Stahl, G. E.
 Stas, J. S.
 Stearic Acid
 Sterochemistry
 Stero-isomerism
 Stoichometry
 Stramonium
 Strontium
 Strophanthus
 Strychnine
 Styrolene
 Succinic Acid
 Sugar
 Sulphonal
 Sulphonic Acids
 Sulphur
 Sulphuric Acid
 Sumbul, or Sumbal
 Supra-renal extract
 Talc
 Tamarisk
 Tannin or Tannic Acid
 Tantalum
 Tar
 Taraxacum
 Tartar
 Tartaric Acid
 Tellurium
 Tennant, Charles
 Tennant, Smithson
 Terbium
 Terpenes
 Tetrazines
 Tetrazoles
 Thénard, L. J.
 Therapeutics
 Thermochemistry
 Thiazines
 Thiazoles
 Thiophen
 Thomsen, Julius
 Thomson, Thomas
 Thorium
 Thymol
 Thyroid
 Tin
 Tincture
 Titanium
 Toilet Powders
 Toluene
 Tonqua Bean
 Tooth Powders and Pastes
 Triazines
 Triazoles
 Triphenylmethane
 Trophine
 Tungsten
 Turmeric
 Upas
 Uranium
 Urea, or Carbamide
 Urethane
 Urotropin
 Valency
 Valerian
 Valeric Acid
 Vanadium
 Vanilla
 Van’t Hoff, J. H.
 Vaseline
 Vauquelin, L. N.
 Veratrum
 Veronal
 Viburnum
 Vitriol
 Weighing Machines
 Weights and Measures
 Weldon, Walter
 Wenzel, K. F.
 Williamson, A. W.
 Wine
 Wintergreen
 Winter’s Bark
 Wislicenus, J.
 Witch-hazel
 Wöhler, Friedrich
 Wollaston, W. H.
 Wormwood
 Wurtz, C. A.
 Xanthic Acid
 Xanthone
 Xylene
 Yew
 Young, James
 Ytterbium
 Yttrium
 Zinc
 Zirconium




                              CHAPTER XIII
            FOR MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS OF FOOD PRODUCTS


The manufacturer of or dealer in food products must of necessity be
interested in questions of transportation by land and sea, of taxation,
of agriculture, stock-raising and fishing, for example. For all such
subjects as these he is referred to other chapters of this Guide. Here
he will find only the chief articles on the subjects most closely
related to the study of food products. But on these he may glean a
wealth of information that will be of greatest value to him, and from
them he can turn readily and with profit to a survey of the larger area
covered by other chapters.

As a general introduction to the subject the student should read
DIETETICS (Vol. 8, p. 214), by the late Dr. W. O. Atwater, who was in
charge of the Nutrition Investigation of the U. S. Department of
Agriculture, and R. D. Milner, also of that Department. This article
deals with the composition and nutritive values of foods, their fuel
value, quantities of nutriments needed, hygienic and pecuniary economy
of foods (with tables showing the percentage composition of common food
materials), conditions of digestibility, and other matters of equal
importance. NUTRITION (Vol. 19, p. 920), by Prof. D. N. Paton and Dr. E.
P. Cathcart, both of the University of Glasgow, discusses more
particularly digestion and the utilization of the different food
constituents.

[Sidenote: Food Preservation]

After establishing the value and relative importance of the various
substances used as food, it is of great interest to everyone in the
business to consider the subject of FOOD PRESERVATION (Vol. 10, p. 612),
an article by Otto Hehner, formerly president of the Society of Public
Analysts, in which there are separate sections on _Preservation by Heat_
(which includes all canning processes); _by Chemicals_; _by Drying_; _by
Refrigeration_; _by Pickling_. The sterilization of milk, condensed milk
and milk powder all fall within the scope of this article. The
preservation of food by cold is described in fuller detail in the
article REFRIGERATING AND ICE MAKING (Vol. 23, p. 30), by T. B.
Lightfoot, author of the standard technical book on that subject. Among
the separate articles on preservative materials are VINEGAR (Vol. 28, p.
96), ACETIC ACID (Vol. 1, p. 135), CITRIC ACID (Vol. 6, p. 397), OILS
(Vol. 20, p. 43), SALT (Vol. 24, p. 87), SALTPETRE (Vol. 24, p. 93),
SUGAR (Vol. 26, p. 32), BORAX (Vol. 4, p. 243), FORMALIN OR FORMALDEHYDE
(Vol. 10, p. 667), BENZOIC ACID (Vol. 3, p. 756), SALICYLIC ACID (Vol.
24, p. 69), SULPHUR, _Compounds_ (Vol. 26, p. 63), ALCOHOL (Vol. 1, p.
525).

[Sidenote: Adulteration]

The objections to the use of some of these chemicals are discussed in
ADULTERATION (Vol. 1, p. 218), by Otto Hehner. This article is about as
long as 50 pages of this Guide. There is an interesting historical
introduction, from which we learn that the first legal statute in which
the adulteration of food is noticed dates from the reign of King John in
England (1203). There is an elaborate account of all the subsequent
legislation in Great Britain, the United States, and Germany. The
effects upon digestion of the chemical preservatives mentioned above are
shown in the light of the very latest investigations. There is a section
on colouring matter in food, with information about harmless and harmful
dyes; and the last part of the article considers adulteration as
recently applied to the more important articles of food, such as milk
(with tests for borax and formaldehyde), cream, butter, cheese, lard,
oils, flour and bread, sugar, marmalade and jams, tea, coffee, cocoa and
chocolate, wine, beer, spirits, non-alcoholic drinks, and vinegar.

The properties of adulterants and colouring matters are described in
separate articles, such as GLUCOSE (Vol. 12, p. 141); SACCHARIN (Vol.
23, p. 970); PARAFFIN (Vol. 20, p. 752), which is sometimes added to
coffee when it is roasted; ALUM (Vol. 1, p. 766), often used with weak
and unstable flours in bread making, and unwholesome, although not
strictly speaking an adulterant; SAGO (Vol. 23, p. 1003) and ARROWROOT
(Vol. 2, p. 649), which provide adulterants of cocoa; CHICORY (Vol. 6,
p. 131), which many consumers insist upon using in their coffee; COPPER,
_Compounds_ (Vol. 7, p. 109), which describes the copper salts used for
colouring canned vegetables; ANATTO (Vol. 1, p. 943) and TURMERIC (Vol.
27, p. 474), two harmless vegetable colouring matters, much employed;
and ANILINE (Vol. 2, p. 47). A full list of the various other colouring
matters will be found in the article DYEING (Vol. 8, p. 744).

Another group of articles will be found particularly useful in
connection with the manufacture of certain classes of food products.
Among these are FERMENTATION (Vol. 10, p. 275), by J. L. Baker, the
noted English analytical and consulting chemist; FUNGI (Vol. 11, p.
333), illustrated, with its information about molds; BACTERIOLOGY (Vol.
3, p. 156), illustrated, especially for the material relating to the
nature of toxins (p. 174)—both of these articles by the late Professor
Ward of Cambridge and Professor Blackman of the University of Leeds;
MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE, _Food Poisoning_ (Vol. 18, p. 29), by Prof. H. H.
Littlejohn, of the University of Edinburgh, and T. A. Ingram; and POISON
(Vol. 21, p. 893), by the late Dr. Sir Thomas Stevenson, of Guy’s
Hospital, London.

The diseases of animals which affect meat are described in the article
VETERINARY SCIENCE (Vol. 28, p. 2), by George Fleming, author of _Animal
Plagues_, and Prof. John MacQueen of the London Veterinary College,
which contains sections on diseases of cattle, sheep and pigs as well as
on the principal parasites of domestic animals; and there are separate
articles on ANTHRAX (Vol. 2, p. 106); FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE (Vol. 10,
p. 617), PLEURO-PNEUMONIA, or LUNG PLAGUE (Vol. 21, p. 838), and
RINDERPEST (Vol. 23, p. 348).

[Sidenote: Special Foods]

The article FLOUR AND FLOUR MANUFACTURE (Vol. 10, p. 548), by George F.
Zimmer, not only describes the processes of milling and of dressing and
bleaching the flour, but also gives the history of milling from the
earliest times, and deals with the special customs of different
countries. There is a very full article BREAD (Vol. 4, p. 465), by the
same contributor. It is not generally known that there are in existence
remains of cakes made by the Swiss lake-dwellers in the Stone Age. The
author says that, in all probability, they were baked on hot stones. The
machine bakeries of the present day are described; and there are
sections on sanitation of bakehouses, quality, flavour and colour of
flour, baking powders, methods of dough making (the ferment-and-dough,
the sponge-and-dough, and other systems), leavened, unleavened and
aerated bread, and the recently invented Apostolov process, which among
other advantages, permits the utilization of about 87½% of the wheat
berry in bread making. A complete modern bread-making plant is
described, together with the latest types of machine kneaders, dough
dividers and mixers, and baking ovens. There are also articles on
BISCUIT (Vol. 3, p. 992), MACARONI (Vol. 17, p. 192), VERMICELLI (Vol.
27, p. 1024), and GLUTEN (Vol. 12, p. 145).

The article STARCH (Vol. 25, p. 794) treats of the manufacture of this
most important alimentary substance. The materials from which the chief
food starches are made are described in MAIZE (Vol. 7, p. 448),
ARROWROOT (Vol. 2, p. 649), with illustrations showing the appearance
under the microscope of the substances which pass commercially under the
name of arrowroot or farina; SAGO (Vol. 23, p. 1003), TAPIOCA (Vol. 26,
p. 413), and CASSAVA (Vol. 5, p. 457). OAT (Vol. 19, p. 938) has
information about the manufacture of oatmeal.

The article SUGAR (Vol. 26, p. 35) is by two practical experts, Alfred
and Valentine W. Chapman. It deals with the chemistry, manufacture,
history and statistics of this important food product as well as with
the cultivation of the sugar cane and beet.

Among articles on the products in the manufacture of which sugar is
employed is JAMS AND JELLIES (Vol. 15, p. 150), by Otto Hehner. The
author points out many things of interest, for example why
starch-glucose is an ingredient and not an adulterant of these products,
and he shows the baselessness of the prejudice against the use of beet
sugar in their manufacture. The manufacturer of jellies and preserves
will find separate articles on all the fruits employed, and other
information in GELATIN (Vol. 11, p. 554); in IRISH MOSS (Vol. 14, p.
795) as to the properties of vegetable gelatin; and in ISINGLASS (Vol.
14, p. 872), which, besides its gelatinous qualities, possesses the
property of clarifying wines, beers, and other liquids. CONFECTIONERY
(Vol. 6, p. 898) describes an important industry—which until the middle
of the 19th century was part of the druggist’s business. See also
CHOCOLATE (Vol. 6, p. 259) and JUJUBE (Vol. 15, p. 546).

SALT (Vol. 24, p. 87) covers the manufacture of salt very fully. It is
curious to note that the termination “wich” in English place-names
points to localities of ancient salt manufacture, for “wich” is an old
English word meaning saltspring. This article contains an interesting
section on the _Ancient History and Religious Symbolism_ of salt (p.
90), by the late Dr. William Robertson Smith. The preservative qualities
of salt were held to make it a peculiarly fitting symbol of any enduring
compact, and in more than one part of the world cakes of salt have been
used as money.

[Sidenote: Dairy Products]

Butter and cheese manufacture fall under the article DAIRY AND DAIRY
FARMING (Vol. 7, p. 737), illustrated, by the late Dr. William Fream, of
Edinburgh University. There are sections on _Milk Production_; _Cheese
and Cheesemaking_, including Canadian and American factory practice and
the Babcock and Russell investigations in Wisconsin which have opened up
a new field for commercial exploitation (the varieties of English,
French, German, and Italian cheeses being also described); _Butter and
Butter-making_, _Dairy Factories_, _Adulteration of Dairy Produce_; _The
Milk Trade_, _American Dairying_, etc. MARGARINE, the “perfectly
wholesome butter substitute” is the subject of a separate article (Vol.
17, p. 704).

There is an article on LARD (Vol. 16, p. 214), showing what real leaf
lard is, and how the term is applied in commerce. OILS (Vol. 20, p. 43),
by Dr. Julius Lewkowitsch, author of _Chemical Technology and Analysis
of Oils, Fats, and Waxes_, deals with the fixed oils and fats, and
essential, etheral or volatile oils. Some of these are among the most
important articles of food, and the oil and fat industry may be
considered as old as the human race itself. The three processes of oil
extraction are described, also refining and bleaching, methods of
testing, etc. A list of all oils and fats, including those that are
edible, is given. For the chief oils used as food see OLIVE (Vol. 20, p.
85), COTTON, _Cotton-seed_ (Vol. 7, p. 260), SESAME (Vol. 24, p. 701),
SUNFLOWER (Vol. 26, p. 102), POPPY OIL (Vol. 22, p. 91).

Other articles on foods deal with the preparation for the market of such
products as GINGER (Vol. 12, p. 27), MUSTARD (Vol. 19, p. 97), PEPPER
(Vol. 21, p. 127), with the different varieties distinguished, CAYENNE
PEPPER (Vol. 5, p. 589), VINEGAR (Vol. 28, p. 96), PIMENTO (Vol. 21, p.
614), CLOVES (Vol. 6, p. 562), CINNAMON (Vol. 6, p. 376), CURRY (Vol. 7,
p. 649), CAVIARE (Vol. 5, p. 582), from which we learn that the finer
grades rarely find their way out of Russia; KETCHUP (Vol. 15, p. 761),
CHUTNEY (Vol. 6, p. 350), PICKLE (Vol. 21, p. 584), VANILLA (Vol. 27, p.
894), RAISIN (Vol. 22, p. 864), CURRANT (Vol. 7, p. 648), PRUNE (Vol.
22, p. 518), FIG (Vol. 10, p. 332), and GUAVA (Vol. 12, p. 665).

[Sidenote: Beverages, Tea and Coffee]

The same completeness is displayed in the Britannica articles on
beverages. TEA (Vol. 26, p. 476), by John McEwan, has an admirable
historical introduction. It was not until the middle of the 17th century
that the English began to use tea. It is a curious fact that whereas 35
years ago China practically supplied the world with tea, to-day Russia
alone takes half of her export. The reason for this is explained. The
characteristics of all varieties of tea are given and the main facts
about the cultivation and manufacture. _Tea Adulteration_ and _Effects
on Health_ are other sections of this valuable article.

COFFEE (Vol. 6, p. 646) is treated in very similar fashion by A. B.
Rendle and W. G. Freeman. This beverage, in spite of fierce religious
opposition, became the national beverage of the Arabians, and finally
appeared in Europe in the 17th century. The physiological action of
coffee has a section all to itself. Coffee consumption, roasting and
adulteration are also discussed. It is of interest to note that while
one branch of the Anglo-Saxon race, namely the people of the United
States, is near the head of the list of coffee consumers, others,
especially Great Britain, Canada and Australia “are almost at the foot,
using only about 1 lb. of coffee per head each year.” In the United
States “the average consumption per head is about 11 or 12 lbs. per
annum.”

COCOA (Vol. 6, p. 628) is an interesting and valuable article on “the
food of the gods”—the great beverage and dietary substance which America
has given the world. Modern lovers of chocolate as a beverage (which is
the same as cocoa save that the fat has not been extracted) will envy
the digestive powers of the Emperor Montezuma of Mexico who had, each
day, 50 jars of chocolate prepared for his personal consumption.

BEER (Vol. 3, p. 642), by Dr. Philip Schidrowitz, member of the
Institute of Brewery Council, confines itself to the history of this
important beverage, the chemical composition of beers of different
types, and information in regard to production and consumption. In
BREWING (Vol. 4, p. 506) this same author enters very fully into the
manufacturing operations. The English and foreign systems are described
and there are many illustrations. It is curious to note that Pliny, who
is the earliest writer to mention beer, describes it as scorned by the
Romans, who looked upon it as only fit for barbarians, and he thought it
a more sinful drink than wine. “So exquisite,” he says, “is the cunning
of mankind in gratifying their vicious appetites, that they have
invented a method to make water itself produce intoxication.” The
section on _Brewing Chemistry_ is very valuable. In connection with
Brewing there is an article on MALT (Vol. 17, p. 499), illustrated and
very complete in its treatment, by Arthur R. Ling, editor _Journal of
the Institute of Brewing_, and one on HOP (Vol. 13, p. 677), by the late
Dr. Wm. Fream. Dr. Schidrowitz also contributes the article WINE (Vol.
28, p. 716). The art of wine-making is thoroughly described, and there
are most interesting sections on the wines of France, Spain, Portugal,
Germany, Italy, Austria-Hungary, United States, classifying the
different varieties and affording a full survey of the industry.

SPIRITS (Vol. 25, p. 694), illustrated, and also by Dr. Schidrowitz, is
a general article covering the subject of the distillation of fermented
saccharine and starchy liquids. The account is both historical and
technical, and there are separate and more specific articles on BRANDY
(Vol. 4, p. 428), RUM (Vol. 23, p. 825), ARRACK (Vol. 2, p. 642), WHISKY
(Vol. 28, p. 591), in which the difference between three main
types—Scotch, Irish and American—is carefully explained; VODKA (Vol. 28,
p. 170), GIN (Vol. 12, p. 26). The many flavoured and sweetened forms of
alcohol are described in the article LIQUEURS (Vol. 16, p. 744), where
we also learn the difference between a “cordial” and a “liqueur.” There
are separate articles on ABSINTHE (Vol. 1, p. 75), BENEDICTINE (Vol. 3,
p. 721), CHARTREUSE (Vol. 5, p. 954), CURAÇOA (Vol. 7, p. 636), KIRSCH
(Vol. 15, p. 834), and VERMOUTH (Vol. 27, p. 1029).

MINERAL WATERS (Vol. 18, p. 517) classifies all the great springs
according to their mineral constituents, and discusses the effects upon
digestion of their use, and their value in medical treatment.

The appended list includes a large number of articles of interest to the
food producers, including chemical compounds and flavouring extracts.


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL
 INTEREST TO THOSE ENGAGED IN THE MANUFACTURE OR SALE OF FOOD PRODUCTS

 Absinthe
 Acetic Acid
 Acorus Calamus
 Adulteration
 Aerated Waters
 Alcohol
 Aldehydes
 Ale
 Almond
 Alum
 Anatto
 Anchovy
 Angelica
 Aniline
 Anise
 Anthrax
 Apple
 Apricot
 Arrack
 Arrowroot
 Artichoke
 Asparagus
 Aspic
 Avocado Pear
 Bacon
 Bacteriology
 Bael Fruit
 Banana
 Bannock
 Barley
 Barm
 Bean
 Bee, _Bee-keeping_
 Beef
 Beer
 Beet
 Benedictine
 Benzoic Acid
 Bilberry, or Whortleberry
 Biltong
 Birch
 Biscuit
 Bisque
 Bitters
 Blackberry
 Bohea
 Boletus
 Borax
 Brandy
 Brazil Nut
 Bread
 Bread Fruit
 Brewing
 Buckwheat
 Butter
 Butter-nut
 Cabbage
 Caffeine
 Candle
 Capers
 Caraway
 Cardamon
 Carrot
 Cassava
 Cassia
 Cattle
 Caviare
 Cayenne Pepper
 Celery
 Chanterelle
 Chartreuse
 Chasse
 Cheese
 Cherry
 Chestnut
 Chicory
 Chive
 Chocolate
 Chupatty
 Chutney
 Cider
 Cinnamon
 Citric Acid
 Citron
 Claret
 Cloves
 Cocoa
 Coco-nut Palm
 Cod
 Coffee
 Confectionery
 Cookery
 Copper
 Cotton
 Crab
 Cranberry
 Cucumber
 Curaçoa
 Currant
 Curry
 Date Palm
 Dietary
 Dietetics
 Dyeing
 Eel
 Enzyme
 Esters
 Extract
 Fennel
 Fenugreek
 Fermentation
 Fig
 Fisheries
 Flour and Flour Manufacture
 Food
 Food Preservation
 Foot and Mouth Disease
 Formalin, or Formaldehyde
 Fructose
 Fruit
 Fruit and Flower Farming
 Fungi
 Furfurane
 Garlic
 Gelatin
 Gentian
 Ghee
 Gin
 Ginger
 Glucose
 Gluten
 Gooseberry
 Grain Trade
 Ground Nut
 Gumbo
 Guava
 Haddock
 Herring
 Hippocras
 Honey
 Hop
 Horseradish
 Huckleberry
 Hyssop
 Indian Corn
 Iris
 Irish Moss
 Isinglass
 Jams and Jellies
 Jujube
 Juniper
 Junket
 Kava
 Ketchup
 Kipper
 Kirsch
 Koumiss
 Kvass, or Kwass
 Lactic Acid
 Lard
 Lemon
 Lentil
 Liqueurs
 Loaf
 Lobster
 Macaroni
 Mackerel
 Maize
 Malmsey
 Malt
 Maple
 Marchpane
 Margarine
 Marmalade
 Maté
 Meal
 Mealie
 Meat
 Medical Jurisprudence
 Medlar
 Melon
 Milk
 Mineral Waters
 Mint
 Molasses
 Mulberry
 Mulligatawny
 Mushroom
 Mustard
 Nasturtium
 Negus
 Nut
 Nutmeg
 Nutrition
 Oat
 Oils
 Okra
 Oleic Acid
 Olive
 Onion
 Orange
 Oyster
 Palmitic Acid
 Paraffin
 Pea
 Peach
 Pear
 Pemmican
 Pepper
 Pepsin
 Perry
 Pickle
 Pig
 Pilchard
 Pimento
 Pine-apple
 Pistachio-nut
 Plants, _Pathology_
 Pleuro Pneumonia
 Plum
 Poison
 Pomegranate
 Poppy Oil
 Potato
 Poultry and Poultry Farming
 Prune
 Pudding
 Puff-ball
 Pulque
 Pumpkin
 Punch
 Quince
 Radish
 Raisin
 Raspberry
 Ratafia
 Rice
 Rinderpest
 Rum
 Rye
 Saccharin
 Sago
 Saké
 Salicylic Acid
 Salmon
 Salsify
 Salt
 Saltpetre
 Scone
 Sea Kale
 Sesame
 Shaddock
 Sheep
 Sherbet
 Sherry
 Shrimp
 Sorghum
 Spirits
 Sprat
 Starch
 Steak
 Stearic Acid
 Strawberry
 Sturgeon
 Suet
 Sugar
 Sulphur
 Sunflower
 Syrup
 Tamarind
 Tapioca
 Tart
 Tea
 Terpenes
 Thyme
 Tomato
 Treacle
 Trichinosis
 Truffle
 Tunny
 Turmeric
 Vanilla
 Venison
 Vermicelli
 Vermouth
 Veterinary Science
 Vine
 Vinegar
 Vodka
 Walnut
 Wheat
 Whisky
 Wine
 Wintergreen
 Wormwood
 Yeast




                              CHAPTER XIV
                           FOR INSURANCE MEN


For the insurance man, whether veteran or tyro, the new ENCYCLOPAEDIA
BRITANNICA has much of value and importance, _and it has it in quickly
available form so that the desired information may be readily found_,
whether the experienced student wants an authoritative statement on a
difficult point, or the beginner wishes an outline course of the
subject. This availability, whether for the expert or the novice, is
secured by the Index (the 29th volume), which guides the reader
immediately to desired information, if he does not find it in the
alphabetically arranged articles in the body of the book upon first
turning up the article in which he expects the subject to be treated.

To be more concrete—if you want to know something about insurance, turn
first to the article INSURANCE in Volume 14, beginning on p. 656. You
find an elaborate article, which would occupy about 75 pages if printed
in type and on a page like this Guide.

_In other encyclopaedias_ you would have no clue to the whereabouts of
any information about insurance except what would be given in the
article INSURANCE or in articles to which it might refer you in that
article. For anything else you would have to guess how the editor’s mind
had worked to find where in the book he had put other information about
insurance; and to guess how each contributor’s mental processes have
been related to his interest in insurance so that you might know whether
in some article, on a topic apparently not related to insurance at all,
the contributor had put in some interesting and important fact about
insurance.

But in the Britannica you have one entire volume, the 29th, which was
made for the sole purpose of increasing the practical efficiency of the
other 28 volumes. Under the heading _Insurance_ in this index, you will
find references to many articles and cross references to Title Insurance
and to Title Guarantee Companies.

Apart from the fact that he has the initial _assurance_ that what he
gets from the Britannica in the first place is fuller and better than he
would get from another work of reference, what are the advantages
offered by the index in this particular instance?

_First_: Instead of having a reference to volume 14 only he has
references to volumes 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20,
22, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28,—nineteen volumes in all,—say a gain of 1800%
in efficiency.

_Second_: Instead of having one article Insurance to refer to, he has
reference to specific information in the following articles:

 _Annuity_,
 _Austria_,
 _Average_,
 _Barratry_,
 _Bonus_,
 _Employers’ Liability_,
 _Fire and Fire Extinction_,
 _Friendly Societies_,
 _Gaming and Wagering_,
 _Guarantee_,
 _Income Tax_,
 _Infanticide_,
 _Japan_,
 _Land Registration_,
 _Lloyds_,
 _Mensuration_,
 _Novation_,
 _Old Age Pensions_,
 _Post Office_,
 _Probability_,
 _Shipbuilding_,
 _Socialism_,
 _Switzerland_,
 _Title Guarantee Companies_,
 _Tontine_,
 _Underwriter_,
 _Unemployment_,
 _Warranty_.

That is, to 28 new articles,—say 2800% additional gain.

Observe, too, that this is a gain that cannot be expressed in figures.
The index references are classified. First there is a main head
_Insurance_; then subheads, _Fire_, _Life_, _Marine_, _Title_,
_Workmen’s_; and under the subheads special topics arranged
alphabetically.

In brief, the Index facilitates and accelerates reference to anything in
the Britannica that bears on any desired topic.

The article INSURANCE opens with a definition of that word and with
drawing a distinction between it and “assurance.” The general history of
insurance traces marine insurance back to Greek commerce in the 4th
century B.C., but shows that modern methods of marine insurance were
unknown until the 14th century; that fire insurance dates from the 17th
century and especially from the Great Fire of London in 1666; and that,
although there were a few instances of life insurance in the 16th and
17th centuries, it did not become a regular business until the 18th
century and was not widely extended until the 19th century. Separate
sections of the article deal with _Casualty_ (or accident) and
_Miscellaneous Insurance_, _Fire Insurance_, _Life Insurance_, _British
Post Office Insurance_, and _Marine Insurance_.

The section on British Post-Office Insurance will give to the American
insurance man a knowledge of this innovation in the post-office to which
the American post-office seems to be tending, if one may judge by the
introduction of postal savings-banks and the adoption of the
parcels-post system.

In the same way the article OLD AGE PENSIONS will make you acquainted
with another radical measure which has been adopted in Great Britain,
Germany, France, Denmark, Victoria and notably New Zealand, with fuller
description in the article NEW ZEALAND. The importance of the subject to
the American insurance man lies in the fact that similar schemes are
under consideration or actual operation in Massachusetts, New Jersey,
and other states of the United States. In the same way the article on
EMPLOYERS LIABILITY and WORKMEN’S INSURANCE will give him a wider grasp
of the subject of state insurance, mandatory or elective, for workmen.

The principal articles on insurance topics have already been mentioned.
It is to be noted, however, that the actuary will find important
information in the mathematical articles MENSURATION and PROBABILITY;
that the article FRIENDLY SOCIETIES is supplemented by such special
articles as FREE MASONRY, B’NAI BRITH, BUILDING SOCIETIES, BURIAL
SOCIETIES, ODD FELLOWS, etc.

In the _Classified List of Articles_ in the Index Volume the student of
insurance will find on page 893 a list of articles in the field of
economics and social science, many of which will bear more or less
directly on the subject. Among these articles and sub-articles are:

 Abandonment
 Accident
 Actuary
 Annuity
 Assets
 Austria
 Average
 Baby-Farming
 Barratry
 Boarding-out System
 Bonus
 Bounty
 Casualty Insurance
 Census
 Charity
 Co-insurance
 Combination
 Communism
 Conflict of Insurance Laws
 Co-operation
 Emigration
 Employers’ Liability
 Eugenics
 Fire and Fire Extinction
 Fire Insurance
 Foundling Hospitals
 F. P. A. Liabilities
 Friendly Societies
 Gaming and Wagering
 General
 Guarantee
 Halley’s Table
 Housing
 Illegitimacy
 Income Tax
 Industrial Insurance
 Infanticide
 Insurance
 Interest factor
 Japan
 Labour Legislation
 Land Registration
 Liability
 Life Insurance
 Lloyd’s
 Maritime Insurance
 Mendicancy
 Mensuration
 Mutual Insurance
 Mortality Rates
 Negative Values
 Net Liability
 Net Premium
 Non-forfeiture
 Northampton Table
 Novation
 Old Age Pensions
 Pauperism
 Pawnbroking
 Policy
 Poor Law
 Population
 Post Office
 Premium
 Probability
 Production
 Profit Sharing
 Rates of Mortality
 Reserve
 Salvage
 Selection
 Shipbuilding
 Socialism
 Social Settlements
 Subrogation
 Suicide
 Sumptuary Laws
 Surplus
 Surrender Values
 Switzerland
 Tariff
 Taxation of Insurance
 Title Guarantee Companies
 Tontine
 Trade Unions
 Tramp
 Trusts
 Underwriter
 Unemployment
 Usury
 Wages
 Warranty
 Wealth




                               CHAPTER XV
                             FOR ARCHITECTS


Although architecture is more and more coming to be recognized as one of
the fine arts, it is at the same time so largely practical and
utilitarian that its theory and methods may to a great extent be
gathered from systematic reading. In the article Fine Arts in the
Britannica, by Sir Sidney Colvin, it is well said that “The original or
rudimentary type of the architect, considered not as a mere builder but
as an artist, is the savage, who, when his tribe had taken to live in
tents or huts instead of caves, first arranged the skins and timbers of
his tent or hut in one way because it pleased his eye, rather than in
some other way which was as good for shelter.” Whether the architect
wishes to learn how the eye may be pleased, to study critically the
history of architecture, or, like the less imaginative savage who failed
of being the first inspired architect, to consider comfort and shelter
rather than beauty and charm, he will find much to help him in the
Britannica. If his interest is chiefly practical, he should consult the
chapter _For Builders_ in this Guide.

The architect should read first—and he will constantly be referring to
it afterwards—the article ARCHITECTURE (Vol. 2, p. 369), equivalent in
length to 235 pages of this Guide and illustrated by 140 figures, about
one-third of which are photogravures. The article is historical in the
main and a brief outline of it is as follows:—

 Egyptian
 Assyrian
 Persian
 Greek
 Parthian
 Sassanian
 Etruscan
 Roman
 Byzantine
 Early Christian
 Coptic Church in Egypt
 Romanesque and Gothic in
   Italy
   France
   Spain
   England
   Germany
   Belgium and Holland
 Renaissance: Introduction
   Italy
   France
   Spain
   England
   Germany
   Belgium and Holland
 Mahommedan
 Modern
   Classical Revival in British Architecture
   Classical Revival in Germany
   French Classicism
   Barry’s “Commonsense” Style
   Gothic Revival in England
 Gothic Revival in France
 Queen Anne Style
 “Free Classic” Style
 Arts allied to Architecture
 Craftsmanship Ideal
 Architecture in United States (Figures 97, 98, 99, 131, 132, 133, 134,
    135, 136, 137, 138)
 English Churches
 English Public Buildings
 English Domestic and Street Architecture
 Recent French Architecture
 Germany
 Other Countries

The part of the article dealing with Modern Architecture is by H. H.
Statham author of a well-known book on the subject. Earlier sections are
by R. Phené Spiers, late master of the Royal Academy’s Architectural
School, with sections on the Romanesque and Gothic in France by W. R.
Lethaby, principal of the Central (London County) School of Arts and
Crafts.

Before continuing his more systematic historical readings the student
may well read the article HOUSE (Vol. 13, p. 810), illustrated with 12
figures (3 plates), including four particularly fine examples of “half
timbered buildings,” and one English house, the Jew’s House at Lincoln,
dating from the 12th century. An interesting article on MURAL DECORATION
(Vol. 19, p. 16) is by a remarkably distinguished trio: William Morris,
poet, craftsman and painter, John Henry Middleton, late Slade professor
of fine art, Cambridge, and Walter Crane, the well-known illustrator and
decorator. This is illustrated with 16 figures in black and white and
with a reproduction in colours of a wall-painting from a Roman villa of
the early Empire. The article deals with: reliefs in marble and stone;
marble veneer; glazed bricks or tiles; hard stucco; sgraffito; stamped
leather; painted cloth; printed hangings and wall-papers; and painting.

If the student of architecture would know about the buildings of
prehistoric times, in which there was little architecture in the sense
of a fine art, he should read the articles ARCHAEOLOGY, (Vol. 2, p.
344), LAKE DWELLINGS (Vol. 16, p. 91), STONEHENGE (Vol. 25, p. 961) and
STONE MONUMENTS, PRIMITIVE (Vol. 25, p. 962),—the last two of particular
interest to the building engineer because it is so puzzling a problem
how these great blocks could have been brought such distances and set in
place without modern appliances.

[Sidenote: Early Oriental Architecture]

Engineering problems will be the most interesting in a large part of the
student’s reading about Egyptian architecture. Supplementing the 4,000
or 5,000 words on this subject under ARCHITECTURE, accompanied by seven
illustrations, there is much information in the articles EGYPT (Vol. 9,
p. 21); ABYDOS (Vol. 1, p. 81) and KARNAK (Vol. 15, p. 680); and in the
articles PYRAMID (Vol. 22, p. 683), (by W. M. Flinders Petrie) and
SPHINX (Vol. 25, p. 662) by Francis Llewellyn Griffith, another
well-known Egyptologist. In the former article the author points out
that the outside and inside work on all the pyramids was excellent and
that the casings were not a mere veneer but were “of massive blocks,
usually greater in thickness than in height, and in some cases (as at
South Dahshur) reminding the observer of horizontal leaves with sloping
edges.” The massive character of the roofing of the sepulchral chambers
is indicated by Prof. Petrie’s estimate that “in Pepi’s pyramid it is of
three layers of stone beams, each deeper than their breadth, resting one
on another, the thirty stones weighing more than 30 tons each.” But
neither Stonehenge nor the pyramid was really an engineering problem.
Here, and as in all his studies of early architecture, artist or
engineer will find religion and worship the aim and the reason of the
building even more, if that is possible, than in the great European
cathedrals of comparatively recent times.

In the article BABYLONIA and ASSYRIA there is a brief section (Vol. 3,
p. 108) on _Art_, supplementing the treatment under ARCHITECTURE. It is
interesting to note that even in Assyria architecture was trammelled,
reactionary, governed by Babylonian styles and using brick and clay
because Babylon did, although there was stone in Assyria, and none in
Babylonia; and keeping the heavy brick platform foundation which the
Babylonian architects had adopted because of the marshy character of
their country, although there was no need of such construction in
Assyria. Here too the function of architecture was largely as an aid to
religion: as shown in the article NIPPUR (Vol. 19, p. 707), with its
description of the “ziggurat” or artificial mountain in the shrine,
built probably 40 or 45 centuries B. C. One temple was 272 ft. square,
with seven storeys, each smaller than the one below and thus surrounded
by a terrace, each dedicated to a planet, each coloured a separate tint,
the first probably 45 ft. high, and the total height 160 ft.

In Assyria great palaces of the 9th, 8th and 7th centuries B. C. have
been found, and these are probably the earliest large buildings of any
architectural importance not religious in their purpose; but this
distinction must not be carried too far, for the king was sacrosanct,
half priest and half god, and his palace was a shrine.

[Sidenote: Greece and Rome]

Although the main treatment of Greek and Roman architecture is in the
article ARCHITECTURE, the student should read the articles GREEK ART
(Vol. 12, p. 470; equivalent to 70 pages in this Guide; written by Percy
Gardner, author of _Grammar of Greek Art_) and ROMAN ART (Vol. 23, p.
474; equivalent to 40 pages of this Guide; written by H. Stuart Jones,
director of the British School at Rome). The article on GREEK ART
contains 82 illustrations, many of them halftones. It makes clear the
dependence of the other fine arts in Greece on architecture—and on
religion—in showing that the greatest sculptures were adjuncts to
temples, and (p. 471–472) in a discussion of the architecture of Greek
temples calls attention to four basal principles of Greek architecture:

  (1) Each member of the building has one function and only one, and
  this function controls even the decoration of that member. Pillars
  support architraves; their perpendicular flutings emphasize this.
  Moulding at a column’s base suggests the support of a great weight.

  (2) Simple and natural relations prevailed between various members of
  a construction.

  (3) Rigidity of simple lines is avoided; scarcely any outline is
  actually straight. Columns are not equidistant.

  (4) Elaborate decoration is reserved for those parts of the temple
  which have, or seem to have, no strain laid upon them.

The article TEMPLE (Vol. 26, p. 603) gives plans and general information
about Greek and Roman sacred architecture, as well as Hebrew, Egyptian
and Assyrian temples; and the reader should study the article PARTHENON
(Vol. 20, p. 869) and the diagram in that article, and the article
PERGAMUM (Vol. 21, p. 142) and the two plates which accompany it.

The article ROMAN ART (Vol. 23, p. 474) is probably the first brief and
authoritative treatment of a topic long overshadowed in popular interest
by the earlier art of Greece and the later art of Italy. It begins with
a history of recent research. Architecture, pre-eminently the most Roman
of the arts as combining utility with beauty, is outlined (pp. 476–477
especially) and the main point in regard to Roman architecture is
brought out as follows: “the specific achievement of the Roman architect
was the artistic application of a new set of principles—those which are
expressed in the arch, the vault and the dome,” as contrasted with the
rectilinear buildings of the Greeks. The arch, particularly the
triumphal arch, is specifically a Roman product and is specifically
Roman besides in being an expression of reverence for governmental
authority,—which, it should, however, be remembered, cannot be separated
from religion. Among the most important of Roman sculptures and
particularly reliefs are those of the arches, described in the articles
ARCH (Vol. 2, p. 342) and TRIUMPHAL ARCH (Vol. 27, p. 297), the latter
with eight figures. The part of the article AQUEDUCT which deals with
Roman aqueducts (Vol. 2, pp. 241–243, with 2 plates, 6 illustrations)
will interest the architect as well as the contractor or engineer. And
he should read the article on the Roman architect and writer on
architecture, VITRUVIUS (Vol. 28, p. 150), whose book so strongly
affected the Renaissance.

Before taking up modern architecture as distinguished from ancient, the
student will do well to examine the architecture of some more remote
peoples—for instance,

 _Aztec_ (Vol. 5, p. 441 and p. 677)
 _Abyssinian_ (Vol. 12, p. 232)
 _Hittite_ (Vol. 13, p. 537)
 _Indian_ (Vol. 14, p. 428, with 4 plates)
 _Japanese_ (Vol. 15, pp. 181–182)
 _Chinese_ (Vol. 6, p. 214)
 _Byzantine_ (Vol. 4, p. 906, with 2 plates), and the article
    CONSTANTINOPLE (Vol. 7, p. 3)

[Sidenote: Modern Architecture]

The last topic will serve as a transition to the modern architecture of
Europe, especially because the influence of the Byzantine was so strong
in the early church.

The study of the Italian Romanesque and Gothic in an elaborate section
of ARCHITECTURE (Vol. 2, p. 391) may well be supplemented by reading the
articles on the Italian cities in which this art is preserved. The
following list is roughly chronological, the cities named first being
those in which there are the oldest churches.

           RAVENNA, PISA and VENICE, for Byzantine Romanesque.
 ───────────────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────
 MILAN                              │for Lombard Romanesque
 PAVIA                              │                 „
 BRESCIA                            │                 „
 BERGAMO                            │                 „
 PIACENZA                           │                 „
 PARMA                              │                 „
 MODENA                             │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
 BARI                               │for Southern Romanesque
 MOLFETTA                           │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
 PALERMO                            │for Sicilian Romanesque
 MESSINA                            │                 „
 MONREALE                           │                 „
 CEFALU                             │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────
 WÜRZBURG, for Romanesque in Germany
 ───────────────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────
 GENOA                              │for Italian Gothic
 ASSISI                             │                 „
 ORVIETO                            │                 „
 VERONA                             │                 „
 PERUGIA                            │                 „
 SIENA                              │                 „

In the same way, for Gothic in other countries, the student should read:

 AIX-LA-CHAPELLE                    │for French Gothic
 LE PUY                             │                 „
 ANGOULÊME                          │                 „
 ARLES                              │                 „
 NIMES                              │                 „
 ST. DENIS                          │                 „
 NOYON                              │                 „
 SENLIS                             │                 „
 SENS                               │                 „
 REIMS                              │                 „
 LE MANS                            │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
 OVIEDO                             │for Spanish Gothic
 LEON                               │                 „
 AVILA                              │                 „
 SEGOVIA                            │                 „
 LERIDA                             │                 „
 TOLEDO                             │                 „
 BURGOS                             │                 „
 SEVILLE                            │                 „
 SALAMANCA                          │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
 DURHAM                             │for English Gothic
 LINCOLN                            │                 „
 SALISBURY                          │                 „
 GLOUCESTER, etc.                   │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
 AIX                                │for German Gothic
 MAINZ                              │                 „
 WORMS                              │                 „
 SPIRES                             │                 „
 COLOGNE                            │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────
 TOURNAI, LOUVAIN, etc., for Belgian,

and in general, the articles CATHEDRAL, NAVE, AISLE, CHOIR, APSE,
CHEVET, LADY-CHAPEL, VAULT, FLYING BUTTRESS, PINNACLE, CLERESTORY and
TRIFORIUM. The article Cathedral has plans of Canterbury, Salisbury,
Durham, Ely, Chartres, Sens and Angoulême and a perspective of Amiens
cathedral.

In the same way the student of the Renaissance architecture may
supplement the section in the article ARCHITECTURE (p. 408, etc.) by
reference to the articles on the cities in which the great Renaissance
buildings stand. But now “the career of the individual has to be taken
into consideration,” so true is it that the Renaissance in architecture
as in scholarship was intensely individualistic. The article
ARCHITECTURE points this out and in this section is largely biographical
in its treatment. The reader should study the following separate
articles also


                       _For Italian Renaissance_

 FILIPPO BRUNELLESCHI
 FLORENCE
 LEONE BATTISTA ALBERTI
 MICHELOZZO DI BARTOLOMMEO
 BRAMANTE
 ROME (for St. Peters: see Fig. 51 in ARCHITECTURE)
 BORGOGNONE
 BACCIO D’AGNOLO
 SANGALLO
 POLLAIULO
 MICHELANGELO
 JACOPO SANSOVINO
 MICHELE SANMICHELE
 ANDREA PALLADIO
 BAROCCHIO DA VIGNOLA
 GALEAZZO ALESSI
 LOMBARDO
 DOMENICO FONTANA
 BALDASSARE PERUZZI


                        _The French Renaissance_

For this period, less individual than in Italy, the reader will find it
best to study the geographical articles. Let him read

 BLOIS (noting Plate VIII, fig. 84, in the article ARCHITECTURE)
 TOURS
 CHAMBORD
 ORLEANS
 CHENONCEAUX
 FONTAINEBLEAU
 PARIS


                         _Spanish Renaissance_

 GRANADA
 VALLADOLID
 SARAGOSSA
 MALAGA
 SALAMANCA (Plate V., fig. 73 in _Architecture_)
 SEVILLE (Plate V., fig. 74 in _Architecture_)
 ESCORIAL (with plan)
 MADRID (Palacio Royal)


                         _English Renaissance_

 JOHN THORPE
 INIGO JONES
 SIR CHRISTOPHER WREN
 ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL (see Fig. 53 in ARCHITECTURE)
 GREENWICH (for Hospital)
 NICHOLAS HAWKSMOOR
 SIR JOHN VANBRUGH
 DEAN HENRY ALDRICH
 GEORGE AND JAMES DANCE
 WILLIAM KENT
 ROBERT ADAM
 SIR WILLIAM CHAMBERS


                          _German Renaissance_

 ROTHENBURG (town-hall)
 AUGSBURG (town-hall)
 HEIDELBERG (see Plate VII in ARCHITECTURE)


                  _Renaissance in Belgium and Holland_

 ANTWERP
 AMSTERDAM
 ROTTERDAM
 HAARLEM

On _Mahommedan Architecture_ the student should read not only the
section (Vol. 2, pp. 422–427) in the article ARCHITECTURE, with eight
illustrations, but the separate articles

 INDIAN ARCHITECTURE (with 4 plates, 17 figures)
 MOSQUE (with 3 diagrams)
 MINARET
 CAIRO
 CONSTANTINOPLE
 DAMASCUS
 JERUSALEM
 MECCA
 KAIRAWAN
 CORDOVA
 ALHAMBRA
 TABRIZ
 ISFAHAN

On the more recent period, the 19th century, roughly, the student should
supplement the last part of the article ARCHITECTURE by reading the
following articles


            _For the Classical Revival in the British Isles_

 DUBLIN (see also Fig. 85 in ARCHITECTURE)
 EDINBURGH
 SIR JOHN SOANE


                        _English Gothic Revival_

 A. W. N. PUGIN
 SIR GEORGE GILBERT SCOTT
 GEORGE S. STREET
 WILLIAM BUTTERFIELD
 JOHN LOUGHBOROUGH PEARSON
 ALFRED WATERHOUSE


            _France_ (Figs. 122–129 in article ARCHITECTURE)

 L. P. BALTARD
 J. L. C. GARNIER


                          _The Last 50 Years_

 GEORGE FREDERICK BODLEY            │England
 R. NORMAN SHAW                     │                 „
 WILLIAM MORRIS                     │                 „
 HARVEY L. ELMES                    │                 „
 CHARLES R. COCKERELL               │                 „
 LIVERPOOL (and Fig. 86 in          │                 „
   ARCHITECTURE)                    │
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
 H. H. RICHARDSON                   │United States (and see Plates XV
                                    │  and XVI, and Figs. 97, 98, 99 in
                                    │  article ARCHITECTURE)
 RICHARD M. HUNT                    │                 „
 CHARLES F. MCKIM                   │                 „
 STANFORD WHITE                     │                 „
 WILLIAM R. MEAD                    │                 „
 RUSSELL STURGIS                    │                 „
 STEEL CONSTRUCTION                 │                 „


                     _Classical Revival in Germany_

 KARL FRIEDRICH SCHINKEL
 BERLIN (and Fig. 87 in ARCHITECTURE)
 POTSDAM (and Fig. 88 in ARCHITECTURE)
 MUNICH (and Fig. 89 in ARCHITECTURE)
 GOTTFRIED SEMPER


                          _French Classicism_

 ADOLPHE THEODORE BRONGNIART
 JACQUES IGNACE HITTORFF (Plate XII in ARCHITECTURE)


                        _English “Commonsense”_

 SIR CHARLES BARRY
 HALIFAX (Fig. 90 in ARCHITECTURE)
 WESTMINSTER (Houses of Parliament; see Fig. 91 in ARCHITECTURE)
 BUDAPEST (Fig. 92 in ARCHITECTURE)

The sections of the article ARCHITECTURE dealing with France and Germany
in the last two generations may best be supplemented by a study of the
articles PARIS, BERLIN, VIENNA, and BUDAPEST.

The following is a brief alphabetical list of architectural articles and
topics in the _Britannica_, including topics for the builder and
contractor.

 Abacus
 Abated
 Abbey
 Abutment
 Acroterium
 Adam, Robert
 Aedicula
 Aisle
 Aiwan
 Leone Battista Alberti
 Alcove
 Galeazzo Alessi
 Alley
 Almery
 Almonry
 Almshouse
 Alure
 Ambo
 Ambulatory
 Amphiprostyle
 Amphitheatre
 Andron
 Angel-lights
 Antae
 Ante-chapel
 Ante-choir
 Ante-fixae
 Anthemion
 Apophyge
 Apollodorus of Damascus
 Apse
 Apteral
 Aqueduct
 Araeostyle
 Araeosystyle
 Arcade
 Arch
 Architrave
 Archivolt
 Arcosolium
 Arena
 Arris
 Ashlar
 Astragal
 Astylar
 Atrium
 Attic
 Attic Base
 Baccio d’Agnolo
 Back-choir
 Bailey
 Balcony
 Ball-flower
 L. P. Baltard
 Balustrade
 Banker-marks
 Baptistery
 Barbican
 Bargeboard
 Giacomo Barocchio
 Bartizan
 Base
 Basement
 Basilica
 Batement-lights
 Baths
 Batter
 Battlement
 Bay
 Bed-mould
 Belfry
 Bell-cot
 Belvedere
 Bema
 Bench-table
 Bevel
 Bezantée
 Sir A. W. Blomfield
 G. W. Bodley
 Bonding
 Giuseppi Bonomi
 Francesco Borromini
 Bowtell
 Bracket
 Bramante
 Brattishing
 Sir Reginald Bray
 Brick, and Brickwork
 Bridges
 Broach
 Sir I. M. Brunel
 Filippo Brunelleschi
 Building
 Charles Bulfinch
 Bungalow
 William Butterfield
 Buttress
 Cable moulding
 Luigi Cagnola
 Caissons
 Camber
 Campanile
 N. le Camus de Mézières
 Canal
 Canalis
 Cancelli
 Candelabrum
 Canephorae
 Canopy
 Cantilever Foundations
 Capital
 Carpentry
 Cartouche
 Caryatides
 Casement
 Castle
 Cathedral
 Cathetus
 Cauliculus
 Cavaedium
 Cavea
 Cavetto
 Ceiling
 Cella
 Cements
 Chalcidicum
 Sir William Chambers
 Chamfer
 Chancel
 Chapter-house
 Charnel-house
 Chateau
 Chersiphron
 Chevet
 Chevron
 Chimney
 Chimney-piece
 Choir
 Chresmographion
 Cinque Cento
 Cleithral
 Clerestory
 Cloaca
 Cloister
 C. R. Cockerell
 Coenaculum
 Coffer, and Coffer Dams
 Cogging
 Colonnade
 Placido Columbani
 Column
 Compluvium
 Composite Order
 Compound pier
 Conch
 Concrete, Concrete Piers, etc.
 Consisterium
 Construction
 Coping
 Corbel
 Corbie
 Cornice
 Counterfort
 Coursed Rubble
 Cramps
 Crenelle
 Crest
 Crocket
 Crossing
 Cross springer
 Crypt
 Crypto-porticus
 Cubicle
 Cuneus
 Cupola
 Curvilinear
 Cusp
 François de Cuvilles
 Cyclopean Masonry
 Cyclostyle
 Cyma
 Cyrto-style
 Cyzicenus
 Daedalus
 Dais
 Dance (family)
 Decastyle
 Decorated Period
 Dentil
 Diaconicon
 Diastyle
 Diaulos
 Diazomata
 Dikka
 Dinocrates
 Dipteral
 Philibert De l’Orme
 Discharging Arch
 Distyle
 Docks
 Dodecastyle
 Dog-tooth
 Dome
 Donjon
 Door
 Doorway
 Dormer
 Dormitory
 Dosseret
 Dovetail
 Dowels
 Drafted masonry
 Dredging
 Dripstone
 Dromos
 Dungeon
 Early English Period
 Eaves
 Echinus
 Eiffel Tower
 Elevator
 Elizabethan Style
 H. L. Elmes
 James Elmes
 Embrasure
 Engaged Column
 Entablature
 Entasis
 Ephebeum
 Epi
 Epinaos
 Epistyle
 Estrade
 Eupalinus
 Eustyle
 Exedra
 Extrados
 Façade
 Facing
 Fan Vault
 Femerell
 Fenestration
 Feretory
 James Fergusson
 Festoon
 Fillet
 Finial
 Flamboyant Style
 Flèche
 Floor
 Flue
 Flying Buttress
 Pierre F. L. Fontaine
 Domenico Fontana
 Footing
 Foot-stall
 Formeret
 Foundation
 Fountain
 Charles Fowler
 Frater
 Freestone
 Fret
 Frieze
 Frigidarium
 Frontispiece
 Gable
 Gablets
 Galilee
 Gallery
 Gargoyle
 J. L. C. Garnier
 Garret
 Garretting
 Gate
 Gatehouse
 Gazebo
 Girder
 Glazing
 Glyph
 Glyptothek
 Godroon
 Gothic
 Grange
 Granite
 Griffe
 Groin
 C. G. Guarini
 Guilloche
 Gutta
 Gutter
 Joseph Gwilt
 Gynaeceum
 Hagioscope
 Half-timber Work
 Hall
 Halving
 Hammerbeam Roof
 J. A. Hansom
 Nicholas Hawksmoor
 Heating
 K. A. von Heideloff
 Helix
 Hemicycle
 Herring-bone
 Hexastyle
 Hip-knob
 Hipped roof
 Hippodamus
 Hippodrome
 J. I. Hittorff
 Hôtel-de-Ville
 Hôtel-Dieu
 Hot-water Heating and Supply
 House
 Hypaethros
 Hypocaust
 Hypostyle
 Hypotrachelium
 Ichnography
 Iconostasis
 Ictinus
 Imbrex
 Impluvium
 Impost
 In-antis
 Indian Architecture
 Intercolumniation
 Interlaced arches
 Intrados
 Jacobean Style
 Jamb
 Jesse
 Joinery
 Joints
 Joggles
 Inigo Jones
 Owen Jones
 Jubé
 Keel-moulding
 Keep
 Keystone
 Label
 Labrum
 Laconicum
 Lacunar
 Lady-Chapel
 Lancet
 Lantern
 Lanterns of the Dead
 Lectern
 Libon
 Lighting
 Lightning Conductor
 Limestone
 Lintel
 Loft
 Louver (Louvre)
 Lucarne
 Lunette
 C. F. McKim
 Machicolation
 Maksoora
 Manor-house
 Marble
 Mastaba
 Mausoleum
 Megaron
 Merlon
 Meshrebiya
 Meta
 Metope
 Mezzanine
 Mihrab
 Minaret
 Minbar
 Minster
 Modillion
 Module
 Monotriglyph
 Mortar
 Mortice
 Mosque
 Mouldings
 Moving Stairs
 Mullion
 Mural Decoration
 Mutule
 Narthex
 Nave
 W. E. Nesfield
 Newel
 Niche
 Notching
 Nymphaeum
 Obelisk
 Octastyle
 Odeum
 Oecus
 Ogee
 Ogive
 Oillets
 Order
 Ordinance
 Oriel
 Orientation
 Orthostatae
 Orthostyle
 Oubliette
 Ovolo
 Pagoda
 Painter-work
 Palace
 Palaestra
 Andrea Palladio
 Palladian
 Panel
 Pantheon
 Parament
 Parapet
 Parascenium
 Parclose
 Pargetting
 John Henry Parker
 Parquetry
 Parthenon
 Parvis
 Patera
 Patio
 Pavement
 Pavilion
 J. L. Pearson
 Paruzzi
 Pedestal
 Pediment
 Pendant
 Pendentive
 Pergamum
 Peripteral
 Peristyle
 Perpendicular Period
 Perpent Stones
 Perron
 Philon
 Piazza
 Pier
 Pilaster
 Pile Foundations
 Pillar
 Pinacotheca
 Pinnacle
 Piscina
 Plan
 Planceer
 Plaster
 Plinth
 Podium
 Poppy Heads
 Porch
 Porticullis
 Portico
 Postern
 Presbytery
 Prick Posts
 Propylaea
 Proscenium
 Prostyle
 Prothesis
 Pseudo-dipteral
 Pseudo-peripteral
 Pteron
 Philon
 A. W. N. Pugin
 Pulpit
 Purlin
 Pycnostyle
 Pyramid
 Pyramidion
 Pythis
 Quadriga
 Quatrefoil
 Quoins
 Rag-stone
 Random
 Rear vault
 Refectory
 Regula
 Reredos
 Respond
 Rib
 George Richardson
 H. H. Richardson
 Thomas Rickman
 River Engineering
 Road
 Rood
 Rough Cast
 Rubble
 Rustication
 Sacristy
 Saddle
 Sangallo (family)
 Sanmichele
 Scabbling
 Scaffold
 Scamilli impares
 K. F. Schinkel
 Sir G. G. Scott
 Scotia
 Sedilia
 Gottfried Semper
 Sepulchre, Easter
 Severy
 Sewerage
 Sexpartite vault
 Shaft
 R. Norman Shaw
 Shoring
 Sill
 Skeleton Construction
 Slaking
 Slip Joints
 Slype
 Sir John Soane
 Soffit
 Solar (Soller)
 Sommer
 Spandril
 Sphaeristerium
 Spina
 Spire
 Spire light
 Springer
 Squinch
 Squint
 Stag Bars
 Stage
 Stained Glass
 Staircase
 Stairn
 Stall
 Stanchion
 Steam-Heating
 Steel Construction
 Steeple
 Stele
 Stereobate
 Stillicidium
 Stilted
 Stoa
 Stone, Stone Wash
 Storey
 G. E. Street
 Russell Sturgis
 Style
 Stylobate
 Bartolommeo Suardi
 Sudatorium
 Surbase
 Surveying
 Suspensura
 Systyle
 Tabernacle
 Tablinum
 Tabularium
 Taenia
 Talar
 Talus
 Tambour
 Taper
 Tas-de-charge
 Tegula
 Telamones
 Temenos
 Temple
 Tenon
 Tepidarium
 Terminal Figures
 Terrace
 Tessellated
 Tetrastoön
 Tetrastyle
 Thatch
 Theatre
 Thesaurus
 Tholobate
 Tholos
 John Thorpe
 Timber
 Sir William Tite
 Toran
 Torus
 Tower
 Trabeated
 Tracery
 Trachelium
 Transept
 Transom
 Transverse Rib
 Trapezophoron
 Trefoil
 Trial Boring
 Tribune
 Triforium
 Triglyph
 Triumphal arch
 Tudor flower
 Tudor period
 Tunnel
 Tunnel-vault
 Turning-piece
 Turret
 Under-croft
 Vane
 Vault
 Ventilation
 Verandah
 Verge
 Vesica Piscis
 Vestibule
 Vignette
 Villa
 Viollet-le-Duc
 Vitruvius
 Volute
 Voussoir
 Wall, and Walling, and Wall Coverings
 Alfred Waterhouse
 Water Spray Ventilation
 Wattle and dab
 Wedging
 Well Foundations
 Wind braces
 Window
 Sir Christopher Wren
 James Wyatt
 Xystus




                              CHAPTER XVI
                      FOR BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS


[Sidenote: The Builder’s Problems]

The rapid increase in population, and especially in its density, the
congestion in great cities, with the consequent building up of suburbs;
and the equally rapid upward tendency in the scale of comfort, are
factors of modern civilization which make the work of the builder and
contractor increasingly complex. The good builder is probably much
commoner than ever before, in spite of the popular impression that
building materials are poorer and that construction work is more often
“scamped” than they used to be. Increased transportation facilities make
the builder much less dependent on local and often inadequate materials.
And there has been a change in the theory and practice of government:
the old easy-going policy has been abandoned, and new laws, strictly
enforced, have resulted in such inspection and control of building
operations as would have seemed tyranny to the builder of a generation
ago and as make modern buildings, especially in cities, much safer than
ever before. Insurance companies have done much to the same end.

There is a general prejudice against the modern builder on the part of
the temperamental “praiser of the past.” Occasionally similar complaints
are made even against the builders of the past. Kipling sings:

                  Who shall doubt the secret hid
                    Under Cheops’ pyramid
                  Was that a contractor did
                    Cheops out of several millions?
                  Or that Joseph’s sudden rise
                    To Comptroller of Supplies
                  Was a fraud of monstrous size
                    On King Pharaoh’s swart civilians?

The mere duration of the pyramids, undamaged except by the hand of man,
is an answer to such a charge; and in the Britannica article PYRAMID the
reader will find (Vol. 22, p. 683) that even where the hidden material
was rubbly or of mud bricks, “the casings were not a mere veneer, but
were of massive blocks, usually greater in thickness than in height”—in
other words, that the construction was of the best character.

But the builder must be a far better-informed man under present
conditions than ever before. To give him the necessary information there
is a large and growing literature ranging from builders’ and
contractors’ pocket manuals to special periodicals. This literature is
expensive, and like all special literature puts the intending purchaser
in a difficult position, for _if he buys it all_, he must pay much more
than the returns from his purchase warrant, and he will then have to
_read it all_ and use his own judgment in deciding what is best. If he
does not buy all, he must be an expert, not merely in every branch of
his business but in the bibliography of his business, to make a wise
selection,—and if he is sufficiently expert for this he will probably
need no such library. But he will find, to a remarkable degree, the best
of all that there is in such special literature in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, with the strongest assurance of its being authoritative, and
with the certainty that for an outlay, small in comparison with what he
would make for such special information elsewhere, he will get the
guidance that he needs for his work and also information as excellent on
any other subject that he or any member of his family may wish to
pursue.

The key or foundation article for the builder or contractor is BUILDING
(Vol. 4, p. 762), by James Bartlett, lecturer on construction, etc.,
King’s College, London, who has contributed other articles on related
topics. The article deals with:

  The relation of building to architecture and with building laws and
  special types of plans according to local governmental requirements

  The conditions necessary for a successful building, namely—ease of
  access, good light, good service, pleasing environment and approaches,
  minimum cost with true economy, and, for office buildings, ease of
  arrangement to suit tenants

  Construction, its general principles

  Materials of construction, especially stone and brick

  Particular objects of construction

  Foundation walls

  Footings to walls

  General procedure for an intended building

  Builder’s sphere

  American building acts

  Fire-resisting construction.

This general article is supplemented by the following articles:

  FOUNDATION, containing 13 diagrams and paragraphs on: load on
  foundation; trial boring; construction; types—concrete piers, pile
  foundations, concrete piles, plank foundations, caissons, well
  foundations, coffer dams, dock foundations, cantilever foundations,
  building on sand (at Cape Henlopen, Delaware)

  CAISSON

  MASONRY, with 18 diagrams, and with special treatment of tools,
  including hammers, mallets, saws, chisels, setting tools, hoisting
  appliances; of seasoning stone; of setting stones; of use of mortar;
  of bonding; slip joints; footings; walling; random; coursed rubble,
  ashlar, etc.; backing to stone work; pointing and stonewash. There is
  also a brief vocabulary of technical terms and a discussion of methods
  of facing; joints; cramps; dowels; joggles; stone arches; tracery and
  carving; and the articles ASHLAR, RAG-STONE, RANDOM

  CEMENT, with 3 figures; description and analysis of Pozzuolanic and
  Portland cement; mixing; loading of kilns; types of kilns; cement
  clinker; testing; hydraulic lime; Roman cement; natural cements;
  Passow cement; uses of hydraulic cement; calcium sulphate cements

  CONCRETE, with 16 illustrations and paragraphs on constituents;
  proportions; mixing; moulds; depositing; strength; durability;
  convenience and appearance; resistance to fire; cost; artificial
  stones; steel concrete, including columns, piles, beams, floor slabs,
  etc.; concrete arches

  MORTAR, with sections on slaking; hardening; magnesia in mortar;
  strengths; adhesion, decay, effects of salt and frost; legal
  restrictions; limes and cements for mortar

  LIME

  BRICK, with sections on brick-clays and brick-making

  BRICKWORK, with 15 diagrams; sections on hollow walls; materials and
  labor; varieties of bricks; strength of brickwork; mortar; pointing;
  footing; binding; prevention of damp; arches and plates; chimneys and
  flues; brick paving

  BASEMENT

  HOUSE, with 17 illustrations

  BUNGALOW

  CARPENTRY, with 36 diagrams showing joints, notching, cogging,
  dovetail, housing, halving, mortise, tenons, wedging, dowelling,
  turning-piece, lintel, floors, strutting, partition, half timber
  construction, braced frame; and descriptive text on these and other
  topics

  STEEL CONSTRUCTION, with 4 illustrations; sections on skeleton and
  steel-cage construction; local laws; protection from corrosion;
  columns; girders; floors; windbracing; materials; floor-filling;
  partitions; time and cost of construction

  STONE, with sections on constitution, colour, testing, preservatives,
  natural bed, seasoning, varieties, artificial stone

  MARBLE, a descriptive article, about 4000 words long

  GRANITE, with descriptions and analyses of typical granites

  LIMESTONE, about 2500 words

  TIMBER, with paragraphs on: felling timber, conversion of timber—with
  diagram of bastard and quarter sawing; seasoning; defects; decay;
  preservation of timber; varieties, with description of the principal
  coniferous and hard woods—and separate articles on PINE, FIR, LARCH,
  CEDAR, BIRCH, BEECH, CHESTNUT, WALNUT, ELM, TEAK, MAHOGANY, MAPLE,
  etc.

  HALF-TIMBER WORK

  CHIMNEY-PIECE

  SCAFFOLD, with 4 figures; sections on bricklayers’ and masons’
  scaffolds, material, erection, gantries, derrick towers, cradles,
  chimney scaffolds, accidents

  SHORING, with 8 figures; sections on raking shores; braces, horizontal
  or flying shores; needle, vertical and dead, shoring; rules and sizes
  for all shores

  STAIRCASE, divided into architecture and construction, the latter
  having 4 diagrams, description of dog-legged or newel stair, open
  newel stair, geometrical stair, circular stair, spiral stairs; a
  defining vocabulary of technical terms; concrete and stone; moving
  inclines; local building laws

  BALUSTER

  BALUSTRADE

  ELEVATOR, with 3 illustrations; paragraphs on history; construction,
  essentials of design; safety devices; traveling staircases; freight
  elevators

  PARQUETRY

  CEILING

  ROOFS, with 23 figures and two plates; with sections on forms of roof,
  trusses, open timber roofs, mansards; iron roofs, covering
  materials—felt corrugated iron, zinc, lead, copper, “tin,” slate,
  tiles, miscellaneous—weight of roofs, building laws; and separate
  articles on SLATE, TILE, TIN, TIN PLATE, etc.

  PLASTER WORK, with paragraphs on lathing, metal lathing, limes, hair,
  substitutes for hair, sand, external work, rough stucco, roughcast or
  pebble-dash, sgraffito, internal work, three coats, moulding, cracks,
  slabs, fibrous plaster.

  JOINERY, with 13 illustrations, and treating such topics as: tools and
  materials; joints, mitre, dovetail, etc.; warping; moulding; flooring,
  including wood block and parquet; skirting, dados; picture rails;
  windows, bay windows; shutters; shop-fronts; doors; church work;
  ironmongery, including hinges, locks, etc.

  DOOR

  DOORWAY

  CASEMENT

  WINDOWS

  GLAZING

  STAINED GLASS

  WALL COVERINGS, with sections on marble wall-lining, mosaic, tiles,
  metal sheeting, tapestry, wall-papers—and see MURAL DECORATION.

  PAINTER-WORK, dealing with paint bases, vehicles, thinners, driers,
  pigments, enamel, paints, woodwork paints, varnish, gums, French
  polishes, putty, tools, workmanship, graining, marbling, painting on
  plaster and on iron, repainting on old work, blistering and cracking,
  distemper, gilding, etc.

  SEWERAGE

  LIGHTING, with sections on oil, gas and electric lighting

  LIGHTNING CONDUCTOR

  HEATING, with sections on open fires, closed stoves, gas fires,
  electrical heating, oil stoves, low pressure hot water, high pressure
  hot water, steam heating, hot water supply, safety valves, geysers,
  incrustation, Lockport central steam supply

  VENTILATION, with sections on rate of air consumption, ventilation of
  buildings, with table; chimney draught; other outlets; inlets; window
  and door ventilation; arrangements in barracks, in public buildings,
  exhaust cowls; extraction of vitiated air; fans; water spray
  ventilation; extraction by hot-air shaft; measurement of air; systems
  in public buildings

Both the builder and contractor will find valuable information to govern
their financial relations with their clients in the article BUILDING
SOCIETIES, of which the American part is by Carroll D. Wright, late
United States Commissioner of Labor.

The contractor will find the following articles of importance to him, in
addition to those of more particular interest for the builder:

 SURVEYING
 GEODESY
 BRIDGES
 CANTILEVER
 CAISSON
 COFFERDAM
 RIVER ENGINEERING
 HARBOUR
 DIVERS AND DIVING APPARATUS
 DOCKS
 DREDGES
 BREAKWATER
 TUNNEL
 CANAL
 ROAD
 LIGHTHOUSE
 IRRIGATION
 RECLAMATION OF LAND

and the article RAILWAY, with the other articles on railway construction
listed in the chapter _For Railroad Men_ in this Guide.

For an alphabetical list of the principal articles and topics of
interest to builders and contractors, see the end of the chapter _For
Architects_ in this Guide.




                              CHAPTER XVII
                      FOR DECORATORS AND DESIGNERS


[Sidenote: All the Arts in One]

The decorator and designer is a specialist in his purposes rather than
in his methods, and his taste and judgment must be based upon a wide
range of information. His selection and combination of decorative
factors call for a knowledge of architectural design, of painting,
sculpture, furniture, textiles, pottery, enamels, embroideries, laces
and all the other arts, crafts and products that contribute to the
perfecting of “the house beautiful.” The variety of the materials at his
command offers him infinite possibilities of successful achievement, and
as many temptations to incoherence and exuberance. The highest success
in decoration can be attained only when the designer possesses the
resources of all these arts and crafts, and failure perhaps comes
oftenest through too exclusive a use of one medium of expression because
it is the one with which the designer feels he can most competently
deal. The ideal should be not only to employ, but to enlarge, the scope
of every contributory medium of form or colour, as Wagner found new
possibilities in the use of every musical instrument in one orchestra.
This practical usefulness of versatility is clearly indicated in one of
the articles, characteristic of the Britannica, where one great expert
writes about the work of another. William Morris and Walter Crane have
been the leaders of the modern revival of artistic interest in the daily
accessories of life; and Crane in the Britannica (Vol. 2, p. 701) says
of Morris that his influence is to be attributed to his having
“_personally mastered the working details and handling of each craft he
took up in turn, as well as to his power of inspiring his helpers and
followers. He was painter, designer, scribe, illuminator, wood-engraver,
dyer, weaver and, finally, printer and paper-maker; and, having
effectively mastered these crafts he could effectively direct and
criticize the work of others._” Obviously, few men can afford to devote
forty years, as Morris did, to the close study and actual practice of
all these pursuits, and still fewer could hope to develop so many manual
dexterities. But any earnest student can become a competent critic in
all these varied fields, and can retain an equal appreciation of all the
materials and methods employed, if he will enlarge and refresh his
knowledge by constant reading of the best authorities. The
comprehensiveness of the Britannica makes it, for such purposes,
invaluable to the designer and decorator, no matter how many technical
books his working library may contain.

[Sidenote: The Influence of Architecture]

Since harmony of proportion, the essence of architecture, is also the
primary law of interior decoration, the reader of the present chapter
may well begin his reading with a number of the articles described in
the chapter _For Architects_, of which only those dwelling most upon the
use of ornament and colour need be separately mentioned in this
connection. The article ARCHITECTURE (Vol. 2, p. 369) is by R. Phené
Spiers, formerly master of the Architectural School of the English Royal
Academy, with sections on special periods and schools of architecture by
other famous authorities. Oriental architecture, with its elaboration of
detail, is peculiarly suggestive to the decorator, who may be surprised
to find, in the Britannica, treatises so highly specialized as INDIAN
ARCHITECTURE (Vol. 14, p. 428), by Dr. James Burgess, editor of the
standard book on the subject, the _History of Indian Architecture_; the
architectural part of CHINA, _Art_ (Vol. 6, p. 214), by Lawrence Binyon,
whose work in the great British Museum collection has made his
reputation as one of the foremost modern critics; and JAPAN, _Art_ (Vol.
15, p. 181), by Capt. Frank Brinkley, whose many years of study in Japan
have given him an exceptional mastery of the subject. Among other
articles dealing with the decorative aspects of architecture are ORDER
(Vol. 20, p. 176), CAPITAL (Vol. 5, p. 275), and HOUSE (Vol. 13, p.
810), with its exquisite full page plates.

[Sidenote: Design and Mural Painting]

The article DESIGN (Vol. 8, p. 95), by W. R. Lethaby, principal of the
Central School of Arts and Crafts, London, contains a passage which the
decorator may well bear in mind when he has to contend against the
typical client’s unreasoning demand for the sensationalism which, for
the moment, is accepted as an evidence of originality, but is always the
cause of subsequent dissatisfaction and complaint. “Modern use has
tended to associate design with the word ‘original’ in the sense of new
or abnormal. The end of design, however, is properly utility, fitness
and delight. _If a discovery, it should be a discovery of what seems
inevitable_, an inspiration arising out of the conditions, and parallel
to invention in the sciences.” These fifty words are but a millionth
part of the contents of the Britannica; but alone they show that the
work can practically serve the designer. MURAL DECORATION (Vol. 19, p.
16), with its delightful reproduction in colour of a wall painting
preserved in the National Museum at Rome, and its other illustrations,
is by William Morris and Walter Crane, with a section on classical wall
paintings by Prof. J. H. Middleton, Slade professor of fine art at
Cambridge University. The “furnishing” point of view is considered under
other headings (see below). Here the distinguished contributors give an
interesting account of marble and stone reliefs, the oldest method of
wall decoration; marble veneer, especially appropriate to 14th and 15th
century Italian style; wall-linings of glazed brick or tiles; coverings
of hard stucco; the recently revived sgraffito method; stamped leather,
much used in rooms of the 16th–18th century period; painted cloth;
printed hangings and wall-papers, of great antiquity among the Hindus
and Chinese but not common in Europe until the 18th century;
wall-painting, with description of the characteristic schemes of mural
art in ancient and modern times, and methods of execution.

In further connection with this subject the reader should turn to EGYPT,
_Art and Archaeology_ (Vol. 9, p. 65), by the noted Egyptologist, W. M.
Flinders Petrie; GREEK ART (Vol. 12, p. 470), by Percy Gardner; ROMAN
ART (Vol. 23, p. 474), by H. Stuart Jones; PAINTING (Vol. 20, p. 459),
by Prof. G. B. Brown, of Edinburgh University, and other authorities;
SCULPTURE (Vol. 24, p. 488), by Professor Middleton and other
authorities; MOSAIC (Vol. 18, p. 883), by Professor Middleton and H.
Stuart Jones, with a practical section on _Modern Mosaic_ (p. 888), by
Sir William Blake Richmond, noted for his accomplishments in decorative
art. All of these articles are richly illustrated. See further, the
chapters on _Fine Arts_, _Painting_ and _Sculpture_.

[Sidenote: The Wall and the Floor]

WALL-COVERINGS (Vol. 28, p. 279), by James Bartlett, of Kings College,
London, deals with the subject in its practical relation to house
furnishing, with reference to the conditions of the room, the use to
which it is to be put, its lighting aspect, and its outlook. There is
much information about the employment of marble, mosaic, tiles, metal
sheeting, tapestry, and wall-papers; and separate articles will be found
on the following materials: MARBLE (Vol. 17, p. 676), by J. S. Flett;
TILE, _Wall and Floor_ (Vol. 26, p. 971), illustrated, by William
Burton; LEATHER (Vol. 16, p. 330), illustrated, by Dr. J. G. Parker;
TAPESTRY (Vol. 26, p. 403), by A. S. Cole, an admirable historical
account, fully illustrated, and giving information on varieties of
design, indications of date, the marks of makers, modern tapestry
weaving, etc. BAYEUX TAPESTRY (Vol. 3, p. 555) is an interesting
historical account by the antiquarian, J. H. Round, of this venerable
relic executed by order of the half-brother of William the Conqueror; it
is illustrated with two plates containing 11 views of the tapestry.

In the matter of Floor-coverings there are the articles FLOOR-CLOTH
(Vol. 10, p. 527), PARQUETRY (Vol. 20, p. 861), and CARPET (Vol. 5, p.
392), illustrated, by A. S. Cole, devoted to descriptions of carpets and
rugs as designed and manufactured in Europe and Oriental countries.

[Sidenote: Furniture]

The next group of topics begins with the article FURNITURE (Vol. 11, p.
363) with 36 illustrations by J. G. Penderel-Brodhurst. The classified
Table of Articles in the Britannica (Vol. 29, p. 888) indicates over 75
articles on separate pieces of furniture, but in this general treatise
we have a concise history, describing periods and styles, with many
interesting facts about the origin and use of different pieces of
furniture from the earliest time to the “art nouveau” of very recent
date. Some of the noteworthy separate articles, which have been written
by Mr. Penderel-Brodhurst, are CHAIR (Vol. 5, p. 801); DESK (Vol. 8, p.
95); TABLE (Vol. 26, p. 325), and BED (Vol. 3, p. 612). See also
MARQUETRY (Vol. 17, p. 751). For those who wish to preserve unity of
style in furnishing a room, these articles will prove of the highest
value. A full list is appended to this chapter; and the reader should
consult the chapter in this Guide _For the Manufacturer of Furniture_.

[Sidenote: Textile Fabrics]

The decorator and designer must be familiar with all manner of fabrics,
and the Britannica contains an immense fund of information in regard to
the nature, manufacture and use of textiles. For purposes of study a
beginning would perhaps here be made with the article Weaving, which is
in two parts. The first, _Industrial Technicology and Machinery_ (Vol.
28, p. 440) with 28 illustrations, is by T. W. Fox, professor of
textiles in the University of Manchester. Very useful will be found the
classification of weaving schemes into groups, from which we learn the
distinctive weaves of plain cloth, twills, satins, damasks, compound
cloths, repps, piled fabrics, chenille, velvets and plushes, gauze, etc.
All weaving machinery is described. The second part, _Archaeology and
Art_, is written by A. S. Cole. It is a most interesting and valuable
account of the origin of various textiles, and the periods to which they
are appropriate. There are many illustrations of typical designs of
silk, brocade and flax weavings.

The investigation of woven fabrics reveals the fact that the almost
endless variety of effects obtained is due in part only to the method of
weaving. Consequently, it is necessary for the student, in order to
acquire an expert knowledge of the character and effect on any textile
product which he wishes to employ, to have access to the information in
the articles BLEACHING (Vol. 4, p. 49) illustrated; MERCERIZING (Vol.
18, p. 150); DYEING (Vol. 8, p. 744) illustrated, and with an elaborate
classification of colouring matters—acid, direct, and developed colours;
FINISHING (Vol. 10, p. 378) illustrated, and TEXTILE PRINTING (Vol. 26,
p. 694), illustrated. The fact that this fine series of articles has
been prepared by Dr. Edmund Knecht, professor of technological
chemistry, University of Manchester, assisted by noted authorities like
the late J. J. Hummel, professor of dyeing, University of Leeds, and A.
S. Cole, is a guarantee of their great interest and value.

In the matter of the fabrics themselves, under COTTON, _Cotton Goods and
Yarn_ (Vol. 7, p. 275) will be found descriptions of many cotton
fabrics, and see also SILK (Vol. 25, p. 96) illustrated, by Arthur
Mellor and other authorities; WOOL, WORSTED, AND WOOLEN MANUFACTURES
(Vol. 28, p. 805) illustrated, by Prof. A. F. Barker of Bradford
Technical College; LINEN AND LINEN MANUFACTURES (Vol. 16, p. 724) by
Thomas Woodhouse, head of the weaving and textile designing department,
Technical College, Dundee. Those who desire a closer scientific
knowledge of fibres may obtain it from FIBRES (Vol. 10, p. 309),
illustrated, by the well-known English analytical chemist, C. F. Cross.
There are separate articles on BROCADE (Vol. 4, p. 620); MUSLIN (Vol.
19, p. 93); CANVAS (Vol. 5, p. 223); CHINTZ (Vol. 6, p. 235); CRETONNE
(Vol. 7, p. 431); GAUZE (Vol. 11, p. 357) and other textiles. A full
list of these materials is appended.

The article LACE (Vol. 16, p. 37) is one of the most notable
contributions to the Britannica. It is written by A. S. Cole, author of
_Embroidery and Lace_, _Ancient Needle Point and Pillow Lace_, etc., and
has over 60 illustrations. A full history of lacemaking is given, and
the article is of the highest interest throughout. There exists no
better manual on the subject than this, and the pictures alone will
enable the student to distinguish the different varieties. EMBROIDERY
(Vol. 9, p. 309) by A. F. Kendrick, keeper of the Victoria and Albert
Museum, and A. S. Cole, has 18 illustrations and describes the
characteristics of the art as practised by different nationalities. GOLD
AND SILVER THREAD (Vol. 12, p. 200), also by A. S. Cole, is a general
and historical account of the gold and silver strips, threads and gimp
used in connection with varieties of weaving, embroidery and twisting
and with plaiting or lace-work.

[Sidenote: Arts and Crafts]

Before taking up the specific objects of art used in interior decoration
and furnishing, attention must be called to the many articles of great
value to those engaged in all arts and crafts-work whose success depends
upon a sound knowledge of methods and the principle of design. In ARTS
AND CRAFTS (Vol. 2, p. 700) Mr. Walter Crane gives an account of the
recent movement in the arts of decorative design and handicraft that has
for its object the adornment of the house. Handicraft workers will find
valuable material, discussing designs, methods and tools, in NEEDLEWORK
(Vol. 19, p. 339); WOOD-CARVING (Vol. 28, p. 791) fully illustrated, by
F. A. Crallan, author of _Gothic Wood-carving_; CARVING AND GILDING
(Vol. 5, p. 438); METAL-WORK (Vol. 18, p. 205) illustrated, by Professor
Middleton of Cambridge University, with sections on _Modern Art
Metal-work_ by John S. Gardner, and on _Industrial Metal Work_ by J. G.
Horner, author of _Practical Metal Turning_; MEDAL (Vol. 18, p. 1)
illustrated, by M. H. Spielmann, formerly editor of _The Magazine of
Art_; GLASS, STAINED (Vol. 12, p. 105) illustrated, by Lewis Foreman
Day, late vice-president of the Society of Arts; SPINNING (Vol. 25, p.
685) by Professor Fox; BASKET (Vol. 3, p. 481) with an account of the
basket-making industry and methods employed, by Thomas Okey, examiner in
basket-work for the City of London Guilds and Institute; EMBOSSING (Vol.
9, p. 308); CHASING (Vol. 5, p. 956); REPOUSSÉ (Vol. 23, p. 108); ENAMEL
(Vol. 9, p. 362) a very complete historical and technical article, fully
illustrated, by Alexander Fisher, author of _The Art of Enamelling on
Metals_; JAPAN, _Cloisonné Enamel_ (Vol. 15, p. 189); INLAYING (Vol. 14,
p. 574). Much knowledge about primitive shapes and designs may be
obtained from ARCHAEOLOGY (Vol. 2, p. 344) by Dr. Charles H. Read of the
British Museum, AEGEAN CIVILIZATION (Vol. 1, p. 245) by D. G. Hogarth,
the explorer, SCANDINAVIAN CIVILIZATION (Vol. 24, p. 287), and AMERICA,
_Archaeology_ (Vol. 1, p. 810) by the late O. T. Mason, of the National
Museum, Washington. These articles are beautifully illustrated.

[Sidenote: Portable Ornaments]

Some of the articles on art objects have already been mentioned; in
addition to them there is CERAMICS (Vol. 5, p. 703), equivalent to 133
pages of this Guide, with over 100 illustrations including 10 full-page
plates, six of which are colour. This magnificent article is the joint
contribution of six special authorities and describes the art of pottery
and porcelain manufacture, potter’s marks, etc., in all countries and at
all periods, with the exception of Japanese ceramics, for which see
JAPAN, _Art_, _Ceramics_ (Vol. 15, p. 183). GLASS (Vol. 12, p. 86) has a
section on the _History of Glass Manufacture_ (p. 97) in which glassware
from the primitive vessels of ancient Egypt to modern wares is discussed
and illustrated. The authors of this valuable account are Alexander
Nesbitt, who wrote the descriptive catalogue of glass vessels for the
South Kensington Museum, and H. J. Powell, of the Whitefriars Glass
Works, London. PLATE (Vol. 21, p. 789) illustrated, is the joint product
of H. Stuart Jones, formerly director of the British School at Rome; H.
R. H. Hall, of the British Museum, and E. Alfred Jones, author of _Old
English Gold Plate_. It contains unusually full information about
hall-marks. There are also separate articles on PEWTER (Vol. 21, p. 338)
and SHEFFIELD PLATE (Vol. 24, p. 824) by Malcolm Bell, author of _Pewter
Plate_, etc.

CLOCK has a section _Decorative Aspects_ (Vol. 6, p. 552), by J. G.
Penderel-Brodhurst. FAN (Vol. 10, p. 168) by the late J. H. Pollen,
author of _Ancient and Modern Furniture and Woodwork_, devotes special
attention to styles of fan painting. IVORY has a well-illustrated
section on _Ivory Sculpture and the Decorative Arts_ (Vol. 15, p. 95) by
A. O. Maskell, author of _Ivories_, etc. MIRROR (Vol. 18, p. 575); FRAME
(Vol. 10, p. 773), and SCREEN (Vol. 24, p. 477) are likewise useful
articles for the decorator and furnisher. TERRACOTTA (Vol. 26, p. 653)
illustrated, by H. B. Walters of the British Museum, and William Burton,
deals with the use of this material in architecture and sculpture,
describes its manufacture, and contains an historical and critical
discussion of subjects and types. BYZANTINE ART by W. R. Lethaby
contains a section, _Metal Work, Ivories, and Textiles_ (Vol. 4, p.
910).

The subject of LACQUER (Vol. 16, p. 53) is further treated under JAPAN,
_Lacquer_ (Vol. 15, p. 188), a part of a very elaborate discussion of
all forms of Japanese art, including especially _Painting and Engraving_
(Vol. 15, p. 172), which, as well as CHINA, _Art_ (Vol. 6, p. 213), will
be referred to constantly by all who are interested in Oriental
handiwork and design.

[Sidenote: Biographies]

A great number of the biographies in the Britannica will possess much
interest for the decorator and designer. Some of the noteworthy names of
modern times are MORRIS, WILLIAM (Vol. 18, p. 871); CRANE, WALTER (Vol.
7, p. 366); TIFFANY, LOUIS C. (Vol. 26, p. 966); LA FARGE, JOHN (Vol.
16, p. 64); RICHMOND, SIR WILLIAM BLAKE (Vol. 23, p. 307); CHIPPENDALE,
THOMAS (Vol. 6, p. 237); HEPPLEWHITE, GEORGE (Vol. 13, p. 305);
SHERATON, THOMAS (Vol. 24, p. 841); GIBBONS, GRINLING (Vol. 11, p. 936).


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL
INTEREST TO THOSE ENGAGED IN DECORATING, DESIGNING, INTERIOR FURNISHING
                    AND ALL FORMS OF ART HANDICRAFT

 Abbey, E. A.
 Acroliths
 Adam, Robert
 Aegean Civilization
 Ainmuller, M. E.
 Alb
 Alexander, J. W.
 Almuce
 Alto-Relievo
 America, _Archaeology_
 Amice
 Amphora
 Andiron
 Angerstein, J. J.
 Antimacassar
 Apostle Spoons
 Aquarelle
 Aquatint
 Arabesque
 Arch
 Archaeology
 Architecture
 Armoire
 Art
 Arts and Crafts
 Art Teaching
 Bagging
 Bahut
 Baize
 Ball-flower
 Baroque
 Basin-stand
 Basket
 Basso-relievo
 Bead
 Beaker
 Bed
 Bérain, Jean
 Bezel
 Biretta
 Bleaching
 Blondel, J. F.
 Blum, R. F.
 Bombay Furniture
 Bombazine or Bombasine
 Bonelace
 Bonheur du Jour
 Bookbinding
 Bookcase
 Book-plates
 Boulle, André Charles
 Box
 Bracelet
 Bracket
 Brasses, Monumental
 Brazier
 Brocade
 Brooch
 Buckram
 Buffet
 Bunting
 Byzantine Art
 Cable-moulding
 Caffieri, Jacques
 Calender
 Calico
 Cambric
 Cameo
 Candelabrum
 Candle
 Candlestick
 Canopy
 Canvas
 Capital
 Capronnier, Jean Baptiste
 Carding
 Carpet
 Cartoon
 Cartouche
 Carving
 Carving and Gilding
 Caryatides
 Casket
 Cassock
 Cassone
 Ceiling
 Cellaret
 Cellini, Benvenuto
 Ceramics
 Chair
 Chandelier
 Chasing
 Chasuble
 Chatelaine
 Cheese-cloth
 Cheffonier
 Chenille
 Chest
 Chevron
 Chimere
 Chimney-piece
 China, _Art_
 Chintz
 Chippendale, Thomas
 Cimabue, Giovanni
 Cinque Cento
 Cloth
 Coffer
 Column
 Composite Order
 Console
 Cookworthy, William
 Cope
 Copeland, Henry
 Copper
 Corduroy
 Corner Copiae
 Cornice
 Corregio
 Cosmati (family)
 Costume
 Cotton
 Cotton Manufacture
 Cotton-spinning Machinery
 Cowl
 Cox, Kenyon
 Cradle
 Crane, Walter
 Crape
 Crash
 Cressent, Charles
 Crest
 Cretonne
 Cross
 Crozat, Pierre
 Crunden, John
 Cupboard
 Curtain
 Cushion
 Dais
 Dalmatic
 Damascening, or Damaskeening
 Damask
 Darly, Matthias
 Decorated Period
 Delacroix, F. V. E.
 Della Robbia
 Denim
 Design
 Desk
 Diaper
 Die
 Dimity
 Diptych
 Dog-tooth
 Domenichino, Zampieri
 Doulton, Sir Henry
 Dowlas
 Drawing
 Drill
 Drinking Vessels
 Duck
 Dumbwaiter
 Dwight, John
 Dyeing
 Early English Period
 Ear-ring
 Egypt, _Archaeology_
 Electrolier
 Electroplating
 Embossing
 Embroidery
 Enamel
 Encaustic Painting
 Encoignure
 Engraving
 Etagère
 Etching
 Faience
 Fan
 Felt
 Fender
 Festoon
 Fibres
 Filigree
 Fine Arts
 Finiguerra, Maso
 Finishing
 Fireback
 Fire-irons
 Flag
 Flamboyant Style
 Flannel
 Flannelette
 Flock
 Floor
 Floorcloth
 Footman
 Frame
 French Polish
 Fresco
 Frieze
 Furniture
 Fustian
 Ganté
 Gargoyle
 Gauze
 Gem
 Gem, Artificial
 Gesso
 Ghiberti, Lorenzo
 Ghirlandajo
 Gibbons, Grinling
 Gilding
 Gillow, Robert
 Gimp
 Gingham
 Giotto
 Girandole
 Girdle
 Glass
 Glass Cloth
 Glass, Stained
 Glue
 Gobelin
 Goblet
 Gold
 Gold and Silver Thread
 Goldbeating
 Gouache
 Gouthière, Pierre
 Graffito
 Grate
 Greco, El
 Greek Art
 Grisaille
 Grotesque
 Guéridon
 Guido Reni
 Gunny
 Halfpenny, W.
 Hallstatt
 Hamerton, P. G.
 Hepplewhite, George
 Heraldry
 Hessian
 Hiroshige
 Hokusai
 Holland
 Honeycomb
 Horn
 Hosiery
 House
 Huckaback
 Icon
 Illuminated Manuscripts
 Illustration
 Impressionism
 Ince, William
 India, _Costume_
 Indian Architecture
 Ingle-work
 Inlaying
 Intaglio
 Iron-work
 Ivory
 Jack
 Jacobean Style
 Japan, _Art_
 Japanning
 Jewelry
 Johnson, Thomas
 Jug
 Jute
 Kashi
 Knitting
 Lac
 Lace
 Lacquer
 Lacrymatory
 La Farge, John
 Lampstand
 Lantern
 Lawn
 Leather
 Leather, Artificial
 Lectern
 Leonardo da Vinci
 Le Pautre, Jean
 Line Engraving
 Linen, and Linen Manufactures
 Linen-press
 Lithographing
 Lock, Matthias
 Longcloth
 Lowboy
 Macabre
 Majolica
 Manwaring, Robert
 Marble
 Marot, Daniel
 Marquetry
 Matting
 Mayhew, Thomas
 Mazer
 Medal
 Meissonier, J. A.
 Mercerizing
 Metal-work
 Mezzotint
 Michelangelo
 Miniature
 Mirror
 Mohair
 Moleskin
 Monogram
 Monteith
 Morel-Ladeuil, L.
 Mosaic
 Mouldings
 Mull
 Mural Decoration
 Museums of Art
 Muslin
 Nankeen
 Needlework
 Net
 Niello
 Numismatics
 Oeben, F. F.
 Order
 Ormolu
 Ornament
 Osnaburg
 Ottoman
 Overdoor
 Overmantel
 Padding
 Pagoda
 Painting
 Palissy, Bernard
 Pantograph
 Papier Maché
 Parchment
 Parquetry
 Pastel
 Pearl
 Pedestal
 Pediment
 Pendant
 Pergolesi, M. A.
 Perpendicular Period
 Perugino, Pietro
 Pewter
 Photography
 Phylactery
 Pigments
 Plaque
 Plate
 Plated Ware
 Platinum
 Plumbago Drawings
 Plush
 Poplin or Tabinet
 Poppy-heads
 Porcelain
 Portière
 Poster
 Pot-hook
 Prie-Dieu
 Print
 Process
 Puvis de Chavannes, P. C.
 Raphael Sanzio
 Relief
 Rep
 Repoussé
 Reredos
 Ribbons
 Richmond, Sir W. B.
 Riesener, J. H.
 Ring
 Robes
 Rococo
 Roman Art
 Röntgen, David
 Rousseau de la Rottiere, J. S.
 Rubens, Peter Paul
 Rug
 Sacking and Sack Manufacture
 Salt cellar
 Salver
 Samovar
 Sampler
 Sargent, J. S.
 Scandinavian Civilization
 Scarab
 Scarf
 Sconce
 Screen
 Scrim
 Sculpture
 Seals
 Servan, J. N.
 Settee
 Settle
 Shagreen
 Shawl
 Shearer, Thomas
 Sheffield Plate
 Sheraton, Thomas
 Sideboard
 Silk
 Silver
 Sofa
 Soutane
 Spinning
 Spit
 Spoon
 Stencil
 Stole
 Stool
 Sun Copying or Photo-Copying
 Surplice
 Table
 Tallboy
 Tankard
 Tapestry
 Tarpaulin
 Tartan
 Tassie, James
 Tazza
 Tea-caddy
 Tea-poy
 Tempera
 Terracotta
 Textile-printing
 Throne
 Ticking
 Tiepolo, G. B.
 Tiffany, C. L.
 Tile
 Tintoretto
 Titian
 Tool
 Torchère
 Torque
 Tortoiseshell
 Tracery
 Tray
 Triclinium
 Tripod
 Triptych
 Trivet
 Tudor Period
 Tulle
 Twill
 Uniforms
 Utamaro
 Varnish
 Vase
 Velvet
 Velveteen
 Veneer
 Vernis Martin
 Vestments
 Walker, H. O.
 Wall-coverings
 Wardrobe
 Washstand
 Wax Figures
 Weaving
 Wedgwood, Josiah
 What-not
 Window-cornice
 Window-seat
 Wine Table
 Wood-carving
 Wood Engraving
 Wyon, Thomas
 Yarn




                             CHAPTER XVIII
                            FOR RAILROAD MEN


There are no less than six distinct classes of articles in the new
Encyclopædia Britannica which contain information of peculiar interest
to railroad men:—

1. Articles on continents contain authoritative and original accounts of
trans-continental routes and traffic. For example the article EUROPE has
a table in which the 19 chief avenues of trade are analyzed, showing the
direct distance, the distance by sea and the distance by rail from point
to point; another table comparing railroad developments in the various
parts of Europe, and also an account of the contour of Europe from the
railroad man’s point of view, discussing the mountain ranges pierced by
tunnels and the passes over which lines have been carried wholly or
largely in the open.

[Sidenote: Six Classes of Articles]

2. The articles on separate countries, on the individual states of the
Union, and on colonies contain detailed accounts of the railway systems.
For example, the article FRANCE describes the six great French
railroads, traces their lines and explains the financial system by which
they were constructed, the concessions granted to them by the French
government, and the extent to which direct state ownership and
management has been adopted.

3. The articles on cities show the relation of each centre to the
general railroad system of the country and describe the terminals and
the methods of urban communication. For example, in the article BERLIN
there is an account of the Stadtbahn, carried through the heart of the
city, 20 feet above the street, providing for through traffic as well as
for suburban service.

4. The maps as well as the many plans of cities, all of which were
specially prepared for the Britannica, show much more clearly than does
an ordinary atlas, the present development of railroads in all parts of
the world.

5. The articles on various branches of engineering and mechanics,
described in other chapters of this Guide, are complete treatises on the
technical subjects connected with railroad construction and management.

6. The articles devoted exclusively to the subject, of which a brief
account is given in the present chapter, are those to which railroad men
will naturally first turn.

The key article is RAILWAYS (Vol. 22, p. 819), equivalent in length to
more than 120 pages of this Guide. It is written by the foremost
authorities on the subject both in the Old World and in the New,
including:

[Sidenote: Technical Authorities]

  ARTHUR TWINING HADLEY, president of Yale University, and author of
  _Railroad Transportation_.

  HUGH MUNRO ROSS, author of _British Railways_ and editor of the
  _Engineering Supplement_ of the London Times.

  RAY MORRIS, formerly managing editor of the _Railway Age Gazette_ of
  New York and author of _Railroad Administration_.

  LT. COL. H. A. YORKE, C.B., chief inspecting officer of railways of
  the English Board of Trade.

  PROF. FRANK HAIGH DIXON, of Dartmouth College, author of _State
  Railroad Control_.

  BRAMAN BLANCHARD ADAMS, associate editor of New York _Railway Age
  Gazette_.

  WILLIAM ERNEST DALBY, professor of engineering in the South Kensington
  Central Technical College, and author of _The Balancing of Engines_,
  etc.

  WILLIAM BARCLAY PARSONS, formerly chief engineer to the New York City
  Rapid Transit Commission and advisory engineer of the Royal Commission
  on London Traffic.

  MAJ. GEN. C. E. WEBBER, founder of the Institute of Electrical
  Engineers.

  EMILE GARCKE, managing director of the British Electric Traction Co.,
  Ltd., author of _Manual of Electrical Undertakings_.

[Sidenote: The Key Article]

The article opens with an introductory historical summary which
describes the use of railways or tramways before the invention of the
steam locomotive in mining districts in England (just as in the article
_Mauch Chunk_, Vol. 17, p. 903, early mine transportation in America is
described) and the way in which their use induced the development of
high speed locomotives and how the first American trans-continental
railroads were built. The student will find next a section of general
statistics of railway mileage for the world, with a summary of American
railway building, especially in the Far West since 1896. The following
section is on economics and legislation in general, followed by separate
treatment of British railway legislation and of American railway
legislation. The great problem of government control and operation of
railways as practised in various European countries is also discussed
and is of interest in connection with contemporary American tendencies.
The safety of railway transportation is treated in a section containing
in compact form the most valuable classified statistics. A section on
_Financial Organization_ compares American and British conditions in a
most illuminating way.

Of even greater importance to the technical student are the remaining
sections of this great article, namely:

(1) CONSTRUCTION, with subsections on _Location_, _Cuttings and
Embankments_, _Gradients_, _Curves_, _Gauge_, _Permanent Way_ (including
ballast, ties, fish-plates and other rail joints, and rails), _Bridges_,
_Rack_ (or cog) _Railways_, _Cable Railways_, _Mono-Rail Systems_,
_Switches and Cross-overs_, _Railway Stations_ (for passengers and for
freight), _Round Houses for Locomotives_, and _Switching Yards_. This
treatise on construction is equivalent to 22 pages of the type and size
of this Guide, and is in itself an adequate brief manual for the use of
the construction engineer, with valuable illustrations in the text.

(2) LOCOMOTIVE POWER, including subsections on _Fundamental Relations_,
_Methods of Applying Locomotive Power_, _General Locomotive Efficiency_,
_Analysis of Train Resistance_, _Vehicle Resistance_, _Engine
Resistance_, _Maximum Boiler Power_, _Draught_, _The Steam Engine_,
_Tractive Force_, _Engine Efficiency_, _Piston Speed_, _Compound
Locomotives_, _Balancing of Locomotives_, _Classes of Locomotives_,
_Current Developments_. This section of the article is a little longer
than the preceding,—it would fill 25 pages of this Guide,—and has
illustrations, tables, and formulae. It is written by Prof. Dalby, the
principal British authority on locomotives.

(3) ROLLING STOCK, dealing with dining, sleeping, passenger and
vestibule cars, wood and metal, their heating and lighting and their
weight and speed; with freight cars, their weight and speed; and with
car-couplers and brakes.

(4) INTRA-URBAN, or city street railways, elevated and underground, by
W. B. Parsons, formerly chief engineer of the New York Rapid Transit
Commission.

(5) LIGHT RAILWAYS for rural and interurban service and portable
railways.

[Sidenote: Other Major Articles]

The next article to be read is _Tramway_ (Vol. 27, p. 159), dealing with
the earliest railways used in coal mines, American and English, without
locomotive power; and with modern street railways,—surface lines, steam,
cable and electric, the last being subdivided into three classes,
overhead or trolley, open conduit and closed conduit. The different
types of street cars are discussed, and there are summaries of
legislation and of commercial results, with general statistics.

The article TRACTION (Vol. 27, p. 118, equivalent to more than 20 pages
of this Guide) is by Louis Duncan, formerly head of the department of
electrical engineering in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It
deals principally with electric traction and thus supplements the
article TRAMWAY. _Steam_ traction, as treated in the section on
_Locomotive Power_ in the article RAILWAYS, by Prof. Dalby, may be
studied further in the article STEAM-ENGINE (Vol. 25, p. 818), and
especially that part of the article which deals with locomotives (§ 104,
p. 841).

The civil engineer engaged in railway work will profit by reading,
besides the articles already mentioned: Professor W. C. Unwin’s article
(Vol. 4, p. 533) on BRIDGES, especially pp. 545 and 547 seq., dealing
with railway bridges; and the article TUNNEL (Vol. 27, p. 399), by H. A.
Carson, engineer-in-charge of the Boston Subway and of the East Boston
Tunnel, which would make about 30 pages if printed in the form of this
Guide. This article classifies tunnels into river, mountain and town
(subway) tunnels, and gives special information about rail corrosion and
ventilation in tunnels.

The equipment engineer will add to the topics already listed (cars,
engines, etc.) the article SIGNAL, § _Railway Signalling_ (Vol. 25, p.
73; as long as 15 pages of this Guide), by B. B. Adams, of the _Railway
Age Gazette_, and H. M. Ross, of the London _Times_ Engineering
Supplement; and BRAKE (Vol. 4, p. 414).

[Sidenote: Legislation]

On the history of railroading and on statistics there is much
information in the Britannica in local articles. It has already been
remarked that each article dealing with a state of the United States, or
any of the commercial countries of the world, has a section on
_Communications_, giving railway mileage and describing the principal
railway lines in the area; and that articles on cities and towns give
accurate and minute information about railway service. In pursuing the
study of legislation bearing on railways, and especially on rate
legislation, the student should read the article INTERSTATE COMMERCE
(Vol. 14, p. 711), by Prof. Frank A. Fetter of Princeton University, a
part at least of the article TRUSTS (Vol. 27, p. 334), by Prof. J. W.
Jenks, of New York University (formerly of Cornell), parts of the
article on the history of the United States, in the same volume,
especially pp. 315, 316, 353, 367, 394, 395, 396, 406, 407, and, in
separate state articles, the sections on laws and history, notably NORTH
CAROLINA for the rate cases of 1907 (Vol. 19, p. 778), NEBRASKA for the
maximum freight rate of 1893 (Vol. 19, p. 329), WISCONSIN on radical
rate legislation and on physical valuation for _ad valorem_ tax of
railways (Vol. 28, p. 744).

[Sidenote: Biographies]

The biographical articles in the new Britannica also have much important
information for the student of railways.

Among the names of inventors whose lives are outlined are: THOMAS
NEWCOMEN (Vol. 19, p. 475), JAMES WATT (Vol. 28, p. 414), MATTHEW
BOULTON (Vol. 4, p. 324), GEORGE and ROBERT STEPHENSON (Vol. 25, pp. 888
and 889), RICHARD TREVITHICK (Vol. 27, p. 256), OLIVER EVANS (Vol. 10,
p. 2), JOHN ERICSSON (Vol. 9, p. 740), PETER COOPER (Vol. 7, p. 80), and
SIR MARC I. BRUNEL (Vol. 4, p. 682); among the names of engineers and
railway and bridge builders GEORGE PARKER BIDDER (Vol. 3, p. 918),
THOMAS BRASSEY (Vol. 4, p. 435), JOHN COCKERILL (Vol. 6, p. 625),
ERASTUS CORNING (Vol. 7, p. 174), JAMES BUCHANAN EADS (Vol. 8, p. 789),
SIR WILLIAM FAIRBAIRN (Vol. 19, p. 129), SIR JOHN FOWLER (Vol. 10, p.
761), JAMES HENRY GREATHEAD (Vol. 12, p. 398), SIR JOHN HAWKSHAW (Vol.
13, p. 99), WILLIAM KINGSFORD (Vol. 15, p. 817), SIR ROBERT GILLESPIE
REID (Vol. 23, p. 50), JOHN RENNIE (Vol. 23, p. 101), and J. A. ROEBLING
(Vol. 23, p. 450); and among railway financiers,—to take only a few
American names,—the VANDERBILTS (Vol. 27, p. 885), JAY GOULD (Vol. 12,
p. 284), ASA PACKER (Vol. 20, p. 441) and E. H. HARRIMAN (Vol. 13, p.
18).

In such articles as STRIKES AND LOCK OUTS (Vol. 25, p. 1024) and TRADE
UNIONS (Vol. 27, p. 140), each with American sections by Carroll D.
Wright, late U. S. Commissioner of Labor, the reader will find valuable
assistance in studying railway economics as affected by the relations of
labour and capital.

For marine transportation see the next chapter in this Guide.

The following is a brief list of articles, and of sections of articles,
of interest to all railroad men:

 Analysis of Train Resistance
 Anthracite
 Atmospheric Railway
 Ballast
 Balancing of Locomotives
 Blasting
 Bearings
 Bogie
 Boiler
 Boring
 Brake
 Brickwork
 Bridges
 Cable Railways
 Caisson
 Canal
 Cantilever
 Car
 Cement
 Classes of Locomotives
 Coal
 Cog Railways
 Compound Locomotives
 Concrete
 Conveyors
 Cranes
 Cross-overs
 Curves
 Current Developments
 Cuttings
 Dock
 Draught
 Dredge
 Elevators
 Embankments
 Engine
 Engine Efficiency
 Engine Resistance
 Felloe
 Fire brick
 Fish-plates
 Foundations
 Freight
 Fuel
 Gauge
 General Locomotive Efficiency
 Gradients
 Horse Power
 Hydraulics
 Iron and Steel
 Location
 Locomotive Power
 Maximum Boiler Power
 Masonry
 Methods of applying Locomotive Power
 Monorail Systems
 Mortar
 Motors, Electric
 Oil Engine
 Permanent Way
 Pier
 Piston Speed
 Rack Railways
 Rafter
 Rail
 Railways
 Railway Stations
 River Engineering
 Roads and Streets
 Roadbeds
 Rolling Stock
 Roof
 Semaphore
 Sewerage
 Shaft Sinking
 Shoring
 Shovel
 Signalling
 Siphon
 Sleeper
 Smoke
 Steam Engines
 Steel Construction
 Stone
 Strength of Materials
 Switches (or points)
 Switching Yards
 Ties
 Timber
 Traction
 Tractive Force
 Tramway
 Tunnels
 Vehicle Resistance
 Ventilation
 Welding




                              CHAPTER XIX
                     FOR MARINE TRANSPORTATION MEN


[Sidenote: Problems of the Near Future]

The immediate future of marine commerce cannot fail to be very greatly
affected by changed conditions. No one believes that England, Germany,
France, Russia, Austria, Japan and China will be able, before the middle
of the century, to establish a stable adjustment of the international
difficulties which surround them. No one knows what changes the Panama
Canal may make in the movement of freights within the first ten years of
its operation. No one knows to what industry the United States may next
apply the methods by which the country has created the age of steel.

Coal and the steam engine may both, within a few years, be displaced as
factors in marine transportation. Sweeping tariff changes in the United
States, in Great Britain and in Germany may vitally affect the movement
of freights. Transatlantic passenger traffic, not only a huge business
in itself, but also important, so long as it is sea-borne, in its
effects upon transatlantic freights, may become aerial instead of
marine.

[Sidenote: Technical Subjects]

Confronted by the approach of a period so full of changes, the uttermost
alertness of outlook is merely elementary prudence on the part of
everyone engaged in the business of marine transportation; and the new
Britannica reviews all the many fields of knowledge which are of
importance in this connection. It supplies technical information
regarding the construction of ships, the management of shipping lines,
marine engines of every kind, shipboard and waterside appliances for the
handling of cargo, the development of harbours and the dredging and
embankment of rivers, the building of docks, warehouses and dry docks,
ship canals and canal locks, navigation, lighthouses, lightships, buoys,
lanes of traffic, marine insurance, cold transport—every conceivable
subject with which shipping men are concerned. Articles by contributors
in twenty different countries, deal with all the world’s ports,
industries, exports, imports and shipping. The financial and legal
aspects of the business are exhaustively covered. Tariffs, legislation
affecting marine transportation, and such questions of international
policy as the command of the sea, the right of search, and the position
of neutrals in wartime are discussed by the highest authorities.

In addition to all this, the Britannica articles on these and similar
subjects contain historical sections which, in conjunction with the
articles on the history of all countries, _show how past changes, as
sweeping as these which are now anticipated, have affected commerce_.
Whether your present position—or the position you are endeavouring to
make for yourself—in relation to shipping is such that this coming
period of transition promises to affect you favourably or unfavourably,
you need to be forewarned and forearmed, prepared to keep what you have
or get what you want.

[Sidenote: An Outline of Sea Trade]

A course of reading should always begin with the study of general
principles, in order that in your subsequent and more detailed
examination of the field, the relative importance of each fact that you
master may be appreciated. The Britannica provides, in the article
COMMERCE (Vol. 6, p. 766), a bird’s-eye view of the whole subject of
marine transportation. The article would not fill more than 16 pages of
this Guide; you can read it (and digest it as you read it, so clear is
it) in an hour, and yet it will give you such a grasp of the whole
science—for it is a science—of international trade that you will spend
another hour in assorting and classifying, in your own mind, a mass of
impressions you had received before, at school or in the course of
casual reading, impressions which have not been so useful to you as they
should have been because they had not been systematically arranged.
There is no text book in existence which outlines the subject so fully
and clearly as does this one brief article—about one five-thousandth
part of the total contents of the Britannica.

This article will arouse your interest in the direct relation between
commerce, past, present and future, and the progress of civilization.
You will realize that the man who has any part in the vast shifting of
cargoes from one part of the world to another is distributing ideas and
ideals and ambitions as well as commodities, and in the article
CIVILIZATION (Vol. 6, p. 403), by Dr. Henry Smith Williams, editor of
_The Historians’ History of the World_, you will see how harbours
receive and send on to the inlands the influences as well as the
manufactures of the more advanced communities.

From these articles you should turn to the three great articles which
deal with the methods by which these wonderful results are accomplished.
These three are SHIP, SHIPBUILDING and SHIPPING, all in volume 24, and
equivalent to about 420 or 425 pages of this Guide. These three articles
contain hundreds of illustrations, more than forty being full page
plates. They are by the most eminent authorities. Sir Philip Watts,
director of naval construction for the British Navy, designer of the
Dreadnoughts and the Super-Dreadnoughts of the British Navy, as well as
of the “Mauretania” and the “Lusitania,” chairman of the Federation of
Shipbuilders, and naval architect and director of the warshipbuilding
department of Armstrong, Whitworth & Co., Ltd., wrote the articles
SHIPBUILDING and SHIP (except the history of ships before the invention
of steamships, which is by Edmund Warre, provost of Eton, well-known as
a writer on nautical history). The article SHIPPING is by Douglas Owen,
lecturer at the Royal Naval War College and author of _Ports and Docks_.

In brief, these three articles in length, contents,—both text and
illustrations,—and authorship, make up a remarkable book on the subject,
valuable either as a text-book or a work of reference for the ship
builder, the marine engineer or the student of shipping.

[Sidenote: Story of the Ship]

Taking the articles separately, the article SHIP begins with a section
of nearly 10,000 words on the early development of ships. It suggests
that shells floating on the water or the nautilus may first have
suggested the use of a hollowed tree-trunk for transportation—the first
boat or “ship” (the word comes from the same root as “scoop”) as
distinct from a raft. The evolution of boat building is traced,—from
dug-out to bark- or skin-covered frame, built like modern racing-shells
sometimes ribs first and then skin laid on and sometimes shell first and
then ribs inserted. In spite of the great length of the period during
which such boats were used—of course they are still used by more
primitive peoples,—it is interesting to notice that there were local
variations which never became general, such as the outrigger and weather
platform, used in the South Pacific and not found elsewhere.

Egyptian vessels we may study in the excellent early tomb-paintings
still preserved, and one of these shows a ship, not a canoe or large
boat, such as was in use from 3000–1000 B. C., fitted with oars and a
mast in two pieces which could be lowered and laid along a high
spardeck.

The Phoenicians did more than the Egyptians to develop ship and
navigation, and a Phoenician galley of the 8th century B. C. is shown in
an Assyrian wall painting. The Phoenicians probably sailed out of the
Mediterranean, to Britain for tin, or even around Africa.

Greek ships and shipbuilding we know from a full and varied national
literature, from the figures on coins and vases, and from the discovery
in 1834 at the Peiraeus, the port of Athens, of records of Athenian
dockyard superintendents for several years between 373 and 324 B.C. We
have besides descriptions, partly technical, showing the point of view
of the engineer or architect, written by Roman authors. The article
gives a critical account of the Greek types of vessels. The growth of
Roman shipping seems to have been due primarily to political reasons and
to have advanced slowly but surely,—practical devices being introduced
to solve special difficulties in a field and on an element where the
Romans were far from being at home. A five-tiered Carthaginian galley
which had drifted ashore served the Romans as a model for their first
war-ship, and with crews taught to row in a framework set up on dry land
they manned a fleet which was launched in sixty days from the time that
the trees were felled.

[Sidenote: Mast and Sail]

Passing quickly over the remainder of the earlier period, which the
reader will find treated in full in the article SHIP, he should notice
that the sailing vessel came into use gradually for merchant use, but
that galleys (propelled by oars) were long the only type for warships.
There were some galleys even in the Spanish Armada of 1588. In the
meantime the invention of gunpowder and the development of artillery
brought about changes in size and in form, with a notable tendency to
more masts and a greater spread of sail. The discoveries of the 15th and
16th centuries and especially the consequent expansion of trade in the
17th century, all tended to increase the size and efficiency of sailing
ships. The end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th century marked
the highest point in the development of American sailing ships. “The
Americans with their fast-sailing ‘clippers’ taught the English builders
a lesson, showing that increased length in proportion to beam gave
greater speed, while permitting the use of lighter rigging in proportion
to tonnage, and the employment of smaller crews. The English shipyards
were for a long time unequal to the task of producing vessels capable of
competing with those of their American rivals, and their trade suffered
accordingly. But after the repeal of the Navigation Laws in 1850, things
improved and we find clippers from Aberdeen and the Clyde beginning to
hold their own on the long voyages to China and elsewhere.”

The revolution in marine transportation by the introduction of steam is
summed up by Sir Philip Watts as follows:

  Before steam was applied to the propulsion of ships, the voyage from
  Great Britain to America lasted for some weeks; at the beginning of
  the 20th century the time had been reduced to about six days, and in
  1910 the fastest vessels could do it in four and a half days.
  Similarly, the voyage to Australia, which took about thirteen weeks,
  had been reduced to thirty days or less. The fastest of the sailing
  tea-clippers required about three months to bring the early teas from
  China to Great Britain; in 1910 they were brought to London by the
  ordinary P. & O. service in five weeks. Atlantic liners now run
  between England and America which maintain speeds of 25 and 26 knots
  over the whole course, as compared with about 12 knots before the
  introduction of steam.

[Sidenote: Iron Hulls]

The introduction of iron for wood began about the same time as the
substitution of steam for sails, and there was even more prejudice
against it. This was due not merely to the sentiment attaching to the
oaken timbers that typified “hearts of oak,” or to the “Wooden Walls of
England.” In all seriousness it was objected that iron would not float!
It was feared that iron bottoms would be more easily perforated when
ships grounded; but this was found not to be the case when construction
was careful. It was proved that fouling of iron bottoms from weeds and
barnacles might be remedied by frequent cleaning and repainting. The
most serious objection against iron was that it affected the compass;
but in 1839 Sir G. B. Airy laid down rules for the correction of compass
errors due to iron in construction. But even to-day wood is preferred
for the construction of ships for scientific expeditions to the Polar
regions where the slightest disturbance of the compass is to be avoided.
Iron and steel (first used in shipbuilding to any extent in 1870–75)
have three advantages over wooden ships: less weight; greater
durability; greater ease in securing the necessary general and local
strengths. But while iron was coming into use largely because it is more
durable, there was a great increase in the durability of wooden ships,
due to the improved knowledge of wood-preservation. At the end of the
18th century 15 or 20 years was the average life of a wooden ship; but
there are several instances of ships built in the first decade of the
19th century—or even earlier—which were still in commission at the
beginning of the 20th century.

[Sidenote: Early Steamships]

Full details are given in regard to the first ships used for canal and
river navigation in Great Britain and the United States; the
comparatively rapid adoption of steam vessels on the Irish and English
channels; and the first steamships to make long trips—the American-built
“Savannah” which crossed the Atlantic in 1819 in 25 days using steam
only a part of the time, the “Enterprise” which went from London to
Calcutta in 1825 in 103 days (64 under steam), the “Sirius,” the “Great
Western,” etc. All these were propelled by paddle-wheels. Jet propulsion
had been suggested by Benjamin Franklin in 1775 and was tried several
times with some success. But the greater success of the screw-propeller,
perfected by Colonel John Stevens and Captain John Ericsson, soon caused
jet-propulsion to be abandoned. The screw-propeller made possible—and
was quickly followed by—great improvements in engines; the gearing used
with paddles was soon given up for direct-acting engines—compound about
1854, triple-expansion in 1874.

Statistics of shipping for all countries are given in tables and
diagrams equivalent to 18 or 20 pages of this Guide.

A brief summary outline of the remainder of this article SHIP is all
that can be given here.

Merchant Vessels

  Sailing Ships

    Barges, Smacks or Cutters, Schooners, Brigs and Brigantines

Steamships

  Types: Turtle-back, etc. Cargo Ships: Modern Developments, Great Lake
  Freighters, Oil Tank Steamers, Motor Tank Vessels. Passenger Steamers:
  Ferries, River and Sound, Cross-Channel, Ocean Liners (Atlantic:
  Canadian, Emigrant Vessels, Liners on other Routes; Pacific Liners).
  Special Vessels (Dredge, Train Ferries, Ice Breakers, Surveying
  Vessels, Lightships, Coastguard and Fishery Cruisers, Salvage and Fire
  Vessels, Lifeboats, Yachts). Propulsion by Electricity, by Naphtha
  Engines, by Internal Combustion Engines

War Vessels

  Battleships and Armour Protection; Sir E. J. Reed and the British Navy
  Turret Ships; American Monitor; Sir Nathaniel Barnaby in England; the
  work of Sir W. H. White; Development from 1885 to 1902; The
  “Dreadnought” type—in England, United States, Germany, France, Japan,
  Russia, Italy, Austria, Brazil, Argentina, etc., with Table,
  “Development of Some of the Leading Features of Notable Armored
  Battleships from 1860 to 1910.”

  Cruisers, Second-Class Cruisers, Third-Class, Armored Cruisers,
  Dreadnought Cruisers, Cruisers in Different Navies

  Gunboats and Torpedo Craft and Torpedo-boat Destroyers

  Submarines: American experiments in the 18th Century; inventions of
  Holland and Nordenfeldt; the Goubet System in France; Submarines in
  different navies.

[Sidenote: History of Shipping]

The article SHIPPING (Vol. 24, p. 983) is devoted to the history and
practice of maritime transportation. It outlines the early period of
trade, and the contest for trade among Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands
and England, especially in the period after the discovery of America,
when the prizes of commerce became suddenly so much richer. The
Navigation Act of 1651, confining the trade between England and her
colonies and the British coasting trade to English ships, was followed
by a rapid growth of English shipping. The tonnage doubled between 1666
and 1688. In the 18th century and into the 19th, the history of shipping
was primarily a contest for trade between France and England, finally
won by the latter. The 19th century, as has already been seen in the
article SHIP, was marked by the adoption of steam as a motive power. The
struggle for supremacy in the Atlantic trade and in commerce with China
and the Far East between the United States and Great Britain was won by
the latter largely for this reason—the American ship-builders clung to
the sailing clipper too long—and they were too slow in adopting iron
instead of wooden hulls. The American Civil War was an additional
set-back to American commerce. Other great factors during the last 50
years in the development of shipping, treated in the article, may be
catalogued here:

  The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869.

  Improved apparatus for fire prevention.

  Refrigerating machinery, making possible the shipment of meats and
  other foods.

  Germany’s merchant marine.

  Japanese merchant vessels.

  French efforts to get trade.

  The shipping combine of 1902.

  “Liners” and “Tramps.”

  The freight rate question and increased tonnage.

  Special passenger transport: tourists, emigrants, etc.

[Sidenote: Instructions for the Ship-Builder]

The third of the main articles is SHIPBUILDING (Vol. 24, p. 922) by Sir
Philip Watts. The article is equivalent to 200 pages of this Guide, and
the illustrations include more than 120 working drawings. A brief
outline of the article is all that can be given here.

  _Stability_: Equilibrium, Stability of Equilibrium, Transverse
  Stability, Small Inclinations, Metacentric Heights, Inclining
  Experiment, Large Inclinations, Curves of Stability, Effect of
  Freeboard, Effect of Beam, Effect of Position on Centre of Gravity,
  Geometrical Properties, Dynamical Stability, Sailing Ships,
  Longitudinal Stability, Stability when Damaged, Stability in any
  Direction.

  _Rolling of Ships_: Unresisted Rolling—Froude’s Theory, Resisted
  Rolling, Methods of Reducing Rolling (Bilge-Keels, Water Chambers,
  Gyroscope).

  _Resistance_: Components of Force, Wake, Frictional Resistance, Law of
  Comparison, Model Experiments, Experimental Results.

  _Propulsion_: Experimental Results, Cavitation.

  _Strength_: Longitudinal Bending, Transverse Bending.

  _Steering_: Nature of Forces when Turning, Heel when Turning, Types of
  Rudders, Experimental Results.

  _Process of Design_

  Registration Societies
  Board of Trade Supervision
  Load line and Freeboard
  Loading of Grain and Timber

  _Ship-yard Work_

  Structural Parts
  Materials
  Cranes and Gantries

  _Course of Construction_

  Models
  Laying-off
  Sheer Drawing
  Fairing the Body
  Contracted Method of Fairing
  Fairing the End
  Stern Mould
  Displacement Calculation
  Frame Lines
  Cant Frames
  Double Canted Frame
  Swell for Propeller Shaft
  Mould for Boss Frame Casting
  Shaft Struts
  Sight Edges in Body Plan
  Inner Bottom
  Inner Surface of Frames
  Outside Double Bottom
  Deck Lines
  Framing and Plating behind

  Armour

  Laying off Armour of a Warship
  Order of Work
  Keel
  Transverse Frames
  Scrive-Board
  Shoring Ribbands
  Deck Beams
  Longitudinals
  Bilge Keel
  Drawings
  Laying Keel Blocks
  Keels and Frames
  Shell or Outside Plating

  _Structural Arrangements_

  Longitudinal System as used in New London, Conn.; Great Lake steamer;
  British cargo steamer; Atlantic liner; Differences between war and
  merchant ships; Auxiliary Machinery.

[Sidenote: A Dictionary of Ships and Shipping]

The student should read the article NAVY AND NAVIES (Vol. 19, p. 299)
and refer to the Chapter _For Naval Officers_.

The following is a partial list of the articles in the Britannica of
particular value to the marine transportation man.

 Anchor
 Ballast
 Barge
 Belay
 Berth
 Bilge
 Binnacle
 Boat
 Bowline
 Bumboat
 Buoy
 Burgee
 Cable
 Cabotage
 Caique
 Canoe
 Capstan
 Catamaran
 Cleat
 Coble
 Commerce
 Coracle
 C. H. Cramp
 Sir Samuel Cunard
 Dahabeah
 Dhow
 Dinghy
 John Ericsson
 Felucca
 John Fitch
 Robert Fulton
 Gimbal
 Hawser
 Holystone
 T. H. Ismay
 Junk
 Kayak
 Keel
 Lateen
 Life-saving Service
 Lighthouse
 Log
 Mast
 Navigation
 Navigation Laws
 Oars
 Pilot
 Pinnace
 Pirogue
 Polacca
 Poop
 Pram
 Proa
 Punt
 Quarterdeck
 Quay
 Random
 Rigging
 Rowlock
 Rudder
 Sail, and Sailcloth
 Sampan
 Schooner
 Seamanship
 Seamen, Laws of
 Semaphore
 Ship
 Shipbuilding
 Ship Money
 Shipping
 Sloop
 Smack
 Starboard
 Steamship Lines
 Tonnage
 Trinity House
 Turbine
 Wharf
 Sir William H. White
 Yawl




                               CHAPTER XX
                             FOR ENGINEERS


[Sidenote: What “Engineering” Includes]

The history of a word will sometimes supply the key to the gradual
development of an art. “Engineering” was originally used to describe a
mere branch of military science, the construction of fortifications and
the trenching and sapping needed for their capture. Then about a century
and a half ago the use of the phrase “civil engineering” came into use
to indicate the broadening of the engineer’s functions to civil
pursuits, but even then it served for a long time chiefly to describe
surveying, road-making and bridge building. To-day, the specialized
knowledge of engineers of one kind or another directs or facilitates
every branch of industry. Consider for a moment the handling of iron,
which, as the Britannica article IRON AND STEEL shows, has become the
most indispensable of all substances save air and water, because we can
find no substitute for it that possesses its strength, the hardness and
the pliability we can give to it, and its magnetic properties, upon
which all our electrical work depends. The mining engineer is concerned
with the ore, the mechanical engineer with the machinery employed in its
treatment; the transportation of the finished iron or steel depends upon
the skill of the engineers who construct railroads and ships; the
structural engineer shapes our buildings from the girders and erects
them on the sites indicated by the surveying engineer; the sanitary
engineer makes them wholesome, and the electrical engineer provides them
with the many convenient appliances we need. Various primitive races
have believed that the earth is supported upon the back of a tortoise,
an elephant, or a fish; but when we begin to look into the origin of the
surroundings we have made for ourselves, we cannot carry our examination
very far before we find that almost everything we possess begins with a
blueprint.

It seems a paradox, and yet it is true, that the more a man’s profession
tends to specialization, the more help he can get from the
comprehensiveness of the Britannica. He finds it necessary to dig so
deep that the shaft he sinks must perforce be of narrow diameter,
limiting his daily vision to but a small circle of the broad sky above
him. The engineer of each class has his own text books, but at any
moment his work may bring him into temporary relation with allied
subjects which they do not cover, and in connection with which he may
need trustworthy information. There is certainly no other book which
surveys so authoritatively and minutely as does the Britannica the whole
field of applied science. The services rendered by the 73 engineering
experts—German, American, English, French and Italian—who collaborated
in the production of the work are not to be measured only by the
articles they wrote; for the advice and assistance many of them gave the
editors in planning the book as a whole, ensured such treatment as an
engineer would desire of many subjects indirectly connected with his
work.

[Sidenote: Mathematical Articles]

The engineer will naturally turn first to the mathematical articles,
which may be described as text-books of the most concise and useful
nature, written by leading mathematicians of the age. ALGEBRA (Vol. 1,
p. 599) is by Dr. Sheppard, and G. B. Mathews, formerly professor of
mathematics, University College of North Wales; ALGEBRAIC FORMS (Vol. 1,
p. 620) by Major P. A. Macmahon, formerly president of the London
Mathematical Society; GEOMETRY (Vol. 11, p. 675), _Euclidean_,
_Projective_, _Descriptive_, by Dr. Henrici, professor of mathematics,
Central Technical College of the City and Guilds of London Institute;
_Analytical_, by E. B. Elliott, Waynflete professor of pure mathematics,
Oxford; _Line_, by B. A. W. Russell, author of _Foundations of
Geometry_, etc., and Dr. A. N. Whitehead of Trinity College, Cambridge;
_Axioms_, by Dr. Whitehead; TRIGONOMETRY (Vol. 27, p. 271) by Dr. E. W.
Hobson of Cambridge University; SURVEYING (Vol. 26, p. 142), _Geodetic
Triangulation, Levelling, Topographical Surveys, and Geographical
Surveying_, by Sir Thomas Holdich, formerly superintendent of Frontier
Surveys, India; _Nautical_, by Vice-Admiral A. M. Field, R.N., author of
_Hydrographical Surveying_, etc.; GEODESY (Vol. 11, p. 607) by Col. A.
R. Clarke of the British ordinance survey, and Prof. F. R. Helmert of
the University of Berlin; LOGARITHM (Vol. 16, p. 868) by Dr. J. W. L.
Glaisher, editor of the _Quarterly Journal of Pure and Applied
Mathematics_; MECHANICS (Vol. 17, p. 955), _Statics_, _Kinetics_, by Dr.
Horace Lamb, professor of mathematics, University of Manchester; _Theory
of Structures_, _Theory of Machines_, _Applied Dynamics_, by Dr. W. J.
M. Rankine, late professor of civil engineering, Glasgow University, and
W. E. Dalby, professor of civil and mechanical engineering, City and
Guilds of London Institute; DYNAMICS (Vol. 8, p. 756) by Professor Lamb;
DIFFERENCES, CALCULUS OF (Vol. 8, p. 223), by Dr. W. F. Sheppard;
INFINITESIMAL CALCULUS (Vol. 14, p. 535) by Dr. A. E. H. Love, secretary
of the London Mathematical Society; VARIATIONS, CALCULUS OF (Vol. 27, p.
915), by Dr. Love; QUATERNIONS (Vol. 22, p. 718) by Alexander McAulay,
professor of mathematics and physics, University of Tasmania; DIAGRAM
(Vol. 8, p. 146), by Dr. James Clerk Maxwell, the noted physicist;
MENSURATION (Vol. 18, p. 135) by Dr. Sheppard; TABLE, MATHEMATICAL (Vol
26, p. 325), by Dr. J. W. L. Glaisher; UNITS, PHYSICAL (Vol. 27, p.
738), by Dr. J. A Fleming, professor of electrical engineering,
University of London; UNITS, DIMENSIONS OF (Vol. 27, p. 736), by Sir
Joseph Larmor, secretary of the Royal Society, England; and CALCULATING
MACHINES (Vol. 4, p. 972), with 24 illustrations, is by Professor
Henrici.

These admirable treatises as well as the article DRAWING,
_Drawing-Office work_ (Vol. 8, p. 556), by Joseph G. Horner, will be
useful to all engineers, and in the special field of civil engineering
the following partial list of articles will convey some idea of the
scope of the material to which the professional man has immediate
access.

[Sidenote: Articles for Civil Engineers]

BRIDGES (Vol. 4, p. 533), with 72 illustrations, diagrams, etc., is a
thorough discussion of the subject by Dr. William C. Unwin, emeritus
professor of engineering, Central Technical College, City and Guilds of
London Institute, author of _Wrought Iron Bridges and Roofs_, etc. This
article covers the whole theory of bridge design, and describes all the
typical structures from the timber Pons Sublicius of ancient Rome, the
bridge Horatius defended, to the Manhattan Bridge over the East River at
New York. ROADS AND STREETS (Vol. 23, p. 388); RIVER ENGINEERING (Vol.
23, p. 374), with 26 illustrations, by the late L. F. Vernon-Harcourt,
professor of civil engineering, University College, London, and author
of _Rivers and Canals_, etc.; JETTY (Vol. 15, p. 359), with 6
illustrations, and PIER (Vol. 21, p. 588), illustrated, also by Prof.
Vernon-Harcourt; DREDGE AND DREDGING (Vol. 8, p. 562), with 13
illustrations, by William Hunter, consulting engineer for Waterworks to
Crown agents for the Colonies.

HYDRAULICS (Vol. 14, p. 35), with 213 illustrations, is by Prof. W. C.
Unwin—an article in which the whole theory and practice of water-power,
including discussions of water-motors and turbines, are brought fully up
to date by the designer of the first water-motors at Niagara, the
section dealing with hydraulic machines occupying 25 pages;
HYDROMECHANICS (Vol. 14, p. 115) by Sir Alfred George Greenhill,
formerly professor of mathematics in the Ordnance College, Woolwich;
VENTILATION (Vol. 27, p. 1008), illustrated, by James Bartlett; WATER
SUPPLY (Vol. 28, p. 387), with 20 illustrations, diagrams, and maps, by
Dr. G. F. Deacon, formerly engineer-in-chief for the Liverpool Water
Supply; AQUEDUCT, _Modern Construction_ (Vol. 2, p. 244), by E. P. Hill;
SEWERAGE (Vol. 24, p. 735), with 29 illustrations, by James Bartlett;
IRRIGATION (Vol 14, p. 841).

CANAL (Vol. 5, p. 168), by Sir E. Leader Williams, chief engineer of
Manchester Ship Canal during construction, is an interesting article.
There are also separate articles on great engineering undertakings, such
as PANAMA CANAL (Vol. 20, p. 667); MANCHESTER SHIP CANAL (Vol. 17, p.
550) by Sir E. Leader Williams; SUEZ CANAL (Vol. 26, p. 22). It will
surprise many readers to learn that the project of a ship canal across
Central America was considered as early as 1550, when a book
demonstrating its feasibility was published in Portugal. Only a year
later the King of Spain was strongly urged, in a memorial presented by
De Gomara, the Spanish historian, to undertake the work.

[Sidenote: Railways and Transportation]

TUNNEL (Vol. 27, p. 399), with many plans and illustrations, by H. A.
Carson, in charge of designing and constructing the Boston Subway; DOCK
(Vol. 8, p. 353), with illustrations and plans; CAISSON (Vol. 4, p.
957); BREAKWATER (Vol. 4, p. 475), with 16 illustrations; HARBOUR (Vol.
12, p. 935), illustrated; RECLAMATION OF LAND (Vol. 22, p. 954), with 13
illustrations. The last five articles are by Professor Vernon-Harcourt;
LIGHTHOUSE (Vol. 16, p. 627), with 59 illustrations, by W. T. Douglass,
who erected the Eddystone and Bishop Rock Lighthouses, and Nicholas G.
Gedye, chief engineer to the Tyne Improvement Commission; SHIPBUILDING
(Vol. 24, p. 922), with 125 illustrations—a complete treatise on the
subject by Sir Philip Watts, director of naval construction for the
British Navy; TRACTION (Vol. 27, p. 119), illustrated, by Prof. Louis
Duncan, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology; TRAMWAY (Vol. 27,
p. 159), illustrated, by Emile Garcke, managing director of the British
Electric Traction Co., Ltd.; RAILWAYS (Vol. 22, p. 819), a magnificent
composite article, fully illustrated, in which the _Introduction_ and
the sections on _Construction and Rolling Stock_ are by H. M. Ross,
editor of _The Times Engineering Supplement_; _General Statistics and
Financial Organization_, by Ray Morris, formerly of the _Railway Age
Gazette_, New York, and author of _Railroad Administration_; _Economics
and Legislation_, by Arthur T. Hadley, president of Yale University;
_American Railway Legislation_, by Prof. Frank H. Dixon, of Dartmouth
College, author of _State Railroad Control_; _Accident Statistics_, by
B. B. Adams, associate editor, _Railway Age Gazette_; _Intra Urban
Railways_, by W. B. Parsons, formerly chief engineer, Rapid Transit
Commission, New York, and _Light Railways_, by C. E. Webber of the Royal
Engineers, and Emile Garcke. No book on the subject has ever before
contained so great a collection of expert knowledge as this article
presents.

[Sidenote: Structural Engineering]

In regard to construction, engineers will find most valuable for
reference and study the elaborate treatises STRENGTH OF MATERIALS (Vol.
25, p. 1007), with 42 diagrams and illustrations, by Prof. J. A. Ewing,
and ELASTICITY (Vol. 9, p. 141), with 32 diagrams, by Prof. A. E. H.
Love. Notable articles in this connection are IRON AND STEEL (Vol. 14,
p. 801), illustrated, by Dr. H. M. Howe, professor of metallurgy,
Columbia University; and STEEL CONSTRUCTION (Vol. 25, p. 861),
illustrated. It is interesting to note that early in the 19th century a
tall shot-tower was built in New York city by erecting a braced cage of
iron and filling in the panels with masonry. STONE (Vol. 25, p. 958);
MASONRY (Vol. 17, p. 841), with 18 illustrations; BRICKWORK (Vol. 4, p.
521), with 15 illustrations—these four articles by James Bartlett,
lecturer on construction at King’s College, London; CEMENT (Vol. 5, p.
653), illustrated, by Bertram Blount, hon. president, Cement Section of
International Association for Testing Materials, Budapest; CONCRETE
(Vol. 6, p. 835), with 16 illustrations, by F. E. Wentworth-Shields,
dock engineer of the London and South-Western Railway; MORTAR (Vol. 18,
p. 875); FOUNDATIONS (Vol. 10, p. 733), with 13 illustrations; TIMBER
(Vol. 26, p. 978); ROOFS (Vol. 23, p. 697), with 23 illustrations;
SCAFFOLD (Vol. 24, p. 279) illustrated; SHORING (Vol. 24, p. 1004),
illustrated—the last six by James Bartlett.

[Sidenote: For the Mechanical Engineer]

The Engineering Section of the new Britannica provides an equal wealth
of authentic material for members of other branches of the profession.
It is impossible to indicate the exact lines of demarcation between
these branches, and many articles are of use to all engineers alike; but
in the special field of mechanical engineering there are THERMODYNAMICS
(Vol. 26, p. 808) by Dr. H. L. Callendar, professor of physics, Royal
College of Science, London; STEAM ENGINE (Vol. 25, p. 818) by Prof.
Ewing, more than 30 pages long, with 68 illustrations. This article,
with its up-to-date section on turbines, is one of the many in the
engineering department of the Britannica which have been said by
technical critics to merit separate publication as text-books. But such
articles are all the more useful because they form part of one great
library of universal knowledge. Other mechanical articles are AIR ENGINE
(Vol. 1, p. 443), illustrated, also by Professor Ewing; GAS ENGINE (Vol.
11, p. 495), illustrated, by Dugald Clerk, inventor of the Clerk Cycle
Gas Engine; OIL ENGINE (Vol. 20, p. 35), illustrated, also by Dugald
Clerk; BOILER (Vol. 4, p. 141), with 20 illustrations, by James T.
Milton, chief engineer surveyor to Lloyd’s Registry of Shipping, and
Joseph G. Horner, author of _Plating and Boiler Making_; INJECTOR (Vol.
14, p. 570); WATER MOTORS (Vol. 28, p. 382), illustrated, by T. H.
Beare, Regius professor of engineering in the University of Edinburgh;
WINDMILL (Vol. 28, p. 710), illustrated, by Professor Unwin; FUEL (Vol.
11, p. 274), illustrated, _Solid Fuels_ by Hilary Bauermann, of the
Ordnance College, Woolwich; _Liquid Fuel_, by Sir James
Fortescue-Flannery, formerly president of the Institute of Marine
Engineers; _Gaseous Fuel_, by Dr. Georg Lunge, professor of technical
chemistry at the Zurich Polytechnic; GAS, _Gas for Fuel and Power_ (Gas
producers) (Vol. 11, p. 490), illustrated, also by Professor Lunge.

POWER TRANSMISSION (Vol. 22, p. 224), illustrated, _Mechanical_, by
Professor Dalby; _Hydraulic_, by Edward B. Ellington, chief engineer of
the General Hydraulic Power Co., Ltd.; _Pneumatic_, by A. de W. Foote,
superintendent of the North Star Mining Co., California; PULLEY (Vol.
22, p. 641), illustrated, by Dr. Ernest G. Coker, professor of
mechanical Engineering in the City and Guilds of London Technical
College; PUMP (Vol. 22, p. 645), illustrated; BRAKE (Vol. 4, p. 413),
illustrated; TOOL (Vol. 27, p. 14), with 79 illustrations, by Joseph G.
Horner; CRANES (Vol. 7, p. 368), with 21 illustrations, by Walter Pitt;
ELEVATORS (Vol. 9, p. 263), illustrated, by G. F. Zimmer, author of
_Mechanical Handling of Material_; LUBRICANTS (Vol. 17, p. 89) by R. M.
Deeley, joint author of _Lubrication and Lubricants_; PNEUMATIC DESPATCH
(Vol. 21, p. 865) by H. R. Kempe, electrician to the General Post
Office, London; GYROSCOPE AND GYROSTAT (Vol. 12, p. 769), illustrated,
by Sir Alfred Greenhill; MOTOR VEHICLES (Vol. 18, p. 914), with 37
illustrations—_Light_, by the Hon. C. S. Rolls, late managing director
of the Rolls Royce Co., Ltd.; _Heavy Commercial Vehicles_, by Edward S.
Smith, editor of _The Commercial Motor_; RAILWAYS, _Locomotive Power_
(Vol. 22, p. 842) by Professor W. E. Dalby.

[Sidenote: For the Electrical Engineer]

The key article describing the general principles of electrical
engineering is ELECTRICITY SUPPLY (Vol. 9, p. 192), illustrated, by
Emile Garcke, but at the immediate service of the electrical engineer
there also stand DYNAMO (Vol. 8, p. 764), with 42 illustrations, by C.
C. Hawkins, author of _The Dynamo_; POWER TRANSMISSION, _Electrical_
(Vol. 22, p. 233) by Dr. Louis Bell, chief engineer, Electric Power
Transmission Dept., General Electric Co.; CONDUCTION, ELECTRIC (Vol. 6,
p. 855), _Conduction in Solids_ by Professor Fleming; _in Liquids_, by
W. C. D. Whetham; in Gases, by Sir J. J. Thomson, a Nobel prize-winner
and professor of experimental physics at Cambridge; ELECTROLYSIS (Vol.
9, p. 217) by W. C. D. Whetham; ELECTROKINETICS (Vol. 9, p. 210),
illustrated; ELECTROSTATICS (Vol. 9, p. 240); ELECTROMAGNETISM (Vol. 9,
p. 226), illustrated; UNITS, PHYSICAL, _Electrical Units_ (Vols. 27, p.
740); GALVANOMETER (Vol. 11, p. 428), illustrated; ELECTROMETER (Vol. 9,
p. 234), illustrated; AMPEREMETER (Vol. 1, p. 879), illustrated;
VOLTMETER (Vol. 28, p. 206), illustrated; OHMMETER (Vol. 20, p. 34),
illustrated; WATTMETER (Vol. 28, p. 419)—all of these by Professor
Fleming; POTENTIOMETER (Vol. 22, p. 205); ACCUMULATOR (Vol. 1, p. 126),
with 24 illustrations and diagrams, by Walter Hibbert, of the London
Polytechnic; TRANSFORMERS (Vol. 27, p. 173), with 15 illustrations and
diagrams, and WHEATSTONE’S BRIDGE (Vol. 28, p. 584), illustrated, by
Professor Fleming; MOTORS, ELECTRIC (Vol. 18, p. 910), by Dr. Louis
Bell; METER, ELECTRIC, (Vol. 18, p. 291), by Professor Fleming;
LIGHTING, _Electric_ (Vol. 16, p. 659), with 16 illustrations, by
Professor Fleming, and a chapter on its commercial aspects, methods of
charging, wiring of houses, testing meters, etc., by Emile Garcke;
TELEGRAPH (Vol. 26, p. 510), fully illustrated, _Land and Submarine
Telegraphy_, by H. R. Kempe; _Wireless Telegraphy_, by Professor
Fleming, and _Commercial Aspects_, by Emile Garcke; TELEPHONE (Vol. 26,
p. 547), illustrated, by H. R. Kempe and Emile Garcke; TRACTION,
_Electric_ (Vol. 27, p. 120), illustrated, by Professor Duncan. An
admirable historical sketch of electricity will be found in ELECTRICITY
(Vol. 9, p. 179), by Professor Fleming, which contains also an account
of the development of electric theory.

[Sidenote: American Practice in Mining]

It is typical of the policy pursued in making the new Britannica that
the Editor placed the mining section in the hands of American experts,
since they are universally regarded as the best in the world. This
entire section is a worthy monument to American learning and practice.

The key-article MINING (Vol. 18, p. 528), fully illustrated, is by Dr.
Henry Smith Munroe, professor of mining in Columbia University. This
covers every branch of the subject, but further discussion of its
special phases is continued in MINERAL DEPOSITS (Vol. 18, p. 504) by Dr.
James F. Kemp, professor of geology, Columbia University; QUARRYING
(Vol. 22, p. 712) by Dr. F. J. H. Merrill, formerly state geologist of
New York; ORE-DRESSING (Vol. 20, p. 238), illustrated, by Dr. R. H.
Richards, professor of mining and metallurgy, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; SHAFT-SINKING (Vol. 24, p. 766), illustrated; BORING (Vol.
4, p. 251), illustrated; BLASTING (Vol. 4, p. 44), illustrated—the last
three by Robert Peele, professor of mining in Columbia University.

[Sidenote: The Metallurgical Section]

METALLURGY (Vol. 18, p. 203) describes in outline the general sequence
of operations. ASSAYING (Vol. 18, p. 776) is by Andrew A. Blair,
formerly chief chemist U. S. Geological Survey. See also METAL (Vol. 18,
p. 198). METALOGRAPHY (Vol. 18, p. 202), illustrated, is an account of
the new and important method of microscopical examination of alloys and
metals by Sir William Chandler Roberts-Austen; and Francis H. Neville.
ALLOYS (Vol. 1, p. 704), with unique photomicrographs of alloys and
metals, is also by the authors of the article METALLOGRAPHY. ANNEALING,
HARDENING AND TEMPERING (Vol. 2, p. 70), illustrated, is by Joseph G.
Horner, who also writes FORGING (Vol. 10, p. 663), which has 19
illustrations, FOUNDING (Vol. 10, p. 743), with 11 illustrations, and
ROLLING-MILL (Vol. 23, p. 468), with 8 illustrations. The material on
FUEL has already been mentioned. FURNACE (Vol. 11, p. 358) describes and
illustrates all the latest designs. WELDING (Vol. 28, p. 501) is by J.
G. Horner and Elihu Thomson, who writes on his own invention, _Electric
Welding_.

The mining engineer or metallurgist will have in the new Britannica
constantly at his elbow a complete series of articles dealing with the
mining and metallurgy of all minerals and metals. Professor Howe’s
exhaustive article IRON AND STEEL has already been noted in another part
of this chapter. A few of the other important articles are COPPER (Vol.
7, p. 103); GOLD (Vol. 12, p. 192); SILVER (Vol. 25, p. 112); LEAD (Vol.
16, p. 314); TIN (Vol. 26, p. 995); ZINC (Vol. 28, p. 981); MANGANESE
(Vol. 17, p. 569); ALUMINUM (Vol. 1, p. 767) by E. J. Ristori, member of
Council, Institute of Metals. SAFETY-LAMP (Vol. 23, p. 998) is written
by Hilary Bauermann. The latest mining statistics of all countries are
to be found under their respective headings.

[Sidenote: Biographies of Engineers]

Military men are familiar with the lives and deeds of great soldiers;
lovers of art and literature know something of the careers of their
favorites; but as a rule the engineer knows little or nothing about the
lives of the great ornaments of his profession, the splendid heroes of
peace who have done much more than the soldier and the artist to create
the world of to-day. The reason for this is that engineering biographies
are very scarce, and in this connection the new Britannica _fills a
positive gap_ in the engineer’s library. There are considerably more
than 100 biographies of great engineers, living and dead, written in the
most interesting fashion by authoritative contributors. Among these
articles are WATT, JAMES (Vol. 28, p. 414) by Professor Ewing;
ARKWRIGHT, SIR RICHARD (Vol. 2, p. 556); STEPHENSON, GEORGE (Vol. 25, p.
888); BESSEMER, SIR HENRY (Vol. 3, p. 823); WHITWORTH, SIR JOSEPH (Vol.
28, p. 616); RENNIE, JOHN (Vol. 23, p. 101); LESSEPS, FERDINAND DE (Vol.
16, p. 494) by Henri G. S. A. de Blowitz; EADS, JAMES B. (Vol. 8, p.
789); EDISON, THOMAS A. (Vol. 8, p. 946); ERICSSON, JOHN (Vol. 9, p.
740); MAXIM, SIR HIRAM (Vol. 17, p. 918); ROEBLING, JOHN A. (Vol. 23, p.
450); SIEMENS, SIR WILLIAM (Vol. 25, p. 47) by Professor Ewing; TELFORD,
THOMAS (Vol. 26, p. 573); MCADAM, JOHN L. (Vol. 17, p. 190), and
TREVITHICK, RICHARD (Vol. 27, p. 256).


    ALPHABETICAL LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPÆDIA
              BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO ENGINEERS

 Aberration
 Abrasion
 Abscissa
 Absorption of Light
 Acceleration
 Accumulator
 Achromatism
 Acoustics
 Actinometer
 Adhesion
 Adjutage
 Adze
 Aeronautics
 Aether, or Ether
 Aggregation
 Agonic Lines
 Air Engine
 Algebra
 Algebraic Forms
 Aliquot
 Alloys
 Aluminium
 Amicable Numbers
 Amperemeter, or Ammeter
 Anchor
 Angle
 Annealing, Hardening and Tempering
 Anthracite
 Anvil
 Aperture
 Aqueduct
 Archimedes, Screw of
 Architecture
 Arkwright, Sir Richard
 Armature
 Armour Plates
 Armstrong, 1st Baron
 Artesian Wells
 Assaying
 Atmospheric Electricity
 Atmospheric Railway
 Auger
 Autoclave
 Awl
 Axe
 Axis
 Axle

 Baird, James
 Baker, Sir Benjamin
 Ballast
 Ballistics
 Balloon
 Banket
 Barker’s Mill
 Barometer
 Barometric Light
 Battery
 Bazalgette, Sir Joseph William
 Bearings
 Bell, Henry
 Bellows and Blowing Machines
 Bench-mark
 Berlin
 Berthon, Edward Lyon
 Berthoud, Ferdinand
 Bessel Function
 Bessemer, Sir Henry
 Bicycle
 Bidder, George Parker
 Biddery
 Binocular Instrument
 Binomial
 Biquadratic
 Bisectrix
 Blasting
 Bloom
 Bogie
 Boiler
 Boring
 Boulton, Matthew
 Brachistochrone
 Bradawl
 Brake
 Bramah, Joseph
 Brass
 Brassey, Thomas
 Brazing and Soldering
 Breakwater
 Brick
 Brickwork
 Bridges
 Bridgewater, 3rd Duke of
 Bright, Sir Charles
 Brindley, James
 Bronze
 Bronzing
 Brown, Sir John
 Brunel, I. K.
 Brunel, Sir Marc
 Buoy
 Building
 Burns, Sir George
 Bush

 Cab
 Cable
 Caisson
 Caisson Disease
 Calculating Machines
 Caledonian Canal
 Calorescence
 Calorimetry
 Camera Lucida
 Camera Obscura
 Camus, F. J. des
 Canal
 Cantilever
 Capillary Action
 Car
 Cardioid
 Carnegie, Andrew
 Carpentry,
 Cart
 Cartwright, Edmund
 Cash Register
 Catenary
 Causeway
 Caustic
 Cautley, Sir Proby Thomas
 Cement
 Chain
 Chappe, Claude
 Chart
 Chisel
 Chronograph
 Chubb, Charles
 Cinematograph
 Circle
 Cissoid
 Clark, Josiah Latimer
 Clock
 Coal
 Cockerill, W. (and J.)
 Cofferdam
 Cold
 Colour
 Combinational Analysis
 Compass
 Conchoid
 Concrete
 Condensation of Gases
 Conduction, Electric
 Conduction of Heat
 Cone
 Congreve, Sir William
 Conic Section
 Conoid
 Continued Fractions
 Contour, Contour-line
 Conveyors
 Coode, Sir John
 Copper
 Copying Machines
 Cordite
 Corning, Erastus
 Coxwell, Henry Tracey
 Cramp, Charles Henry
 Cranes
 Crank
 Crompton, Samuel
 Cube
 Cubitt, Thomas
 Cubitt, Sir William
 Cunard, Sir Samuel
 Curricle
 Curve
 Cycloid
 Cyclometer
 Cylinder

 Damascening or Damaskeening
 Damask Steel or Damascus Steel
 Density
 Destructors
 Determinant
 Diagonal
 Diagram
 Diamagnetism
 Diameter
 Dielectric
 Differences, Calculus of
 Differential Equation
 Diffraction of Light
 Diffusion
 Dimension
 Dispersion
 Divers and Diving Apparatus
 Dock
 Dodecahedron
 Drawing
 Dredge and Dredging
 Drill
 Drummond, Thomas
 Dry Rot
 Dupuy de Lôme, S.C.H.L.
 Dynamics
 Dynamite
 Dynamo
 Dynamometer

 Eads, James Buchanan
 Earth Currents
 Earth, Figure of the
 Edison, Thomas Alva
 Elasticity
 Electrical, or Electrostatic Machine
 Electricity
 Electricity Supply
 Electric Waves
 Electrochemistry
 Electrokinetics
 Electrolysis
 Electromagnetism
 Electrometallurgy
 Electrometer
 Electron
 Electroplating
 Electroscope
 Electrostatics
 Electrotyping
 Electrum
 Elevators, Lifts or Hoists
 Ellipse
 Ellipsoid
 Embankment
 Employers’ Liability
 Energetics
 Energy
 Engine
 Engineering
 Epicycloid
 Equation
 Ericsson, John
 Evans, Oliver
 Explosives

 Fairbairn, Sir William
 Felloe
 Ferguson, James
 Figurate Numbers
 File
 Filter
 Finlay, Sir George
 Fire and Fire Extinction
 Firebrick
 Firth, Mark
 Fitch, John
 Flight and Flying
 Flume
 Flux
 Focus
 Folium
 Forging
 Fortification and Siegecraft
 Fossick
 Foundations
 Founding
 Fourier’s Series
 Fowler, John
 Fowler, Sir John
 Friction
 Frustum
 Fuel
 Fulton, Robert
 Function
 Furnace
 Fusible Metal
 Fusion
 Fuze, or Fuse

 Galvanized Iron
 Galvanometer
 Gas Engine
 Gatling, Richard Jordan
 Gauge, or Gage
 Geodesy
 Geoid
 Geometrical Continuity
 Geometry
 Gimlet
 Girard, Philippe Henri de
 Glazing
 Gnomon
 Gold
 Gooch, Sir Daniel
 Goodyear, Charles
 Gouge
 Graduation
 Gramophone
 Graphical Methods
 Gravitation
 Greathead, James Henry
 Grimthorpe, 1st Baron
 Groups, Theory of
 Guncotton
 Gyroscope and Gyrostat
 Gunpowder

 Hachure
 Hammer
 Harbour
 Harmonic
 Harmonic Analysis
 Harrison, John
 Hartley, Sir Charles Augustus
 Hawkshaw, Sir John
 Hawksley, Thomas
 Hawser
 Heat
 Heathcoat, John
 Heating
 Heliostat
 Hodgkinson, Eaton
 Hodograph
 Holden, Sir Isaac
 Horse-Power
 Hose-pipe
 Hydraulics
 Hydrodynamics
 Hydrography
 Hydromechanics
 Hydrometer
 Hydrostatics
 Hyperbola
 Hypsometer
 Hysteresis

 Icosahedron
 Illumination
 Inclinometer
 Induction Coil
 Infinitesimal Calculus
 Ingot
 Injector
 Interference of Light
 Interpolation
 Invar
 Inversion
 Involution
 Iron and Steel
 Irrigation
 Ismay, Thomas Henry

 Jacquard, Joseph Marie
 Jenkin, H. C. F.
 Jetty
 Joinery
 Joints
 Joist

 Kaleidoscope
 Kiln
 Kinematics
 Kinetics
 Kingsford, W.
 Knife
 Knot
 Krupp, Alfred

 Labour Legislation
 Ladder
 Lamp
 Lantern
 Lath
 Lathe
 Latitude
 Latten
 Lead
 Lemniscate
 Lens
 Lesseps, Ferdinand de
 Lever
 Leyden Jar, or Condenser
 Life-boat
 Light
 Lighthouse
 Lighting
 Lightning Conductor
 Limaçon
 Lindley, William
 Line
 Liquid Gases
 Lock
 Locus
 Logarithm
 Logocyclic Curve, Strophoid, or Foliate
 Longitude
 Loxodrome
 Lubricants
 Lubrication

 Magic Square
 Magnetism
 Magnetism, Terrestrial
 Magnetograph
 Magnetometer
 Magneto-Optics
 Manchester Ship Canal
 Manganese
 Manometer
 Map
 Masham, Baron
 Masonry
 Mathematics
 Matter
 Maxima and Minima
 Maxim, Sir Hiram
 McAdam, John Loudon
 McCormick, Cyrus Hall
 Mechanics
 Mensuration
 Meridian
 Metal
 Metallography
 Metallurgy
 Meter, Electric
 Metric System
 Microscope
 Mill
 Mineral Deposits
 Mining
 Mirror
 Model
 Molecule
 Mortar
 Mortise, or Mortice
 Motion, Laws of
 Motors, Electric
 Motor Vehicles
 Murdock, William
 Myddelton, Sir Hugh

 Nasmyth, James
 Navigation
 Newcomen, Thomas
 Nitro-glycerine
 Nixon, John
 Noble, Sir Andrew
 Number
 Numbers, Partition of
 Numeral

 Objective, or Object Glass
 Octahedron
 Ohmmeter
 Oil Engine
 Optics
 Ordinate
 Ore Dressing
 Oscillograph
 Oval

 Painter-work
 Palanquin
 Palmer, Sir Charles Mark
 Panama Canal
 Pantograph
 Parabola
 Parachute
 Parallel Motion
 Pedometer
 Perkins, Jacob
 Permeability, Magnetic
 Permeameter
 Perpetual Motion, or Perpetuum Mobile
 Perspective
 Phonograph
 Photography
 Photometry
 Physics
 Pier
 Piston
 Plaster-work
 Pneumatic Despatch
 Pneumatics
 Polarity
 Polarization of Light
 Pole, William
 Polygon
 Polygonal Numbers
 Polyhedral Numbers
 Polyhedron
 Porism
 Potentiometer
 Power Transmission
 Prism
 Probability
 Projection
 Prony, G. C. F. M. R. de
 Pulley
 Pump
 Pyrometer

 Quadratrix
 Quarrying
 Quaternions

 Radiation, Theory of
 Radiometer
 Rafter
 Railways
 Random
 Rankine, W. J. M.
 Rawlinson, Sir Robert
 Reclamation of Land
 Reflection of Light
 Refraction
 Refrigerating and Ice Making
 Reid, Sir Robert G.
 Rennie, John
 River Engineering
 Rivet
 Roads and Streets
 Roebling, J. A.
 Rolling-mill
 Roofs
 Roulette

 Safes, Strong-rooms and Vaults
 Safety-lamp
 Saw
 Scaffold, Scaffolding
 Scantling
 Schichau, Ferdinand
 Science
 Scissors
 Screw
 Semaphore
 Seppings, Sir Robert
 Series
 Serpentine
 Sewerage
 Sewing Machines
 Sextant
 Shadoof
 Shadow
 Shaft-sinking
 Shears
 Ship
 Shipbuilding
 Shoring
 Shovel
 Shuttle
 Siemens, Sir William (Karl Wilhelm)
 Sieve
 Signal
 Silver
 Siphon, or Syphon
 Sleeper
 Sleigh, Sled, or Sledge
 Smeaton, John
 Smoke
 Solder
 Sound
 Sounding
 Spade
 Spectroscopy
 Speculum
 Sphere
 Spherical Harmonics
 Spheroid
 Sphereometer
 Spiral
 Starley, James
 Statics
 Steel Construction
 Steam Engine
 Stephenson, George
 Stephenson, Robert
 Stereoscope
 Stevenson, Robert
 Stone
 Strength of Materials
 Strutt, Jedediah
 Stucco
 Suez Canal
 Sun Copying, or Photo Copying
 Surface
 Surveying

 Table, Mathematical
 Tacheometry
 Tangye, Sir Richard
 Technical Education
 Telegraph
 Telephone
 Telford, Thomas
 Tetrahedron
 Theodolite
 Thermodynamics
 Thermoelectricity
 Thermometry
 Thomas, Sidney Gilchrist
 Tide
 Timber
 Time, Measurement of
 Time, Standard
 Tin
 Tin-plate and Terne-plate
 Tire
 Tongs
 Tool
 Topography
 Traction
 Tramway
 Transformers
 Tredgold, Thomas
 Trevithick, Richard
 Triangle
 Tricycle
 Trigonometry
 Trisectrix
 Trumpet, Speaking and Hearing
 Tube
 Tunnel
 Turbine
 Tweezers
 Typewriter

 Units, Dimensions of
 Units, Physical

 Vacuum Tube
 Valve
 Vaporization
 Variations, of Calculus
 Vector Analysis
 Ventilation
 Vernier
 Vision
 Voltmeter

 Wagon or Waggon
 Water Motors
 Water Supply
 Watt, James
 Wattmeter
 Wave
 Wedge
 Weighing Machines
 Weights and Measures
 Weir
 Welding
 Well
 Wheatstone’s Bridge
 White, Sir William H.
 Whitney, Eli
 Whitworth, Sir Joseph
 Wilkinson, John
 Windmill
 Witch of Agnesi

 Zero
 Zinc




                              CHAPTER XXI
     FOR PRINTERS, BINDERS AND PAPER-MAKERS AND ALL WHO LOVE BOOKS


[Sidenote: From Manuscript to Book]

[Sidenote: Supply and Demand Interacting]

“An author, even an immortal genius, is, from the economic point of
view, a producer of raw material,” says the Britannica article
PUBLISHING, and from the educational point of view, his product, until
it has undergone the industrial and commercial processes of
reduplication and distribution, is as undeveloped as the seed lying
hidden in the winter soil. The history of civilization might, indeed, be
divided into four stages: the period before writing; the period before
printing, when libraries of manuscripts were almost exclusively the
property of kings and priests; the period of costly, hand-printed books;
and the period of the power-press, which began less than a hundred years
ago. Of these four periods, the first is almost unimaginable. You are
sometimes brought into contact with absolutely illiterate people. But
they live in shadow, not in total darkness; they get the diffused light
of our age of culture. The second period, the era of books in manuscript
we can, however, to some extent reconstruct; and by one fantastic
supposition we can even bring it into the focus of our 20th century. Let
it be assumed that for some reason the printing of the new Britannica
had been enjoined by the law courts, but that the original typoscript
was available for consultation—say in a public library at New York or
Chicago. Instead of your 29 volumes, weighing only 80 lbs. and occupying
only about two cubic feet of space, the walls of a large room would be
lined with partitioned shelves on which the 300,000 typed sheets and the
7,000 illustrations, on cardboard, would be ranged. What a mob of
students there would be, waiting their turns to read the 40,000
articles, what a mass of notebooks would be filled each day! The
impossibility of accomplishing, without the use of printing, all that
the Britannica does, will present itself very forcibly to your mind, in
another aspect, if you try to imagine 1,500 separate audiences,
assembled each day to listen to lectures by the 1,500 contributors to
the book. Any attempt to imagine the Britannica doing its work in any
way but the way in which it does makes you realize, too, that if it were
not for modern methods of _spreading_ knowledge, there would be no such
system of _assembling_ and co-ordinating knowledge as finds its fullest
development in the Britannica. It is not only for commercial reasons
that the demand must be sufficient to justify the supply; the 1,500
specialists who laid aside their usual work in order to write these
articles would never have combined their efforts if this vast public of
all educated English speaking people were not to have been enabled to
avail themselves of the result.

The industrial arts which make it possible to produce books swiftly and
to sell them at low prices are obviously subjects of interest not only
to those who do the producing and selling, but to all who profit by the
use of books. And, as the articles mentioned in this chapter show, these
arts are in themselves among the most ingenious and curious of all
processes; so that in a double sense they merit the attention of
everyone to whom the chapters on _Literature_ in this Guide would
appeal. As the warp of cloth carries the weft, so the raw material of
printers’ paper and printers’ ink carries the “raw material” of the
writer’s thoughts.

The article on PAPER (Vol. 20, p. 725) is equivalent to 35 pages of this
Guide and is illustrated with 15 diagrams. The article is divided into
three parts: _History_, by Sir Edward Maunde Thompson, director of the
British Museum; _Manufacture_, by J. W. Wyatt, author of _The Art of
Making Paper_; and _India Paper_, by W. E. Garrett Fisher.

[Sidenote: History of Paper]

The history of paper, like that of so many other great inventions, dates
back to an early period in China; and, as is the case with almost every
great contribution to civilization which came from China, paper came to
the Western world only after many years and only by chance. In the 8th
century of the Christian era, when paper had been made in China for 1000
years, some Chinese paper-makers were taken captives in Samarkand by
Arabs, who thus learned the methods of its manufacture. The Arabs and
the Persians used linen as a base for the paper instead of the cotton
the Chinese used; and the name “paper” was transferred from the Egyptian
rush and the writing material made from its fibres to the new product.
Paper was manufactured in Europe first by the Moors in Spain at Xativa,
Valencia and Toledo in the 12th century; and into Italy also it seems to
have been brought by the Arab occupation of Sicily. Among other
interesting points in regard to the history of paper are: water-marks as
a sign of age; old papers; variation in prices of paper; blotting-paper,
wrapping paper, etc. The articles PAPYRUS (Vol. 20, p. 743) and
PARCHMENT (Vol. 20, p. 798), both by Maunde Thompson, deal with these
earlier writing materials. PALIMPSEST (Vol. 20, p. 633) describes the
processes by which writings which have been scraped or washed from
sheets of vellum, so that the material might be used again, can
sometimes be chemically restored and deciphered.

[Sidenote: Paper Manufacture]

In taking up the study of paper manufacture, the first article to be
read is FIBRES by C. F. Cross, the well-known analytical and consulting
chemist, and especially the section in it on _Paper-making_ (Vol. 10, p.
312). This describes the treatment of cotton and flax for writing and
drawing papers, wood pulp, esparto, cellulose and cereal straws for
printing-paper, etc. See also the article CELLULOSE (Vol. 5, p. 606) by
C. F. Cross. The section on _Manufacture_ in the article PAPER, already
mentioned, should next be read. Here it is stated that rags, linen or
cotton, were the principal materials used for paper in Europe until the
middle of the 19th century; and then when prices rose, because the
necessarily inelastic supply was no longer sufficient, esparto-grass,
wood and straw began to be used as substitutes. The change from
hand-making to machinery began in France in 1798 and was accomplished in
England in 1803, with the result that hand-made paper is now used only
where great durability is the chief requisite, as for bank-notes and
drawing paper.

Actual paper manufacture may be divided into two processes: the
preliminary cleaning and reduction to pulp; and the methods of
converting pulp to paper—including beating, sizing, colouring, making
the sheet or web, surfacing, cutting, etc. Reduction to pulp is
described in the treatment of esparto, straw and wood, and there are
cuts showing rag-boiler, rag-breaking engine, esparto boiler, press-pâte
or half-stuff machine, esparto bleaching and beating plant, and the
Porion evaporator and the Yaryan multiple-effect evaporator for soda
recovery.

Paper-making proper, after the pulp has been prepared, is next
described. The first process is beating; and besides the esparto
bleaching and beating plant, described under bleaching, there are
drawings of the Taylor and Jordan beaters and a description of them and
of the Kingsland beater. Sizing, loading and colouring are then
explained. The other main topics of the section on manufacture are: hand
manufacture (with two illustrations), paper machine, with pictures of
the paper machine, of the dandy roll, of super-calender and of reel
paper cutters, and paragraphs on straining, forming the sheet, shake,
water marking and couching, pressing and drying, surfacing, machine
power, tub-sizing, glazing or surfacing for better grades, cutting,
sheeting, sizes (with table), standards of quality, the paper trade, and
a list of the best books on paper.

[Sidenote: India Paper]

The article PAPER closes with a brief history and description of India
paper, which is of particular interest because of the adoption and
successful use of this paper in the new Encyclopaedia Britannica. In
this true India paper, “the material used is chiefly rag,” but “the
extraordinary properties of this paper are due to the peculiar care
necessary in the treatment of the fibres, which are specially beaten in
the beating engine.” The first India paper was brought to England from
the Far East in 1841 by an Oxford graduate, and the name India was used
merely to express this Oriental origin, as in “Indian ink” or in the
name “Indians” as applied to the American aborigines when their home was
thought to be a part of the East. Just where the paper came from is not
known. It was given to the Oxford University Press and was used in
printing a very small English Bible in 1842. This book was only
one-third the usual thickness, and attracted much attention by its
lightness and by the opacity of the thin tough paper.

  In 1874 a copy of this Bible fell into the hands of Henry Frowde, and
  experiments were instituted at the Oxford University paper mills at
  Wolvercote with the object of producing similar paper. On the 24th of
  August 1875 an impression of the Bible, similar in all respects to
  that of 1842, was placed on sale by the Oxford University Press. The
  feat of compression was regarded as astounding, the demand was
  enormous, and in a very short time 250,000 copies of this “Oxford
  India paper Bible” had been sold. Many other editions of the Bible,
  besides other books, were printed on the Oxford India paper, and the
  marvels of compression accomplished by its use created great interest
  at the Paris Exhibition of 1900. Its strength was as remarkable as its
  lightness; volumes of 1500 pages were suspended for several months by
  a single leaf, as thin as tissue; and, when they were examined at the
  close of the exhibition, it was found that the leaf had not started,
  the paper had not stretched, and the volume closed as well as ever.
  The paper, when subjected to severe rubbing, instead of breaking into
  holes like ordinary printing paper, assumed a texture resembling
  chamois leather, and a strip 3 in. wide was found able to support a
  weight of 28 lb. without yielding. The success of the Oxford India
  paper led to similar experiments by other manufacturers, and there
  were, in 1910, nine mills (two each in England, Germany and Italy, one
  each in France, Holland and Belgium) in which India paper was being
  produced. India paper is mostly made upon a Fourdrinier machine in
  continuous lengths, in contradistinction to a hand-made paper, which
  cannot be made of a greater size than the frame employed in its
  production.

In addition to technical information in regard to paper the student of
the manufacture of books must know something about ink.

[Sidenote: Ink]

The necessary information he will find in the article INK (Vol. 14, p.
571) with special descriptions of writing inks, tannin inks, China or
Indian ink, logwood ink, aniline ink, copying ink, red and blue ink,
marking ink, gold and silver inks, indelible or incorrodible ink,
sympathetic ink, and, of the most importance for our present purpose,
printing inks.

The process of putting ink on paper is a subject which in the Britannica
takes much more ink and paper than the subject of ink or of paper.

[Sidenote: Printing]

This topic is treated in two main articles: one dealing with type and
the other with presses. The former, TYPOGRAPHY (Vol. 27, p. 509), is a
good sized treatise in itself, being equivalent to more than 135 pages
of this Guide. It is divided into two parts: _The History of
Typography_, by John Henry Hessels, author of _Gutenberg: an Historical
Investigation_; and _Modern Practical Typography_, by John Southward,
author of _A Dictionary of Typography and its Accessory Arts_, and Hugh
Munro Ross, editor of _The_ (London) _Times Engineering Supplement_.

The former part of the article, and the longer, is a very important and
elaborate contribution to the knowledge of early printing. On these
first developments the student should read the same writer’s article
GUTENBERG (Vol. 12, p. 739) and should notice the great difficulty
surrounding the whole question of the “invention,” obscured by the fact
that so many of the documents on Gutenberg exist only in copies, while
others seem to be forgeries by two librarians of the city of Mainz who
were eager to prove the claims of their fellow citizen Gutenberg to be
the inventor of printing with movable metal types. See also Mr. Hessel’s
article on JOHANN FUST (Vol. 11, p. 373). The honour of the invention of
typography, Mr. Hessels decides, belongs to Lorens Janszoon Coster of
Haarlem and its date was somewhere between 1440 and 1446. In Mexico
printing was established in 1544, in Manila in 1590, and in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, in 1638 or 1639. The early printers had only a few types
of each character in a fount, and they printed books, even small
quartos, page by page.

This whole treatment of the history of typography is too elaborate to be
summarized here, but it is interesting to note that the article gives
information about the history of the earliest types—Gothic, Bastard
Italian, Roman, Burgundian, etc., with fac-similes of 13 different and
characteristic faces between 1445 and 1479; and of different styles and
alphabets—Italic, Greek, Hebrew, Arabic, Syriac, Armenian, Ethiopic,
Coptic, Samaritan, Slavonic, Russian, Etruscan, Runic, Gothic,
Scandinavian, Anglo-Saxon, Irish, Music, Characters for the Blind,
Initials, Ornaments and Flowers.

[Sidenote: Practical Typography]

The second part of the article TYPOGRAPHY, on _Modern Practical
Typography_, will be of more value, probably, to most students of
printing and book-making. It deals with the following topics:—

  Material characteristics of Type. Fount may consist of 275 “sorts” or
  characters. Numbers of sorts vary with different languages—and with
  different styles and writers; Dickens draws heavily on vowels,
  Macaulay on consonants. Bill of type or scheme—how computed.

  Logotypes or word character as distinct from letters.

  Parts of a type—face, stem, serif, beard, shoulder, shank, belly,
  back, counter, nick, kern, feet, burr and batter.

  Species of letter—short, ascending, descending, long, superior,
  inferior, fat-faced, lean-faced, bastard.

  Sizes: classification by names and by point-system.

  Varieties of face: Roman, sanserifs or grotesques; black; script; old
  style; Caslon; influence of William Morris and the Kelmscott Press;
  Vale Press.

  Manufacture of type: type metal; punch, drive and matrix (with
  illustrations); type-casting—by hand and machine; inventions of Bruce,
  Barth, Wicks, with description and picture of the Wicks rotary
  type-casting machine.

  Type-setting by hand. Type case, with illustration. Composition,
  justifying. Imposition. Signatures. Forme, quoin, side-stick,
  foot-stick, shooting-stick. Distributing.

  Type-setting by machine. Linotype and Monotype. Earlier machines—the
  Paige (in which Mark Twain lost a fortune). Distributing
  machines—Delcambre, Fraser, Empire, Dow, Thorne, Simplex (with cut).
  Linotype—with diagrams and description. Monotype (the machine used for
  the Encyclopaedia Britannica) with illustrations of perforated strip.

  Electrotyping and Stereotyping. Shells. Turtle, Flong. Wood’s
  Autoplate process. See also the articles ELECTROTYPING (Vol. 9, p.
  252) and ELECTROPLATING (Vol. 9, p. 237).

The reader should next turn to the articles ENGRAVING (Vol. 9, p. 645),
LINE-ENGRAVING (Vol. 16, p. 721), WOOD-ENGRAVING (Vol. 28, p.
798)—special reference to America where this method is still used for
some book and magazine illustration—to LITHOGRAPHY (Vol. 16, p. 785)
including offset printing; and PROCESS (Vol. 22, p. 408), for further
information in regard to “printing” apart from (and before) actual press
work. The last-named of these articles is by Edwin Bale, art director of
Cassell & Company, Ltd.; it would occupy about 20 pages of this Guide;
and it is illustrated by a plate showing the three-colour process. The
article describes:

  (1)—relief processes, line blocks, swelled gelatin process,
  typographic etching, halftone processes, three colour blocks, colour
  filters;

  (2)—intaglio processes, monotype, electrotype, steel-facing,
  blanketing, changes in machinery;

  (3)—planographic processes, including woodburytype, stannotype,
  collotype or phototype, heliotype and photolithography. In relation to
  lithography there is further information in the biographical sketch of
  Senefelder, its inventor.

[Sidenote: Press-Work]

The article PRINTING (Vol. 22, p. 350) deals entirely with the subject
of press-work, thus using printing in the narrower and more correct
sense of the word. In length this article is equivalent to 25 pages of
this Guide; and it contains 9 illustrations of presses. The article is
by C. T. Jacobi, author of _Printing_, and _The Printer’s Handbook of
Trade Recipes_. The article gives a history of the printing press, which
was practically unchanged for a century and a half, until the Dutch
map-maker Blaeu greatly simplified it. The first important metal
press—earlier ones were of wood—was invented by Lord Stanhope nearly two
hundred years later. It had greater power with smaller expenditure of
labour, and its workings, as well as that of the Blaeu press, and of the
Albion, which was used by William Morris at Kelmscott, may be readily
understood from the illustrations in the article. Another hand press is
the Columbian, invented in 1816 by a Philadelphian, George Clymer, and
still in use for heavy hand work. Power presses began to be made at the
end of the 18th century, but the presses invented by William Nicholson
(1790) and Friedrich König (adopted by the London _Times_ in 1814)
printed only on one side at a time, as did the “double platen” machine
of a little later date. The cylindrical eight feeder built by Augustus
Applegath in 1848 for the London _Times_ and the Hoe Type Revolving
Machine are described in the section on the history of power presses,
which closes with the story of Bullock’s machine (1865) for printing
from a continuous web of paper.

[Sidenote: Modern Presses]

The closing section of the article on printing is devoted to a
description of modern presses. It opens with a list of the principal
types of presses still in use, which are classified under the following
seven heads:—

  (1)—iron hand-presses like the Albion or Columbian, for proof-pulling
  or limited editions;

  (2)—small platen machines for job or commercial work;

  (3)—single cylinder machines (“Wharfedales”) printing one side only;

  (4)—perfecting machines, usually two cylinder, printing both sides,
  but with two distinct operations;

  (5)—two-revolution machines with one cylinder;

  (6)—two-colour machines, with one cylinder usually, but two printing
  surfaces and two sets of inking apparatus;

  (7)—rotary machines for printing from curved plates upon an endless
  web of paper—principally for newspapers or periodical work.

These seven classes are next described in detail and the article
illustrates them all. A cut of an Albion press is given in an early part
of the article, and the other six presses shown in the cuts are:

  The Golding jobber platen machine

  Payne & Sons’ Wharfedale stop-cylinder machine

  Dryden & Foord’s perfecting machine

  The Miehle two-revolution cylinder machine

  Payne & Sons’ two-colour single cylinder machine

  Hoe’s double-octuple rotary machine

The article closes with a discussion of the following very practical
topics: the preparation or “make ready” for printing; recent development
in printing with cross references to the article PROCESS; and a
paragraph on the management of a printing house.

[Sidenote: Proof-Reading]

From this closing paragraph and the article on PRINTING, the student is
referred to the article PROOF-READING (Vol. 22, p. 438) which is by John
A. Black, head press reader of the 10th edition of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, and John Randall, sub-editor of the _Athenaeum_ and of
_Notes and Queries_ and former secretary of the London Association of
Correctors of the Press, so that this article, like all the other
articles on the subject of book-making, is written by eminent practical
authorities on the subject.

[Sidenote: Bookbinding]

The same is true of the article BOOKBINDING (Vol. 4, p. 216), which
naturally follows in a systematic course of study. This is by Cyril J.
H. Davenport, assistant keeper of books in the British Museum and author
of _History of the Book_, etc. This article is illustrated with 14
figures, including 8 in halftone, showing typical fine bindings. The
other illustrations show machines and processes used in binding. Besides
a historical sketch of book-binding the article treats of the following
topics:

Modern methods and modern binding designers; machine binding, machine
sewing, rounding and backing, casing, wiring, and blocking. A
case-making machine, a casing-in machine and a blocking machine are
shown in the illustrations.

A bookbinder or a student of the subject will find a great deal of very
valuable information elsewhere in the book, particularly in the article
LEATHER (Vol. 16, p. 330) by Dr. J. Gordon Parker, principal of the
Leathersellers Technical College, London, and author of _Leather for
Libraries_, etc. The article occupies the equivalent of 55 pages of this
Guide; and the possessor of the Britannica will be interested to know
that the leather bindings used for its volumes were all made according
to specifications drawn up by Dr. Parker, the greatest authority in the
world on tanning, curing and dyeing leather for book-bindings.

[Sidenote: Publishing and Book-Selling]

The last stages in getting the author’s raw material “from him to the
ultimate consumer” are those in which the publisher and bookseller play
their part; and for a description of their functions the student should
refer to the articles on publishing and book-selling in the Britannica.
The article PUBLISHING (Vol. 22, p. 628) explains that publishing and
book-selling were for a long time carried on together since “booksellers
were the first publishers of printed books, as they had previously been
the agents for the production and exchange of authentic manuscript
copies.” The separation of publishing from book-selling is due to “the
tendency of every composite business to break up, as it expands, into
specialized departments.” As publishers became a separate class the work
of their literary assistants also broke up into specialized
departments—proof-reading and the reading of manuscripts submitted by
authors—or the work of _printers’_ readers and _publishers’_ readers.

The importance of the work of the publisher’s reader is dwelt upon in
this article which sketches besides the growth of the Society of Authors
in England and of the formation there of the Publishers’ Association and
the Booksellers’ Association. The article also outlines the methods of
publishing in the United States and gives particular prominence to the
effect on the British market of the introduction of American books and
of American book-selling methods.

[Sidenote: Historical and Miscellaneous Articles]

Among other articles of interest to the manufacturer of books are the
following: BOOK (Vol. 4, p. 214) by Alfred William Pollard, assistant
keeper of books in the British Museum, gives a general historical
description of books and in particular calls attention to the great
change in book-prices in the last thirty years. “About 1894 the number
of medium-priced books was greatly increased in England by the
substitution of single-volume novels at 6s. each (subject to discount)
for the three-volume editions at 31s. 6d.... The preposterous price of
10s. 6d. a volume had been adopted during the first popularity of the
Waverley Novels and had continued in force for the greater part of the
century.” To-day, well printed copies of these novels sell for 1s. in
England and for 35 cents in the United States.

It may be added that one of the most striking lessons to be learned from
the Britannica, in relation to the improvements and economies effected
by the application of the most modern processes to the manufacture of
books, is supplied by the consideration of the Britannica itself. The
extent of the composition and machinery involved, the accuracy of the
proof-reading, the novel employment—upon a large scale—of India paper
and flexible bindings, the beauty of the illustrations, and, above all,
the low price at which the product is sold, form a combination of the
very latest perfections of every department of the industry.

Read too BOOK-COLLECTING (Vol. 4, p. 221) also by A. W. Pollard; the
article BOOK PLATES (Vol. 4, p. 230) by Egerton Castle, illustrated with
ten cuts of book plates (which are so well chosen that book plate
collectors have not infrequently asked the publishers of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica for extra copies so that they might include
them in their collections); the article BOOKCASE (Vol. 4, p. 221) from
which the reader may be surprised to learn that “the whole construction
and arrangement of bookcases was learnedly discussed in the light of
experience by W. E. Gladstone in the _Nineteenth Century_ for March
1890;” and the article BIBLIOGRAPHY AND BIBLIOLOGY (Vol. 3, p. 908) by
A. W. Pollard, supplemented by the article INCUNABULA (Vol. 14, p. 369).

The following alphabetical list of articles and sections of articles,
although it does not profess to be complete, will give the student some
idea of the large number of topics connected with the general subject of
the manufacture of books:

 Albion Press
 Aniline Ink
 Applegath, Augustus
 Autoplate Process
 Backing
 Barth, Henry
 Bastard Letter
 Batter
 Bibliography and Bibliology
 Bill of Type
 Binding
 Black Type
 Blaeu Press
 Blanketing
 Bleaching
 Blocking
 Blue Ink
 Boiling
 Book
 Book-Binding
 Bookcase
 Book-collecting
 Book-Plates
 Bookselling
 Bourgeois
 Breaking
 Brevier
 Bruce, David
 Burr
 Case-making Machine
 Casing
 Casing-in machine
 Caslon Type
 Casting
 Cellulose
 China Ink
 Chinese Paper-makers
 Chiswick Press
 Clymer, George
 Collotype
 Colour Filters
 Colour Process
 Columbian Press
 Composition
 Copying Ink
 Coster
 Couching
 Cutter
 Dandy Roll
 Delcambre Machine
 Distributing
 Distributing Machines
 Dow Machine
 Drive
 Drying
 Electroplating
 Electrotyping
 Empire Machine
 English Type
 Engraving
 Esparto
 Evaporator
 Face
 Flong
 Forme
 Fount
 Fraser Machine
 Fust
 Glazing
 Golding Machine
 Gold Ink
 Goodson
 Gutenberg
 Half Stuff
 Half-tone
 Heliotype
 Hoe, Robert
 Imposition
 Incunabula
 Indelible Ink
 Indian Ink
 India Paper
 Ink
 Intaglio Process
 Italic Type
 Jordan Beaters
 Justifying
 Kelmscott Press
 Kern
 Kingsland Beater
 König, Friedrich
 Lanston Monotype
 Leather
 Line-Engraving
 Linotype
 Lithography
 Logwood Ink
 Machine Presses
 Marking Ink
 Matrices
 Miehle Press
 Minion
 Monoline
 Monotype
 Morris, William
 Nicholson, William
 Nick
 Nonpareil
 Octuple Rotary Machine
 Off-set Printing
 Old-style Type
 Paige Composing Machine
 Paper
 Papyrus
 Parchment
 Pearl (type)
 Perfecting Machine
 Photolithography
 Phototype
 Pica
 Planographic Process
 Platen
 Point System
 Porion Evaporator
 Power Presses
 Pressing
 Press Plate
 Press-work
 Primer
 Price of Paper
 Printing
 Printing Ink
 Process
 Proof-reading
 Publishing
 Pulp
 Punch
 Quality, Standards of Paper
 Rag
 Red Ink
 Reel Paper Cutter
 Relief Process
 Roman Type
 Rotary Presses
 Rounding
 Ruby
 Scheme of Type
 Senefelder
 Serif
 Sewing
 Shake
 Sheeting
 Shells
 Signature
 Silver Ink
 Simplex Machine
 Sizes of Paper
 Sizing
 Soda Recovery
 Stanhope Press
 Stannotype
 Steel-facing
 Stem
 Stereotyping
 Straining
 Super Calender
 Surfacing
 Swelled Gelatin Process
 Sympathetic Ink
 Tachytype
 Tannin Ink
 Thorne Machine
 Three Colour Process
 Tub-sizing
 Turtle
 Type-case
 Typograph
 Typography
 Vale Press
 Water mark
 Wharfedale Presses
 Wicks, Frederick
 Wiring
 Woodbury Process
 Wood Engraving
 Wood’s Autoplate
 Writing Ink
 Yaryan Evaporator




                              CHAPTER XXII
                      FOR JOURNALISTS AND AUTHORS


[Sidenote: The Development of Style]

No writer can consider the use he will make of the tools of his
trade—and the Britannica is certainly the chief among them—unless he has
very definite views as to the particular kind of work he is trying to
do. Where writing is regarded as a business, the art of writing is the
art of being read, and the art of being read lies, nowadays, in
convincing the reader that you have something fresh to say, rather than
in arousing his admiration of your way of saying it. Writing is none the
less one of the fine arts: the modern writer must form his style with
the utmost care, and always guard himself against the temptation to
relax his standards. But the juggling with words, the “rhythmical
sequences of recurring consonants,” the musical prose in which sounds
are adjusted as artfully as in verse, presuppose readers to whom these
elaborations are delightful. Such readers are rare, to-day. Thirty or
forty years ago it was a matter of course, in thousands of homes, for
some one member of the household to read aloud to the others. The custom
has almost disappeared, and there has been a change in public taste,
due, perhaps, in great measure to a change in the _pace_ at which people
read. A book does not “last” as it did. Newspaper reading has trained
the eye and the mind to swifter consumption. The modern professional
writer adapts himself to the existing conditions. He knows that those
who ride in automobiles do not peer under tufts of leaves to look for
roadside violets. But he also knows that they want a straight, smooth
road. He endeavors to write as concisely as possible, yet to write so
clearly that every point he makes is made once for all; and he can work
fully as hard, and apply talents fully as great, in forming a style that
pleases by its simple directness—or, better, that pleases because the
reader does not think of it as “style,”—as if he were aiming at the most
elaborate ornament.

[Sidenote: “Vitalized Observation”]

In developing the power of clear and concise statement, the first
essential is to form the habit of getting your “something to say”
absolutely plain to your own mind before you attempt to say it. A writer
deliberately strives to be wordy and vague when he is trying to
misrepresent facts, and it is impossible, when he is groping for his
facts, that he should avoid wordiness and vagueness. The Britannica
article on Rudyard Kipling speaks of his “powers of observation
vitalized by imagination.” It would be difficult to find a phrase more
tersely describing the ideal equipment of a writer, and Kipling’s
observation is rapid observation _amplified by deliberate
investigation_. He gets a swift impression of the complex framework of a
ship or of the intricate machinery of a locomotive, and then, before he
writes “The Ship that Found Herself” or “.007,” he makes as elaborate a
technical study as if he were writing an engineering article instead of
a story. His imagination so vitalizes the result that when you read the
story, although it describes beams and valves you never saw, you
recognize the accuracy of his technical description as you recognize, in
an art gallery, the fidelity of a portrait, although you never saw the
person portrayed. In using the Britannica, the investigation by which
you amplify your personal observation helps you in four ways. _First_,
you correct your facts if they need correction. Whatever your subject
may be, you find information so authoritative that you cannot question
it. _Second_, you amplify your own observations; you discover the
underlying causes and relations of the events or opinions you are about
to discuss. _Third_, the reading by which you have, consciously or
unconsciously, been influenced in forming your style, is rendered more
profitable and stimulating by your study of the Britannica articles in
which the work of all the world’s great writers, past and present, is
analyzed by the most brilliant critics. [Sidenote: Models of Style]
_Fourth_, you have in the Britannica itself such examples of scholarly,
forcible, compacted English as cannot often be found in contemporary
books. It is not within the province of this Guide to institute detailed
comparisons between these articles by the leading literary men of the
day and other writings from the same pens. But the reader will discover
for himself that the editorial policy which demanded rigorous concision
has stimulated, not hampered, the distinguished writers whose Britannica
articles are, in case after case, the best of their productions.

[Sidenote: Practical Tests]

The foregoing summary of the uses of the Britannica to writers is based
upon reviews of the work which have appeared in the daily and weekly
press; and it may be supplemented by brief extracts from one or two
letters to the publishers, written by men whose reputations give their
opinions great weight. In one of these Horace White, formerly editor of
the _Evening Post_ of New York, spoke highly of the practical utility of
the Britannica. Joseph Pulitzer, of the New York _World_, shortly before
his death wrote: “I want to thank you for the intellectual pleasure I
enjoyed this winter in examining this extraordinary production. I have
already distributed a dozen sets in America as presents among _editors_
and my children. [He afterwards ordered six more sets.] The work is a
liberal education.” John Habberton wrote: “The new edition of the
Britannica has already cost me hundreds of hours that I should have
given to my work, but I do not regret the outlay, for I have been richly
repaid. There never was a handier book for a desk or a more readable
one.”

It is not only true that no ordinary library would supply the
information to be found in the Britannica, but it is as true, and as
relevant, that no ordinary library presents information in a form as
stimulating to the writer who uses books as the tools of his trade.
The editor-in-chief of the Britannica had all the world’s greatest
experts in all fields of human knowledge and endeavour to choose from.
He chose in each instance the expert whose knowledge was so thorough,
and whose correlation of his special knowledge with related branches
was so complete, that his articles are not merely “last word”
information but interesting and alive. You may remember the new
interest you felt in natural science when you first read an essay by
Huxley, because he had the power of creating enthusiasm. It is a
justifiable figure of speech to say that, in this sense, the
Britannica has been written by Huxleys. Perhaps you have ransacked a
public library for some out-of-the-way fact and finally found it, in
skeleton form, and in crabbed German, in _Meyer_ or _Brockhaus_ or
some other German encyclopaedia. Or did your search end by finding the
fact in _Larousse_ or _La Grande Encyclopédie_, in some clever phrase,
so brilliantly written, so strikingly put, that it was the phrase and
not the fact that you had got—and you felt that the Frenchman had
hidden the fact, if he ever had had it, in his epigram? You may have
wished, then, for a third type of encyclopaedia which should be
“German-thorough” and “French-interesting.” Such a combination is the
Britannica,—more authoritative, more up-to-date, more interesting,
than any other book.

[Sidenote: The Journalist’s Needs]

A newspaper man, reporter or editor, must be informed at a moment’s
notice on any one of so large a number and so wide a range of topics
that the best library of reference obtainable can be none too good for
him. This is especially true of the man on the smaller newspaper which
does not have the luxury of specialists on its editorial staff, or of
many reporters dividing among them the work of gathering news on such
lines that each may work in a field with which he is intimately
acquainted and in which he is particularly versed. And the rural
newspaper is, besides, further from good public libraries and
financially less able to have a large office library. The authority, the
scope, the interest and the convenience of the Britannica make it just
the book to fill these varied needs of the newspaper man. If he has to
write a “murder story” in which some unusual poison has been used, he
can find a full description of the origin, the use, the action and the
tests of the drug by turning to the Britannica—instead of hunting for
(and then through) a text book on medicine. And if, on the same day, or
the next, he must write an editorial on the tariff, he will find in the
article TARIFF, in the articles FREE TRADE and PROTECTION, and in that
part of the article UNITED STATES which deals with the country’s
economic history, the information that he wants; and he can get it
quickly, and can be sure of its being authoritative.

If the Britannica is evidently _the_ work of reference for the writer,
how is he to use it?

It has already been suggested that he will find authoritative and recent
information on any topic connected with the subject on which he is
writing. It would be interesting to see—or at least to imagine—how
largely the Britannica might be used as a source for fiction. A novelist
with an appetite for human documents like Balzac’s or like that of
Charles Reade—with his many albums full of newspaper clippings,—could
satisfy himself with the Britannica, taking his characters “from life”
in its biographical and historical articles and his setting from its
geographical articles.

[Sidenote: Literary Criticism]

It has already been suggested that the writer will find in the
Britannica the clearness and conciseness of style which he cannot but
wish to attain in his own work. Here he has the writings of great
masters of English. He may remember Robert Louis Stevenson’s story of
how he played “the sedulous ape” to the great stylists; and in the
Britannica he can read not only an excellent sketch of Stevenson by
Edmund Gosse, his friend and a well-known essayist, but Stevenson’s own
article on Béranger. He may read Matthew Arnold on Sainte-Beuve; Walter
Besant on Froissart and on Richard Jefferies; John Burroughs on Walt
Whitman; G. W. Cable on William Cullen Bryant; Edmund Kerchever Chambers
on Shakespeare: Ernest Hartley Coleridge on Byron; Sidney Colvin on
Giotto, Leonardo, etc.; Austin Dobson on Fielding, Hogarth, Richardson,
etc.; Henry van Dyke on Emerson; John Fiske on Francis Parkman; Richard
Garnett on T. L. Peacock and on Satire; Israel Gollancz on “The Pearl”;
Edmund Gosse on many literary _genres_, on Ibsen, etc.; Edward Everett
Hale on James Freeman Clarke and on Edward Everett; Frederic Harrison on
Ruskin; W. E. Henley on James Fenimore Cooper; William Price James on
Barrie, Henley and Kipling; Prince Karageorgevitch on Marie
Bashkirtseff; Stanley Lane-Poole on Richard Burton; Andrew Lang on
Ballads, Molière, etc.; Henry Cabot Lodge on Albert Gallatin; E. V.
Lucas on Jane Austen and Charles Lamb; Lord Macaulay on Bunyan,
Goldsmith, Johnson and Pitt; David Masson on Milton; Brander Matthews on
Mark Twain; Alice Meynell on Mrs. Browning; William Minto on Dryden,
Pope, Spenser and Wordsworth; John Nichol on Robert Burns; Charles Eliot
Norton on George William Curtis; Mark Pattison on Casaubon, Erasmus,
Macaulay and Thomas More; W. H. Pollock on Thackeray and de Musset;
Quiller-Couch on Thomas Edward Brown; Whitelaw Reid on Greeley; C. F.
Richardson on Bronson Alcott and John Fiske; W. M. Rossetti on Shelley;
Viscount St. Cyres on Fénelon and Madame Guyon; Saintsbury on French
literature, Balzac, Montaigne, Rabelais, etc.; Carl Schurz on Henry
Clay; H. E. Scudder on Lowell and Harriet Beecher Stowe; Thomas Seccombe
on Boswell, Dickens, Charles Lever, etc.; William Sharp (“Fiona McLeod”)
on Thoreau; Clement Shorter on the Brontës, Crabbe, Cowper and Mrs.
Gaskell; W. W. Skeat on Layamon; E. C. Stedman on Whittier; Sir Leslie
Stephen on Browning and Carlyle; Richard Henry Stoddard on Hawthorne;
Swinburne on Beaumont and Fletcher, Congreve, Hugo, Landor, Marlowe,
Mary, Queen of Scots; John Addington Symonds on the Renaissance,
Machiavelli, Tasso, etc.; Arthur Symons on Hardy, Mallarmé, Verlaine; W.
P. Trent on Sidney Lanier; A. W. Ward on Drama; Mrs. Humphry Ward on
Lyly; Theodore Watts-Dunton on Poetry, Sonnet, Borrow, Wycherley,
Matthew Arnold; Arthur Waugh on William Morris, Walter Pater; and G. E.
Woodberry on American Literature.

The more you know of the subjects or authors in this list the more
likely you will be to say what a Western professor of theology said, in
reviewing the articles in the Britannica dealing with the Bible: “They
are the very authorities that I would have chosen to write these
articles!”

But the Britannica will serve the professional author in other ways than
by giving him information in special fields and by keeping before him
admirable models of style. He might well follow any of the courses
suggested in the chapter on _Literature_ in this Guide; and if he will
read the articles on great authors written by great authors, already
mentioned, he will have a doubly valuable course in biographical
criticism by the ablest of literary critics.

Any newspaper writer or contributor to the periodical press should read
such articles as:

[Sidenote: Newspapers and Magazines]

NEWSPAPERS (Vol. 19, p. 544; equivalent to 125 pages of this Guide), by
Hugh Chisholm, editor-in-chief of the Britannica, with sections on the
price of newspapers by Lord Northcliffe, on illustrated papers by
Clement Shorter, general information on American newspapers, and an
elaborate historical account of British, American and foreign
newspapers.

PERIODICALS (Vol. 21, p. 151; equivalent to 40 pages in this Guide), by
Henry Richard Tedder, librarian of the Athenaeum Club of London, treats
the subject under the heads: _British_, _United States_, _Canada_,
_South Africa_, _Australia and New Zealand_, _West Indies and British
Crown Colonies_, _India and Ceylon_, _France_, _Germany_, _Austria_,
_Italy_, _Belgium_, _Holland_, _Denmark_, _Norway_, _Sweden_, _Spain_,
_Portugal_, _Greece_, _Russia_, and _other Countries_.

SOCIETIES, LEARNED (Vol. 25, p. 309), also by H. R. Tedder, deals with
the publications of such societies and classifies them (with
geographical sub-classification for each head) under _Science
Generally_, _Mathematics_, _Astronomy_, _Physics_, _Chemistry_,
_Geology_, _Mineralogy_ and _Palaeontology_, _Meteorology_,
_Microscopy_, _Botany and Horticulture_, _Zoology_, _Anthropology_,
_Sociology_, _Medicine and Surgery_, _Engineering and Architecture_,
_Naval and Military Science_, _Agriculture and Trades_, _Literature_,
_History and Archaeology_, and _Geography_.

Local information in regard to newspapers and journalism will be found
in separate local articles. Thus under Boston, Philadelphia, New York
City, New Orleans, San Francisco, etc., there is valuable information in
regard to these cities as literary centers and about their principal
periodical publications, including newspapers; and in the articles on
smaller cities, such as Albany and Springfield, Mass., there are
valuable historical sketches of the local press of each.

[Sidenote: Literary Biographies]

The newspaper man should read the biographies of great American printers
and editors: WILLIAM BRADFORD (Vol. 4, p. 370); BENJAMIN FRANKLIN (Vol.
11, p. 24; equivalent to 20 pages of this Guide); ISAIAH THOMAS (Vol.
26, p. 867); NOAH WEBSTER (Vol. 28, p. 463); WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT (Vol.
4, p. 698); JAMES G. BIRNEY (Vol. 3, p. 988); GAMALIEL BAILEY (Vol. 3,
p. 217); W. L. GARRISON (Vol. 11, p. 477); JAMES GORDON BENNETT (Vol. 3,
p. 740); THURLOW WEED (Vol. 28, p. 466); GIDEON WELLES (Vol. 28, p.
506); JOHN BIGELOW (Vol. 3, p. 922); HORACE GREELEY (Vol. 12, p. 531);
HENRY J. RAYMOND (Vol. 22, p. 933); GEORGE RIPLEY (Vol. 23, p. 363); C.
A. DANA (Vol. 7, p. 791); GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS (Vol. 7, p. 652); CARL
SCHURZ (Vol. 24, p. 386); SAMUEL BOWLES (Vol. 4, p. 344); JOSEPH R.
HAWLEY (Vol. 13, p. 101); WHITELAW REID (Vol. 23, p. 52); GEORGE W.
CHILDS (Vol. 6, p. 141); E. L. GODKIN (Vol. 12, p. 174); and HENRY
WATTERSON (Vol. 28, p. 418).

The reading of these biographies will give the student many interesting
starting-points for studies in American politics, economics, literature,
reform movements as widely separated as abolition and the introduction
of the merit system into the civil service. The author should also read
the article AMERICAN LITERATURE (Vol. 1, p. 831; equivalent to 35 pages
of this Guide), by Professor G. E. Woodberry, and, if his field is that
of the publicist, he should read the article on the history of the
UNITED STATES (Vol. 27, p. 663), equivalent to 225 pages of this Guide;
and the allied articles to which he is referred from that.

The advertising writer will find a valuable and stimulating article on
ADVERTISEMENT (Vol. 1, p. 235, equivalent to 20 pages in this Guide),
which gives a history of the subject, deals with posters and signs,
circulars, periodical advertising, and legal regulation and taxation.
For a full list of articles of particular usefulness for the author, see
the chapter _Literature_ in this Guide. The following brief list may
serve as the basis for a preliminary course of reading.

 Alliteration
 Ana
 Anecdote
 Anthology
 Anticlimax
 Antithesis
 Aphorism
 Apologue
 Apophthegm
 Archaism
 Assonance
 Bathos
 Belles-Lettres
 Biography
 Book
 Book-Collecting
 Bookselling
 Burlesque
 Comedy
 Criticism
 Dialogue
 Drama
 Elegy
 Encyclopaedia
 Epic Poetry
 Epigram
 Epilogue
 Epistle
 Essay
 Euphemism
 Fable
 Feuilleton
 Gazette
 Humour
 Hyperbole
 Idyll
 Impromptu
 Index
 Irony
 Lampoon
 Laureate
 Legend
 Libraries
 Limerick
 Litotes
 Lyrical Poetry
 Manuscript
 Melodrama
 Metaphor
 Metonymy
 Metre
 Monologue
 National Anthems
 Newspapers
 Novel
 Ode
 Pamphlets
 Parable
 Paradox
 Paraphrase
 Parody
 Pasquinade
 Periodicals
 Philippics
 Plagiarism
 Pleonasm
 Poetry
 Proof-Reading
 Prose
 Prosody
 Proverb
 Psalm
 Pseudonym
 Pun
 Quatrain
 Quotation
 Reporting
 Rhetoric
 Rhyme
 Rhythm
 Romance
 Saga
 Satire
 Song
 Sonnet
 Squib
 Stanza
 Style
 Tale
 Tract
 Treatise
 Verse




                             CHAPTER XXIII
                              FOR TEACHERS


[Sidenote: The Teacher’s “Factor of Safety”]

Every teacher has one pupil who tries harder than any of the others to
absorb knowledge, and yet is never content with the progress made, who
knows how hard the teacher works, and yet is never satisfied with the
teacher—and that pupil is the teacher’s self. For every other learner
there is a limit to the amount of knowledge to be acquired, but in the
case of the teacher a “standard” is supposed to indicate no more than an
indispensable minimum. When you are trying to make your pupils master a
text-book, the volume seems to contain a most stupendous mass of
learning, and when one of them asks you a question about the subject
with which the text-book deals, that particular point is sure to be one
that the text-book does not cover. What engineers call the “factor of
safety,” the margin by which the strength of materials must exceed the
stress it is expected to encounter, is, for the teacher, incalculable.
It is, of course, a favorite pastime of parents to send a child to
school primed with some question “to ask Teacher,” selecting an enigma
that has been for centuries a battle-ground for scholars or scientists.
And, apart from these malicious pitfalls, children themselves seem,
quite innocently, to hit upon questions of extraordinary difficulty. A
rebuff, a careless response, or, worst of all, an ingenious evasion of
the issue, is fatal to the teacher’s authority and influence. “Ask me
that again, to-morrow morning,” is the phrase with which a conscientious
teacher often meets such a contingency. And then how a fagged brain is
tormented that evening, how the few books available (and they are likely
to be a very few if there is no public library at hand) are searched in
vain! That is not all. If it be true that the teacher is the most
diligent, yet always the least satisfied, of all the teacher’s pupils,
it is equally true that many of the most puzzling questions with which
the teacher is confronted arise in the teacher’s own mind.

[Sidenote: Answers to All Questions]

The question-answering power of the Britannica is therefore of cardinal
importance to the teacher, and is to be considered not only in
connection with the use of the work for reference, but also in the
selection of such courses of reading as may be expected to supply
information of the kind that questions most often demand. And this
question-answering power lies in three characteristics of the work, and
may be measured by the extent to which the three are found in it: broad
scope, unimpeachable authority and convenient arrangement. Its scope
covers the whole range of human knowledge, everything that mankind has
achieved, attempted, believed or studied. Its authority is doubly
vouchsafed. The fact that the Britannica is published by the University
of Cambridge (England), one of the world’s oldest and most famous seats
of learning, in itself gives such a guarantee as no other Encyclopaedia
has ever offered, and the assurance thus given may be regarded as
showing, chiefly, that there are no errors of omission, for against the
existence of the errors of commission there is a further guarantee. The
articles are signed by 1,500 contributors, including the foremost
specialists in every department of knowledge. Among this army of
collaborators, chosen from twenty countries, there are no less than 704
members of the staffs of 146 universities and colleges. This means that
by means of the Britannica the youngest teacher in the most isolated
village is brought into stimulating contact with the great leaders of
the teaching profession. Its arrangement gives it the advantages of a
universal library, providing the varied courses of reading outlined in
this Guide, and those also of a work of reference which yields an
immediate answer to every conceivable question. The index of 500,000
entries instantly leads the enquirer to any item of information in the
40,000 articles. No teacher could hope to form, in the course of a
lifetime, a collection of separate books which would contain anywhere
near as much information.

[Sidenote: A Library of Text-Books]

In another relation, the Britannica is of daily service to anyone
engaged in educational work. It has already been remarked that the
teacher needs a “factor of safety,” a reserve of knowledge beyond that
which is directly called for in the ordinary routine of the class room.
But in the very course of that routine, there is also a need for
co-ordinated knowledge, presented in a form available for use in
teaching, of a more advanced kind than that in the text-books with which
pupils are provided. And the Britannica is, in itself, a vast collection
of text-books.

Professor Shotwell, of Columbia University, recently wrote to the
publishers a letter in which he said: “I shall use the articles in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica which deal with industrial processes as a
substitute for a text-book in one of my courses in Social and Industrial
History and have especially in mind the splendid treatment of the cotton
industry by Professor S. J. Chapman and others.” A large number of
Britannica articles have, by permission, been reprinted, word for word,
for use as text-books; and it is impossible to say how many have been
paraphrased, and, in a form less clear and vivid than the originals,
similarly employed. The writers of the Britannica have, among them, done
so large a share of the world’s recent work in research and criticism,
that no one who is engaged in writing a text-book or in preparing a
course of lectures should fail to use the work as a check to test the
completeness and the accuracy of independent investigation.

Fortunately, the system of monthly payments has enabled teachers to
purchase the Britannica to an extent which, in view of their limited
resources, is a striking evidence of their earnest desire to perfect
their professional equipment. In some cases two and even three teachers
have combined their efforts in order that they might jointly possess the
work. But whatever may be the difficulties to be overcome, it is certain
that the Britannica is, for the teacher, an instrument as directly
productive as a technical library is for a doctor or a lawyer.

A professor in an eastern college wrote to the publishers: “It has
become ‘the collection of books’ which Carlyle might term ‘the true
university’”; and the practical head of a business school in
Pennsylvania says: “By its purchase, I have secured access to a
university education.” A well known professor of German calls it “a
_Hausschatz_ of amazing richness and variety,” and adds: “I hope you
will not be sued at law for an attempt to monopolize the market for
profitable and entertaining literature.” The president of a southern
university wrote: “It is the first book to consult, the one book to own,
if you can own but one.” And a Harvard professor says: “I have been
particularly interested in some of the recent phases of European
history. Concerning some movements, about which it is as yet extremely
difficult to find material in books, I have found the Encyclopaedia most
useful.” A teacher in a theological seminary exclaims: “What a
university of solid training it would be for a young student, if he
would spend an hour each day reading the work, volume by volume, and
including all the articles except those of a technical nature belonging
to other departments than his own!”

This is what teachers have said of the value to them of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica. Specialists in school-hygiene and school
librarians have also noted the advantage of the light, handy volumes
printed on India paper—one weighs no more than two monthly magazines—,
which may be easily held at the proper angle for eye-focus on a large
page.

The teacher will find in this Guide valuable suggestions about
particular subjects which he may wish to teach or study,—such as
history, literature, language and biology. In this chapter we suggest a
general course.

[Sidenote: The Theory of Education]

Let him begin with the article EDUCATION (Vol. 8, p. 951), which is the
equivalent in length of 120 pages of the size and type of this Guide,
and of which the first part is by James Welton, professor of education
in the University of Leeds and author of _Logical Bases of Education_,
etc., the sections on national systems by G. B. M. Coore, assistant
secretary of the London Board of Education, and that on the United
States by Nicholas Murray Butler, president of Columbia University. This
valuable article begins with a discussion of the meaning of the term
“Education,” excludes John Stuart Mill’s extension to everything which
“helps to shape the human being,” and narrows the meaning to definitely
personal work,—the true “working” definition for the practical teacher.

The section on educational theory might equally well be styled a sketch
of the history of education and will prove valuable to the teacher
preparing for a licence-examination in this subject or for a normal
training course. It discusses old Greek education with special attention
to Spartan practice, Plato’s theory and Aristotle’s, and the gradual
change from the point of view of the city-state to Hellenistic
cosmopolitanism. The older Roman education, practical and given by
father to son, is contrasted with the later Hellenized training, largely
by Greek slaves, largely rhetorical and largely summed up in
Quintilian’s _Institutio_. The contest between the pagan system and
Christianity is shown to have culminated in monasticism; and barbarian
inroads stifled classical culture until the Carolingian revival under
Alcuin in the 8th century and the scholastic revival (11th to 13th
centuries) of Abelard, Aquinas and Arabic workings over of Aristotle.
Scholastic education is considered especially in relation to the first
great European universities and the schools of the Dominicans,
Franciscans and Brethren of the Common Life, and in contrast to
chivalry, the education of feudalism. The Renaissance is treated at
greater length, and this is followed by sections on the influence of the
Reformation on education, and the consequent growth of Jesuit schools.
The keynote of the story thereafter is reform,—the movement away from
the classics, toward natural science, and, especially after the French
Revolution, by means of new methods and theories, notably those of
Rousseau, Pestalozzi, Froebel and Herbart.

The remainder of the article EDUCATION deals with national systems of
education: French, German, Swiss, Belgian, Dutch, Scotch, Irish,
English, Welsh and American, with an excellent bibliography. These, and
other, national systems are also treated from another point of view in
the articles on the separate countries.

[Sidenote: Articles on Great Schools]

The article EDUCATION should naturally be followed by a study of the
article UNIVERSITIES (Vol. 27, p. 748—about 100 pages, if printed in the
style of this Guide) by James Bass Mullinger (author of the _History of
Cambridge_, _The Schools of Charles the Great_, etc.) and, for American
universities, by Daniel Coit Gilman, late president of Johns Hopkins
University; and by a reading of articles on the great universities, as
for instance, Oxford, Cambridge, Aberdeen, Glasgow, St. Andrews, Dublin,
Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Cornell, Princeton, Pennsylvania, Michigan,
Wisconsin, California, Leland Stanford, Jr., etc. The student should
then turn to the article SCHOOLS (Vol. 24, p. 359; equivalent to about
40 pages of this Guide) by Arthur Francis Leach, author of _English
Schools at the Reformation_, who gives a summary of what is known of
Greek, Roman and English schools.

Then,—to supplement these general articles,—he should read—

  On _Greek_ education:

  PLATO (Vol. 21, p. 808), especially p. 812 (on _Meno_) and 818 (on the
  _Republic_).

  ARISTOTLE (Vol. 2, p. 501).

  SPARTA (Vol. 25, p. 609, particularly p. 611).

  On _Roman_ education:

  CATO (Vol. 5, p. 535).

  QUINTILIAN (Vol. 22, p. 761).

  On _early Christian_ education:

  CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA (Vol. 6, p. 487, particularly p. 488, on the
  _Paedagogus_).

  AUGUSTINE (Vol. 2, p. 907) and JEROME (Vol. 15, p. 326), with especial
  attention to their early pagan education and their attitude toward it
  as Christians.

  AMBROSE (Vol. 1, p. 798).

  MARTIANUS CAPELLA (Vol. 5, p. 249).

  BOETIUS (Vol. 4, p. 116).

  CASSIODORUS (Vol. 5, p. 459).

  ISIDORE (Vol. 14, p. 871).

  ST. GREGORY (Vol. 12, p. 566).

  BEDE (Vol. 3, p. 615).

  MONASTICISM (Vol. 18, p. 687).

  On the _Carolingian revival_:

  ALCUIN (Vol. 1, p. 529).

  ANGILBERT (Vol. 2, p. 9).

  CHARLEMAGNE (Vol. 5, p. 891, especially p. 894).

  FRANCE (Vol. 10, p. 810).

  On the _Scholastic revival_:

  SCHOLASTICISM (Vol. 24, p. 346).

  ABELARD (Vol. 1, p. 40).

  JOHN OF SALISBURY (Vol. 15, p. 449).

  ALBERTUS MAGNUS (Vol 1, p. 504).

  GROSSETESTE (Vol. 12, p. 617).

  THOMAS AQUINAS (Vol. 2, p. 250).

  ROGER BACON (Vol. 3, p. 153).

  On the _Renaissance_:

  RENAISSANCE (Vol. 23, p. 83).

  DANTE (Vol. 7, p. 810).

  PETRARCH (Vol. 21, p. 310).

  BOCCACIO (Vol. 4, p. 102).

  MANUEL CHRYSOLARAS (Vol. 6, p. 320).

  MANUTIUS (Vol. 17, p. 624).

  THOMAS MORE (Vol. 18, p. 822).

  ERASMUS (Vol. 9, p. 727).

  JOHN COLET (Vol. 6, p. 681).

  THOMAS LINACRE (Vol. 16, p. 701).

  On the _Reformation period and Counter-Reformation_:

  REFORMATION (Vol. 23, p. 4).

  MELANCTHON (Vol. 18, p. 88).

  LUTHER (Vol. 17, p. 133).

  TROTZENDORFF (Vol. 27, p. 308).

  REUCHLIN (Vol. 23, p. 204).

  ASCHAM (Vol. 2, p. 720).

  RABELAIS (Vol. 22, p. 769).

  JESUITS (Vol. 15, p. 337), especially p. 342.

  LA SALLE (Vol. 16, p. 231).

  On the _Modern period_:

  COMENIUS (Vol. 6, p. 759).

  ROUSSEAU (Vol. 23, p. 775).

  VOLTAIRE (Vol. 28, p. 199).

  PESTALOZZI (Vol. 21, p. 284).

  FROEBEL (Vol. 11, p. 238).

  HERBART (Vol. 13, p. 335).

  WILHELM VON HUMBOLDT (Vol. 13, p. 875).

  ANDREW BELL (Vol. 3, p. 684).

  JOSEPH LANCASTER (Vol. 16, p. 147).

  SIR JOHN FITCH (Vol. 10, p. 438).

  JAMES BLAIR (Vol. 4, p. 34).

  T. H. GALLAUDET (Vol. 11, p. 416).

  F. A. P. BARNARD (Vol. 3, p. 409).

  HENRY BARNARD (Vol. 3, p. 410).

  HORACE MANN (Vol. 17, p. 587).

  MARK HOPKINS (Vol. 13, p. 684).

  WILLIAM T. HARRIS (Vol. 13, p. 21).

  JUSTIN S. MORRILL (Vol. 18, p. 869).

  ALEXANDER MELVILLE BELL (Vol. 3, p. 684).

  S. C. ARMSTRONG (Vol. 2, p. 591).

  BOOKER T. WASHINGTON (Vol. 28, p. 344).

  CO-EDUCATION (Vol. 6, p. 637).

  BLINDNESS (Vol. 4, p. 66).

  DEAF AND DUMB (Vol. 7, p. 887).

  INFANT SCHOOLS (Vol. 14, p. 533).

  KINDERGARTEN (Vol. 15, p. 802).

  MUSEUMS OF ART (Vol. 19, p. 60).

  MUSEUMS OF SCIENCE (Vol. 19, p. 64).

  POLYTECHNIC (Vol. 22, p. 38).

  TECHNICAL EDUCATION (Vol. 26, p. 487), an elaborate article, about 40
  pages in the form of this Guide, by Sir Philip Magnus, author of
  _Industrial Education_, member of the Royal Commission on technical
  instruction (1881–1884) and, in 1907, president of the education
  section of the British Association.

[Sidenote: The Study of Psychology]

Of equal importance with this course on the history of education, for
the student taking the licence-examination or for a teacher taking an
examination for a higher grade licence or a principalship, is a course
in Psychology in the Britannica. This will be found largely in the great
article on PSYCHOLOGY (Vol. 22, p. 547; equivalent in length to 200
pages of this Guide) by James Ward. The systematic treatment of the
subject in this article is particularly valuable to the teacher, whether
the object desired is to review the entire subject, sharpening one’s
impressions from a longer course of reading; to get a general grounding
in the subject—for which a careful study of this one article will
suffice; or to make one’s self more certain of his comprehension of any
part of the subject. It is not practicable to give an outline of this
article here, but a few of its special topics are listed below:

  General analysis of the subject

  Attention
  Theory of presentations
  Sensation
  Perception
  Imagination or Ideation
  Mental Association
  Reminiscence and Expectation
  Experimental Investigations on Memory and Association
  Feeling
  Emotion and Emotional Action
  Intellection
  Self-Consciousness
  Relation of Body and Mind
  Comparative Psychology

Besides the general article with its systematic summary of the subject,
the Britannica contains many briefer articles on special topics, so that
the teacher will find not only an excellent text-book of the subject in
Prof. Ward’s article, but also an elaborate dictionary or encyclopaedia
of psychological terms or topics. Among the topics treated in this
“Dictionary of Psychology” are:

 AFFECTION
 APPERCEPTION
 ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS
 ATTENTION
 CATEGORY
 COGNITION
 CONCEPT
 CONNOTATION
 DEDUCTION
 DEFINITION
 DENOTATION
 DREAM
 EXTENSION
 HEARING
 IDEA
 IMAGINATION
 IMITATION
 IMMORTALITY
 INDIVIDUALISM
 INDUCTION
 INSTINCT
 INTELLECT
 INTROSPECTION
 INTUITION
 MNEMONICS
 MOTIVE
 NOÜMENON
 OBJECT, SUBJECT
 PARALLELISM
 PERCEPTION
 PERSONALITY
 PHENOMENON
 PLEASURE
 PSYCHOPHYSICS
 RECEPT
 RELATIVITY
 REMINISCENCE
 RETRO-COGNITION
 SELF
 SENSATIONALISM
 SMELL
 SUGGESTION
 TASTE
 TOUCH
 VISION
 WEBER’S LAW
 WILL

Furthermore, the teacher will find the Britannica a valuable
biographical dictionary. This he will already have realized, if he has
looked up the biographical articles mentioned in connection with the
history of education. The following is a brief outline course in
psychological biography:

 Adamson, Robert
 Aristotle
 Bain, Alexander
 Baldwin, James Mark
 Beneke, F. E.
 Berkeley, George
 Clifford, Wm. K.
 Democritus
 Epicurus
 Fechner, G. F.
 Geulincx, Arnold
 Hamilton, William
 Hartley, David
 Helmholtz, Herman von
 Herbart, Johann F.
 Hobbes, Thomas
 Höffding, Harold
 Hume, David
 Hucheson, Francis
 James, William
 Kant, Immanuel
 Ladd, G. T.
 Lange, F. A.
 Leibnitz, G. W.
 Lewes, George Henry
 Locke, John
 Lotze, R. H.
 Mill, James
 Mill, J. S.
 Müller, Johannes Peter
 Münsterberg, Hugo
 Reid, Thomas
 Ribot, T. A.
 Spencer, Herbert
 Sully, James
 Ward, James
 Wundt, W. M.




                              CHAPTER XXIV
                             FOR MINISTERS


[Sidenote: The Great Preachers]

The minister or candidate for the ministry will find a valuable course
of reading laid out for him in this Guide under the heading _Bible
Study_, and it might be said with little exaggeration that _any_
systematic course of reading in the Encyclopaedia Britannica should add
to the efficiency and power of one who would be an ideal pastor. If the
schools of the Middle Ages could truly call all the arts and sciences
hand-maids and helpers to Theology, much more truly, in the present age,
should the minister, in order that he may minister truly, know not
merely the history of the Bible and of the Church, the results of modern
criticism, and of comparative religion and folk-lore, but, almost as
fully, general history, literature, philosophy, psychology, education,
something of the fine arts, much of law and political science, and still
more of social science and economics. In a period of specialization he
cannot afford to be a specialist—or, it might be nearer the truth to say
that, like every other true specialist, he must make all knowledge, all
the circle of the sciences, tributary to his specialty, which is the
knowledge and the improvement of the human soul. The suggestions that
follow must necessarily be fragmentary, and should be considered as
including merely a few topics not covered in the chapter on _Bible
Study_ nor in the other courses which, as has just been suggested, a
minister might profitably pursue.

The article SERMON (Vol. 24, p. 673) is by Edmund Gosse, librarian of
the House of Lords, biographer of John Donne, Jeremy Taylor and Dr.
Thomas Browne. The writer is especially conversant with the English
literature of the 17th century, in the middle of which, to quote his
article, “the sermon became one of the most highly-cultivated forms of
intellectual entertainment in Great Britain, and when the theatres were
closed at the Commonwealth it grew to be the only public form of
eloquence.”

Each name on the following list of great preachers is accompanied by
volume and page reference to the biographical sketch in the Britannica,
containing criticism of the preacher and a bibliography of his works and
of works about him, so that the articles supply the basis for a study of
the world’s great preachers.

                                   _British._
 JOHN WYCLIFFE (Vol. 28, p. 868)
 JOHN FISHER (Vol. 10, p. 427)
 HUGH LATIMER (Vol. 16, p. 242)
 JOHN KNOX (Vol. 15, p. 878)
 RICHARD HOOKER (Vol. 13, p. 672)
 JOHN DONNE (Vol. 8, p. 417)
 JOSEPH HALL (Vol. 12, p. 847)
 JOHN HALES (Vol. 12, p. 834)
 EDMUND CALAMY (Vol. 4, p. 967)
 BENJAMIN WHICHCOTE (Vol. 28, p. 587)
 THOMAS ADAMS (Vol. 1, p. 180)
 RICHARD BAXTER (Vol. 3, p. 551)
 THOMAS MANTON (Vol. 17, p. 607)
 JOHN OWEN (Vol. 20, p. 392)
 RALPH CUDWORTH (Vol. 7, p. 612)
 ROBERT LEIGHTON (Vol. 16, p. 398)
 JEREMY TAYLOR (Vol. 26, p. 469)
 ISAAC BARROW (Vol. 3, p. 440)
 ROBERT SOUTH (Vol. 25, p. 463)
 JOHN TILLOTSON (Vol. 26, p. 976)
 EDWARD STILLINGFLEET (Vol. 25, p. 921)
 BENJAMIN HOADLY (Vol. 13, p. 542)
 JOSEPH BUTLER (Vol. 4, p. 882)
 THOMAS BOSTON (Vol. 4, p. 289)
 JOHN WESLEY (Vol. 28, p. 527)
 GEORGE WHITEFIELD (Vol. 28, p. 603)
 THOMAS CHALMERS (Vol. 5, p. 809)
 EDWARD IRVING (Vol. 14, p, 854)
 CHARLES HADDON SPURGEON (Vol. 25, p. 742)
 EDWARD BOUVERIE PUSEY (Vol. 22, p. 667)
 JOHN KEBLE (Vol. 15, p. 710)
 JOHN HENRY NEWMAN (Vol. 19, p. 517)
 HENRY EDWARD MANNING (Vol. 17, p. 589)
 JOHN CLIFFORD (Vol. 6, p. 507)
 GEORGE MÜLLER (Vol. 18, p. 961)
 FREDERICK TEMPLE (Vol. 26, p. 600)
 ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL TAIT (Vol. 26, p. 363)
 BENJAMIN JOWETT (Vol. 15, p. 527)
 ARTHUR PENRHYN STANLEY (Vol. 25, p. 777)
 J. F. D. MAURICE (Vol. 17, p. 910)
 HUGH PRICE HUGHES (Vol. 13, p. 860)
 ANDREW M. FAIRBAIRN (Vol. 10, p. 129)
 NORMAN MACLEOD (Vol. 17, p. 262)

                                   _American._
 COTTON MATHER (Vol. 17, p. 883)
 INCREASE MATHER (Vol. 17, p. 884)
 RICHARD MATHER (Vol. 17, p. 885)
 JONATHAN EDWARDS (Vol. 9, p. 2)
 JOHN CARROLL (Vol. 5, p. 409)
 J. L. A. M. L. DE CHEVERUS (Vol. 6, p. 114)
 S. W. G. BRUTÉ (Vol. 4, p. 695)
 JOHN WITHERSPOON (Vol. 28, p. 759)
 JOHN WOOLMAN (Vol. 28, p. 817)
 SAMUEL SEABURY (Vol. 24, p. 531)
 FRANCIS ASBURY (Vol. 2, p. 715)
 PETER CARTWRIGHT (Vol. 5, p. 435)
 MATTHEW SIMPSON (Vol. 25, p. 135)
 DEMETRIUS A. GALLITZIN (Vol. 11, p. 421)
 ALEXANDER CAMPBELL (Vol. 5, p. 127)
 JOHN WINEBRENNER (Vol. 28, p. 729)
 WILLIAM A. MUHLENBERG (Vol. 18, p. 957)
 WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING (Vol. 5, p. 843)
 G. W. DOANE (Vol. 8, p. 349)
 EDWARD PAYSON (Vol. 21, p. 2)
 ADONIRAM JUDSON (Vol. 15, p. 543)
 JOHN HUGHES (Vol. 13, p. 860)
 ARCHIBALD ALEXANDER (Vol. 1, p. 564)
 MOSES STUART (Vol. 25, p. 1048)
 NATHANIEL W. TAYLOR (Vol. 26, p. 472)
 LEONARD BACON (Vol. 3, p. 152)
 JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE (Vol. 6, p. 444)
 HENRY WARD BEECHER (Vol. 3, p. 639)
 HOSEA BALLOU (Vol. 3, p. 282)
 HORACE BUSHNELL (Vol. 4, p. 873)
 PHILLIPS BROOKS (Vol. 4, p. 649)
 EDWARD EVERETT HALE (Vol. 12, p. 832)
 R. S. STORRS (Vol. 25, p. 969)
 CHARLES FORCE DEEMS (Vol. 7, p. 921)
 EDWARDS AMASA PARK (Vol. 20, p. 825)
 DAVID SWING (Vol. 26, p. 237)
 MICHAEL AUGUSTINE CORRIGAN (Vol. 7, p. 197)
 JAMES GIBBONS (Vol. 11, p. 936)
 T. DEWITT TALMAGE (Vol. 26, p. 380)
 ISAAC T. HECKER (Vol. 13, p. 194)
 ROBERT COLLYER (Vol. 6, p. 694)
 HENRY C. MCCOOK (Vol. 17, p. 205)
 JOHN FLETCHER HURST (Vol. 13, p. 960)
 DWIGHT L. MOODY (Vol. 18, p. 802)
 WASHINGTON GLADDEN (Vol. 12, p. 63)
 JOHN IRELAND (Vol. 14, p. 742)
 JOHN JOSEPH KEANE (Vol. 15, p. 706)
 MINOT J. SAVAGE (Vol. 24, p. 239)
 REUBEN ARCHER TORREY (Vol. 27, p. 61)

                                   _French._
 JOHN GERSON (Vol. 11, p. 904)
 JOHN CALVIN (Vol. 5, p. 71)
 THEODORE BEZA (Vol. 3, p. 839)
 ST. FRANCIS OF SALES (Vol. 10, p. 940)
 J. B. BOSSUET (Vol. 4, p. 287)
 LOUIS BOURDALOUS (Vol. 4, p. 329)
 ESPRIT FLÉCHIER (Vol. 10, p. 491)
 JULES MASCARON (Vol. 17, p. 836)
 JEAN BAPTISTE MASSILLON (Vol. 17, p. 867)
 JEAN SIFFREIN MAURY (Vol. 17, p. 915)

These lists could easily be made longer and fuller, but the articles
mentioned give such a view of the great preachers of the world as cannot
fail to stimulate any minister. Supplementing what has been said above
about the necessity of the minister’s being a well-rounded man, it may
be worth while to notice that Donne and Keble and, in a less degree,
Doane and Muhlenberg, were poets as well as preachers; that Cudworth was
known as the founder of the Cambridge Platonists, and Jowett as the
translator of Plato, Barrow as a mathematician, second, in his day, only
to Isaac Newton, Edward Everett Hale as an essayist and writer of short
stories, and McCook as a great naturalist.

The minister will find the Britannica an excellent encyclopaedia of
comparative religion and of church history, with the newest and most
authoritative information on any subject in this field. For a brief
outline course in these topics let him read:

The article RELIGION (Vol. 23, p. 61; equivalent to 50 pages of this
Guide), by Dr. Joseph Estlin Carpenter, principal of Manchester College,
Oxford, and Robert R. Marett, fellow and tutor of Exeter College,
Oxford, author of the _Threshold of Religion_ and contributor to the
Britannica of articles on PRAYER, RITUAL, etc. This article is made up
of: a general introduction sketching the history of the study of
religions, especially in the last century, and concluding that “the
origin of religion can never be determined archaeologically or
historically; it must be sought conjecturally through psychology”; a
section on primitive religion, which is a remarkable summary of all that
is known of this subject; and a section on the higher religions which
discusses developments of animism, transition to polytheism, polytheism,
the order of nature (a half-way stage to monotheism), monotheism,
classification of religions, revelation, ethics and eschatology and
bibliography.

Another class of articles comprises ANCESTOR WORSHIP, ANIMAL WORSHIP,
ANIMISM, FETISHISM, FOLKLORE, MAGIC, MYTHOLOGY, PRAYER, RITUAL,
SACRIFICE, SERPENT-WORSHIP, TOTEMISM and TREE-WORSHIP, written by such
authorities as N. W. Thomas, author of _Kinship and Marriage in
Australia_, etc., Andrew Lang, Stanley Arthur Cooke and R. R. Marett.

Certain primitive religions are separately treated, as in the article
INDIANS, NORTH AMERICAN (Vol. 14, especially pages 471–473), by A. F.
Chamberlain, assistant professor of anthropology, Clark University,
Worcester; in the article AUSTRALIA (Vol. 2, especially p. 957); in the
article _Hawaii_ (Vol. 13, pages 87, 88).

On higher religions there are the following separate articles (among
many):

BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN RELIGION, by Morris Jastrow of the University of
Pennsylvania; and the articles ANAI, ISHTAR, EA, MARDUK, ASSUR and
GILGAMESH,—all by the same author and all of particular value as
throwing sidelights on Hebrew Religion.

EGYPT (Vol. 9, pp. 48–56), by Allan H. Gardiner, editor of the _New_
(Berlin) _Hieroglyphic Dictionary_.

HEBREW RELIGION (Vol. 13, p. 176; equivalent to 40 pages of this Guide),
by Dr. Owen Charles Whitehouse, professor of Hebrew, Cheshunt College,
Cambridge; and the articles _Hebrew Literature_, _Jews_, etc.

BRAHMANISM (Vol. 4, p. 381) and HINDUISM (Vol. 13, p. 501), by Julius
Eggeling, Professor of Sanskrit, Edinburgh.

BUDDHISM, BUDDHA and LAMAISM, by T. W. Rhys Davids, author of _Buddhist
India_, etc.

CONFUCIUS, by James Legge, author of _The Religions of China_.

SIKHISM, by Max Macauliffe, whose book _The Sikh Religion_ is accepted
by the Sikhs as authoritative.

ZOROASTER, by Karl Geldner, professor at Marburg, and the article
PARSEES.

MAHOMMEDAN RELIGION (Vol. 17, p. 417; equivalent to 45 pages in this
Guide), by G. W. Thatcher, warden of Camden College, Sydney.

MAHOMET, by D. S. Margoliouth, Laudian professor of Arabic, Oxford;
MAHOMMEDAN INSTITUTIONS and MAHOMMEDAN LAWS, by D. S. Macdonald,
professor of Semitic languages, Hartford Theological Seminary.

BÁBIISM, by E. G. Browne, professor of Arabic, Cambridge, and author of
_History of the Báb_.

GREEK RELIGION (Vol. 12, p. 527), by L. R. Farnell, fellow of Exeter
College, Oxford, author of _Cults of the Greek States_; and such
articles as DEMETER, HECATE, HERA, HERMES, HESTIA, NIKE, PHOEBUS, THEMIS
and ZEUS.

ROMAN RELIGION (Vol. 23, p. 577), by Cyril Bailey, fellow of Balliol
College, Oxford, and author of _The Religion of Ancient Rome_; and such
articles as ANNA PERENNA, ARVAL BROTHERS, BONA DEA, CONCORDIA, FAMA,
FAUNUS, JUNO and JUPITER; and the valuable articles on Eastern cults in
Rome, GREAT MOTHER OF THE GODS, ATTIS, MITHRAS, etc., by Professor Grant
Showerman of the University of Wisconsin.

CHRISTIANITY (Vol. 6, p. 280; equivalent to 35 pages of this Guide), by
G. W. Knox, professor of philosophy and history of religion, Union
Theological Seminary, New York; JESUS CHRIST (Vol. 15, p. 348;
equivalent to 35 pages of this Guide), by the Very Rev. Joseph Armitage
Robinson, Dean of Westminster; GOSPEL (Vol. 12, p. 265), by Rev. V. H.
Stanton, Ely professor of divinity, Cambridge; articles on the separate
gospels; PAUL THE APOSTLE (Vol. 20, p. 938), by the Rev. James Vernon
Bartlett, professor of church history, Mansfield College, Oxford.

ON CHURCH HISTORY there is an excellent key article in volume 6 (p. 331;
equivalent to 45 pages of this Guide). It begins with an outline of the
work of the great church historians and divides the subject into three
parts: _first_, up to 590 B.C.,—this part and the general introduction
are by A. C. McGiffert, professor of church history in Union Theological
Seminary, New York City; _second_, the Church in the Middle Ages, by
Albert Hauck, professor of church history at Leipzig; and The Modern
Church, by W. Alison Phillips, author of _Modern Europe_. This sketch
may be filled in by reference to the following articles (among many):

 ABYSSINIAN CHURCH
 ARMENIAN CHURCH
 ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH
 PAPACY
 ORTHODOX EASTERN CHURCH
 REFORMATION
 ENGLAND, CHURCH OF
 IRELAND, CHURCH OF SCOTLAND, CHURCH OF
 SCOTLAND, EPISCOPAL CHURCH IN
 LUTHERANS
 BAPTISTS
 PRESBYTERIANISM
 CAMERONIANS
 CONGREGATIONALISM
 METHODISM
 FRIENDS, SOCIETY OF
 CALVINISTIC METHODISTS
 DISCIPLES OF CHRIST
 GERMAN BAPTIST BRETHREN
 MENNONITES
 MORAVIAN BRETHREN
 DOUKHOBORS
 GERMAN CATHOLICS
 OLD CATHOLICS
 UNITED BRETHREN
 UNITED PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH

A brief course in theology and dogma is contained in the following
articles:

THEOLOGY (Vol. 26, p. 772; equivalent to 45 pages in this Guide), by the
Rev. Dr. Robert Mackintosh of Lancashire Independent College,
Manchester.

 ATONEMENT
 BAPTISM
 CONFESSION
 CONFIRMATION
 CONVERSION
 DOGMATIC THEOLOGY
 ESCHATOLOGY
 EUCHARIST
 EXCOMMUNICATION
 GRACE
 IMMACULATE CONCEPTION
 INFALLIBILITY
 INSPIRATION
 PENANCE
 PREDESTINATION
 PURGATORY
 SIN
 TRANSUBSTANTIATION
 WORSHIP

On Religious Orders:

 ABBEY
 FRIARS
 MONASTICISM
 MONK
 NUN
 SISTERHOODS

and see also the names of different orders and hundreds of biographical
articles on saints and heretics, preachers and theologians.

The following alphabetical list includes only a part of the articles in
the Britannica on religious topics; but it will serve to show the value
of the book to a clergyman in his own field:

 Abbess
 Abbey
 Abbot
 Abbreviators
 Abecedarians
 Abgar
 Ablution
 Abrahamites
 Absolution
 Abstemii
 Abyssinian Church
 Acephali
 Acerra
 Acoemeti
 Acolyte
 Adamites
 Adiaphorists
 Adoptianism
 Advent
 Adventists, Second
 Advocatus Diaboli
 Agape
 Agapemonites
 Agapetae
 Agapetus
 Agnoetae
 Agnosticism
 Agnus Dei
 Agrapha
 Alb
 Albigenses
 Allah
 All Saints
 All Souls Day
 Allocution
 Almoner
 Almuce
 Altar
 Ambrosians
 Ambrosiaster
 Amen
 Amice
 Amora
 Ampulla
 Anabaptists
 Anathema
 Angel
 Angelus
 Anglican Communion
 Anglo-Israelite Theory
 Annates
 Annunciation
 Anthropomorphism
 Antichrist
 Antinomians
 Antitype
 Apocalypse, Knights of
 Apologetics
 Apostasy
 Apostle
 Apostolic Canons
 Apostolic Fathers
 Apostolical Constitutions
 Apostolici
 Apotactites
 Apotheosis
 Aquarii
 Arabici
 Archbishop
 Archdeacon
 Arches, Court of
 Archimandrite
 Archpriest
 Aristides, Apology of
 Arius
 Ark
 Armenian Church
 Artemon
 Asaph
 Ascension, Feast of
 Asceticism
 Ascitans
 Ash-Wednesday
 Asperges
 Assassins
 Assumption, Feast of
 Asterius of Cappadocia
 Atheism
 Athos, Mount
 Atonement
 Attrition
 Augsburg, Confession of
 Augustinians
 Augustinians Canons
 Augustinian Hermits
 Autocephalous
 Auto da Fé
 Auxentius of Cappadocia
 Azan
 Azymites
 Bábiism
 Babylonian Captivity
 Bagimond’s Roll
 Bairam
 Bambino, Il
 Bangorian Controversy
 Baphomet
 Baptism
 Baptists
 Basel, Confession of
 Basel, Council of
 Basilian Monks
 Beatification
 Beguines
 Benedictines
 Benediction
 Benedictus
 Bethlehemites
 Bible Christians
 Bidding-Prayer
 Biretta
 Bishop
 Black Veil
 Bogomils
 Bollandists
 Boy’s Brigade
 Breviary
 Bridgebuilding Brotherhood
 Bridgittines
 Brothers of Common Life
 Cadi
 Calf, The Golden
 Calvary
 Calvinistic Ministers
 Camaldulians
 Cameronians
 Candlemas
 Canon
 Canoness
 Canon Law
 Canonization
 Capuchins
 Cardinal
 Carmathians
 Carmelites
 Carnival
 Carthage, Synods of
 Carthusians
 Cassock
 Catechism
 Catechumen
 Cathars
 Catholic
 Catholic Apostolic Church
 Celestines
 Celibacy
 Cenobites
 Cerdonians
 Chalcedon, Council of
 Chaldee
 Chalice
 Chambre Ardente
 Chant
 Chantry
 Chapel
 Chapter
 Chaplain
 Chasuble
 Chiliasm
 Chimere
 Chrism
 Christ
 Christadelphians
 Christian Catholic Church
 Christian Connection
 Christian Endeavour Societies
 Christianity
 Christian Science
 Christmas
 Church
 Church Army
 Church Congress
 Church History
 Churching of Women
 Churchwarden
 Ciborium
 Cistercians
 Clares, Poor
 Clergy
 Clerk
 Clementine Literature
 Cluny
 Cohen
 Commendation
 Common Order, Book of
 Conclave
 Concord, Book of
 Concordat
 Confession
 Confessional
 Confessor
 Confirmation
 Confirmation of Bishops
 Congregation
 Congregationalism
 Consistory
 Consistory Courts
 Constance, Council of
 Constantinople, Councils of
 Consuetudinary
 Convent
 Conversion
 Convocation
 Cope
 Copts
 Corban
 Corporal
 Corpus Christi, Feast of
 Council
 Cowl
 Cowley Fathers
 Creatianism and Traducianism
 Credence
 Creeds
 Cross and Crucifixion
 Crozier
 Culdees
 Curia Romana
 Curate
 Cyprus, Church of
 Dalmatic
 Davidists
 Deacon
 Deaconess
 Dean
 Decretals
 Dedication
 Deism
 Dervish
 Devil
 Didache, The
 Diocese
 Diognetus, Epistle to
 Dionysius Areopagiticus
 Diptych
 Dirge
 Disciples of Christ
 Dispensation
 Dissenter
 Docetae
 Dogma
 Dogmatic Theology
 Dominicans
 Donation of Constantine
 Donatists
 Dort, Synod of
 Dossal
 Doukhobors
 Doxology
 Easter
 Ebionites
 Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
 Ecclesiastical Commissioners
 Elder
 Elvira, Synod of
 Ember Days
 Encyclical
 Energia
 England, Church of
 Enthusiasm
 Ephesus, Council of
 Ephod
 Epiphany, Feast of
 Episcopacy
 Eschatology
 Essenes
 Establishment
 Eucharist
 Evangelical Alliance
 Evangelical Association
 Evangelical Church Conference
 Evangelical Union
 Exarch
 Excommunication
 Exorcist
 Extreme Unction
 Fakir
 Faldstool
 Familists
 Fasting
 Fathers of the Church
 Feasts and Festivals
 Febronianism
 Ferrara-Florence, Council of
 Flagellants
 Font
 Franciscans
 Frankincense
 Fraticelli
 Free Baptists, or Freewill Baptists
 Free Church of England
 Free Church of Scotland
 Free Church Federation
 Friars
 Friends, Society of
 Gallicanism
 Gaon
 German Baptist Brethren, or German Brethren (U. S. A.)
 German Catholics
 German Evangelical Synod of North America
 Ghazi
 Giaour
 Glasites
 Glory
 Gnosticism
 Golden Rose
 Good Friday
 Grace
 Gradual
 Grandmontines
 Great Awakening
 Gustavus Adolphus Union
 Habdala
 Haggada
 Hagiology
 Hajj
 Halakha
 Halfway Covenant
 Halisah
 Hallel
 Hanukkah
 Haptara
 Harem
 Hebrew Religion
 Heidelberg Catechism
 Helvetic Confessions
 Hemerobaptists
 Heresy
 Hermas, Shepherd of
 Hermeneutics
 Hermit
 Hesychasts
 Hierarchy
 Hieronymites
 High Place
 Hippolytus, The Canons of
 Holy
 Holy Water
 Holy Week
 Homiletics
 Homily
 Hospice
 Houri
 Hours, Canonical
 Housel
 Humanitarians
 Humiliati
 Hussites
 Hymns
 Hypostasis
 Iblis
 Icon
 Iconoclasts
 Ignorantines
 Illuminati
 Image
 Imam
 Imitation of Christ, The
 Immaculate Conception
 Immortality
 In Coena Domini
 Incumbent
 Independents
 Index Librorum Prohibitorum
 Indulgence
 Indult
 Infallibility
 Innocents’ Day
 Inquisition, The
 Inspiration
 Installation
 Institutional Church
 Interim
 Interdict
 Investiture
 Ireland, Church of
 Islam
 Jacobite Church
 Jansenism
 Jehovah
 Jerahmeel
 Jerusalem, Synod of
 Jesuati
 Jesuits
 Jesus Christ
 Jews
 Jihad
 Jubilee, Year
 Jubilee, Year of
 Ka’ba
 Kabbalah
 Kermesse
 Keswick Convention
 Kismet
 Koran
 Koreshan Ecclesia, The
 Kosher or Kasher
 Kyrie
 Labour Church, The
 Lamb
 Lambeth Conferences
 Laodicea, Synod of
 Lateran Councils
 Laud
 Lavabo
 Lay
 Laymen, Houses of
 Lazarites
 Lazarus, St., Order of
 Lection, Lectionary
 Lector
 Legate
 Lent
 Libellatici
 Liber Diurnus
 Liber Pontificalis
 Libertines
 Lights, Ceremonial use of
 Limbus
 Limina Apostolorum
 Lincoln Judgment, The
 Litany
 Liturgy
 Logia
 Low Churchman
 Low Sunday
 Lutheran
 Luther League
 Lyons, Councils of
 Mahdi
 Mahommedan Institutions
 Mahommedan Law
 Mahommedan Religion
 Mandaeans
 Manichaeism
 Maniple
 Manse
 Marabout
 Marburg, Colloquy of
 Marcion and the Marcionite Church
 Maronites
 Marprelate Controversy
 Martyr
 Martyrology
 Matins
 Maundy Thursday
 Maurists
 Mechitharists
 Melchites
 Mendicant Movement and Orders
 Mennonites
 Messiah
 Methodism
 Methodist New Connexion
 Metropolitan
 Midrash
 Millennium
 Minister
 Miracle
 Miserere
 Missal
 Missions
 Mitre
 Moderator
 Monarchianism
 Monasticism
 Monk
 Monophysites
 Monothelites
 Monsignor
 Monstrance
 Montanism
 Moravian Brethren
 Mormons
 Morse
 Mortuary
 Mozarab
 Muckers
 Mufti
 Mysticism
 Mythology
 Nazarenes
 Necrology
 Neo-Caesarea, Synod of
 Neophyte
 Nestorians
 New Jerusalem Church
 New Year’s Day
 Nicaea, Councils of
 Nîmes, Councils of
 Nonconformist
 Nosairis
 Novice
 Nun
 Nuncio
 Oblation
 Oecumenical
 Offertory
 Official
 Old Catholics
 Olivetans
 Ophites
 Oratory
 Oratory of St. Philip Neri, Congregation of the
 Order, Holy
 Orphrey
 Orthodox Eastern Church
 Pallium or Pall
 Palm Sunday
 Pantheism
 Party Royal
 Passion Week
 Pastoral Letter
 Pastoral Staff
 Patarenes
 Paten
 Patriarch
 Patron
 Paulicians
 Pax
 Pectoral
 Peculiar
 Peculiar People
 Pelagius
 Penance
 Penitential
 Penitentiary
 Pentecost
 Peter’s Pence
 Pew
 Philadelphians
 Phylactery
 Piarists
 Pietism
 Pilgrim
 Pilgrimage
 Pirke Aboth
 Pisa, Council of
 Pistoia, Synod of
 Plymouth Brethren
 Poissy, Colloquy of
 Pope
 Prayer, Book of Common
 Prayers for the Dead
 Preaching
 Prebendary
 Precentor
 Preconization
 Predestination
 Prelate
 Premonstratensians
 Presbyter
 Presbyterianism
 Primate
 Primitive Methodist Church
 Prior
 Procession
 Procession Path
 Prolocutor
 Proselyte
 Protestant
 Protestant Episcopal Church
 Protestantenverein
 Provision
 Purgatory
 Purim
 Puritanism
 Qaraites
 Quakers
 Quietism
 Rabbi
 Ramadan
 Ranters
 Rawendis
 Rector
 Recusant
 Reformed Churches
 Reformed Church in America (Dutch)
 Reformed Church in U. S. A. (German)
 Reformed Episcopal Church
 Regium Donum
 Regular
 Relics
 Religion
 Remonstrants
 Requiem
 Reredos
 Retable
 Reverend
 Ritual
 River Brethren
 Robber, Synod
 Rochet
 Rogation Days
 Roman Catholic Church
 Rood
 Rosary
 Rota, Court of
 Rubric
 Rum
 Sabbation
 Sabians
 Sacerdotalism
 Sacrament
 Sacramentals
 Sacramentarians
 Sacrarium
 Sacred Heart
 Saint John of Jerusalem
 Salvation Army
 Saragossa, Councils of
 Sardica, Council of
 Schism
 Scillitan Martyrs
 Scotland, Church of
 Scotland, Episcopal Church in
 Sect
 Secular
 See
 Sepulchre, Canons Regular of the Holy
 Servites
 Sexton
 Shakers
 Shiites
 Shrine
 Shrove Tuesday
 Silvestrines
 Sin
 Sion College
 Sisterhoods
 Skoptsi
 Soutane
 Spanish Reformed Church
 Sponsor
 Stations of the Cross
 Stigmatization
 Stole
 Suffragan
 Sufiism
 Sunnites
 Supererogation
 Superintendent
 Surplice
 Syllabus
 Symbol
 Synagogue
 Synagogue, United
 Synazarium
 Syncellus
 Synedrium
 Synod
 Talmud
 Tanna
 Targum
 Templars
 Tenebræ
 Tertiaries
 Testamentum Domini
 Tetragrammaton
 Teutonic Order
 Theism
 Theocracy
 Theology
 Theosophy
 Therapeutae
 Thurible
 Tiara
 Tithes
 Toledo, Councils of
 Tonsure
 Transubstantiation
 Trappists
 Trent, Council of
 Trinitarians
 Trinity Sunday
 Tunicle
 Ulema
 Ultramontanism
 Unction
 Unitarianism
 United Brethren in Christ
 United Free Church of Scotland
 United Methodist Church
 United Methodist Free Churches
 United Presbyterian Church
 Universalist Church
 Ursulines
 Vallombrosians
 Vatican, Council of
 Venerable
 Verger
 Vespers
 Vestments
 Viaticum
 Vicar
 Vienne, Council of
 Vigil
 Wahhabis
 Waldenses
 Wesleyan Methodist Church
 Westminister Synods
 Whitsunday, or Pentecost
 Worship
 Yezidis
 Young Men’s Christian Association
 Zenana




                              CHAPTER XXV
                 FOR PHYSICIANS, SURGEONS AND DENTISTS


The Britannica adds so largely to medical literature that, in outlining
the services which the work can render to those engaged in the
prevention and treatment of disease, it is desirable to define the
limits, rather than to insist upon the extent, of the plan adopted by
the technical assistant editors to whom the Editor-in-chief entrusted
the control of this important part of the undertaking. It is true that
the 644 medical articles, many of which might be described as books in
themselves, cover the whole field of anatomy, physiology, pathology,
therapeutics, surgery, pharmacology, medical education, medical
jurisprudence and medical biography. It is also true that the writers
who sign these articles are specialists of world-wide authority, and
that the total number of words and illustrations in these articles is as
great as would be required for a complete encyclopaedic hand-book of
medical science. But, notwithstanding all this wealth of matter and of
international collaboration, the Britannica does not profess to take the
place of the elementary working library in daily use by every
professional man. “Working library” is, however, an elastic term, and it
is used here to mean only the handbooks which constitute an irreducible
minimum, the few without which no beginner would venture to establish
himself in practice. Certain manuals are, to the practitioner, what
mathematical tables are to the engineer; and it is not the function of
the Britannica to duplicate what the practitioner already possesses, nor
yet, for example, to include a pharmacopoeia in a book used by the
general public.

[Sidenote: The Encyclopaedic Method]

On the other hand, no professional man restricts himself a day longer
than he must to the bare modicum of medical literature with which he may
have been forced, at first, to do his best; and when he can add
_anything_ to it, there is nothing he will use so often, or find so
helpful, as the Britannica. It may be well to define in general, its
professional uses, before dealing in detail with the articles included
in this course of reading.

(1) The system of technical collaboration is, in the Britannica,
organized and coördinated with a completeness which gives the medical
articles an authority and impartiality often lacking in isolated
treatises. The contributors were selected with a view to their
recognized ability only, whereas the publication of medical works is too
often an outcome of the writer’s ambitions, which, however legitimate
they may be, are no proof of his capacity.

(2) The Britannica articles were written for the sole purpose of being
used in their present form. A great part of current medical literature
originates in lectures to students, and retains too much of its first
form to be satisfactory to the professional man.

(3) The articles are all based upon an original and recent survey of
knowledge, and thus contain information which cannot be found in
reprints of standard medical works insufficiently brought up to date by
additions to earlier editions.

(4) In relation to statistics, to administrative and legislative
provisions regarding public health, to hospitals and other public
institutions, the broadly international character of the Britannica,
with its contributions from twenty different countries, gives a scope
which the private writer cannot attain.

(5) The great number of biographies of physicians, surgeons and men who
devote themselves exclusively to research, gives professional men access
to information which they cannot elsewhere obtain.

(6) Chemistry, bacteriology, general biology, botany, psychology and
other sciences allied to the more immediate field of medicine are fully
treated by specialists of the highest authority.

(7) Apart from the definite occupational diseases (fully discussed in
the Britannica), there is often a relation between the pathological
results of overwork and the routine of the patient’s business life.
Every branch of industry and commerce is treated in detail in the
Britannica, and the insight which the physician may thus gain will often
be of service to him.

(8) The Britannica not only enlarges the medical library of the
practitioner, but gives him, and the members of his family, the use of
_the only complete library of general information_.

[Sidenote: Scope of the Medical Section]

Specifically, the medical and surgical section of the Britannica
comprises 3 general articles, constituting broad systematic surveys of
the various provinces of the subject: 103 articles on anatomy and
physiology, which are partly surgical; 265 articles on pathology; 75 on
pharmacology; 21 on public health, in addition to the articles on
dentistry and on veterinary science, and 170 biographies. But this
comprehensive scheme does not by any means include all the material of
value to the medical man. The sister sciences of chemistry, physics,
biology, botany, zoology and psychology, have much to offer him. A
consultation of the list appended to this section will show how the
needs of the physician and surgeon are served by the Encyclopaedia. It
must suffice here to call attention briefly to some of the more
important contributions.

Taking up, first, the more general articles, there is MEDICINE (Vol. 18,
p. 41) containing about 35,000 words. This deals with the history and
development of the science. Dr. J. F. Payne of the Royal College of
Physicians, London, traces its history from the earliest known times to
the middle of the 19th century; and Sir T. C. Allbutt, professor of
physic in Cambridge University, completes this review with a section on
_Modern Progress_ (p. 55). Of high practical value is MEDICAL
JURISPRUDENCE or FORENSIC MEDICINE (Vol. 16, p. 25), by H. H.
Littlejohn, professor of forensic medicine, University of Edinburgh, and
T. A. Ingram. This deals solely with that branch of the science which
has to do with the application of medical knowledge to certain questions
of civil and criminal law. There are discussions of questions affecting
the civil or social rights of individuals, and injuries to the person,
the function of the physician in questions of mutilation, homicide,
infanticide, poisoning, etc. MEDICAL EDUCATION (Vol. 18, p. 23) is a
useful reference article by Sir John Batty Tuke, Dr. W. H. Howell, dean
of the medical faculty, Johns Hopkins University, and Dr. H. L.
Hennessy, furnishing data on the educational qualifications necessary to
the practice of medicine in Europe and America.

[Sidenote: Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology]

Dr. Frederick G. Parsons, vice-president of the Anatomical Society of
Great Britain and Ireland, lecturer on Anatomy at St. Thomas’s Hospital,
London, contributes the general article ANATOMY (Vol. 1, p. 920) which
goes deeply into its history, and has further sections on _Modern Human
Anatomy_ (Anthropotomy) and _Anatomy, Superficial_ and _Artistic_. This
noted authority also writes detailed and fully illustrated articles on
the anatomy and embryology of the BRAIN (Vol. 4, p. 392); HEART (Vol.
13, p. 129); EYE (Vol. 10, p. 91); EAR (Vol. 8, 791); OLFACTORY SYSTEM
(Vol. 20, p. 77); LYMPHATIC SYSTEM (Vol. 17, p. 166); VASCULAR SYSTEM
(Vol. 27, p. 926); NERVOUS SYSTEM (Vol. 19, p. 400); MUSCULAR SYSTEM
(Vol. 19, p. 51); REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM (Vol. 23, p. 129); and RESPIRATORY
SYSTEM (Vol. 23, p. 184) and on the SKELETON (Vol. 25, p. 169); SKIN AND
EXOSKELETON (Vol. 25, p. 188); SKULL (Vol. 25, p. 196); JOINTS (Vol. 15,
p. 483); and NERVE (Vol. 19, p. 394). Another valuable anatomical
article is CONNECTIVE TISSUES (Vol. 6, p. 958), by Dr. T. G. Brodie of
the University of Toronto. Prof. Adam Sedgwick writes a most excellent
general and historical account of EMBRYOLOGY (Vol. 9, p. 314); and Dr.
Hans A. E. Driesch of Heidelberg University adds to it a section
_Physiology of Development_ (p. 329), treating of the laws that govern
the development of the organism. The general article PHYSIOLOGY (Vol.
21, p. 554) is from the pen of the celebrated Prof. Max Verworn of the
University of Bonn, and to this there are closely linked, according to
the new plan of the Britannica, extensive and detailed accounts of the
physiology of the BRAIN (Vol. 4, p. 403); SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM (Vol. 26,
p. 287); SPINAL CORD (Vol. 25, p. 672); MUSCLE AND NERVE (Vol. 19, p.
44); RESPIRATORY SYSTEM (Vol. 23, p. 187); VASCULAR SYSTEM (Vol. 27, p.
929); ALIMENTARY CANAL (Vol. 1, p. 663); BLOOD (Vol. 4, p. 77), etc., by
noted specialists, including Dr. Charles S. Sherrington, professor of
physiology in the University of Liverpool, Dr. J. S. Haldane of Oxford
University, Dr. L. E. Hill, lecturer on physiology at the London
Hospital, Dr. P. Chalmers Mitchell, and Dr. T. G. Brodie of the
University of Toronto.

[Sidenote: Articles on Pathology]

Drs. D. J. Hamilton and Richard Muir are the authors of a brilliant
summary of the whole subject of PATHOLOGY (Vol. 20, p. 913) with over 50
illustrations, including coloured plates. The whole story of the
elevation of the science dealing with the theory and causation of
disease from a mere philosophical abstraction to one of the natural
sciences is admirably told. For the pathological details of various
diseases and groups of diseases the reader is referred to PARASITIC
DISEASES (Vol. 20, p. 770), fully illustrated, by Dr. G. Sims Woodhead,
professor of pathology, Cambridge University, one of the notable
contributions to the Britannica; METABOLIC DISEASES (Vol. 18, p. 195),
by Prof. D. N. Paton of Edinburgh University; DIGESTIVE ORGANS,
_Pathology_ (Vol. 8, p. 262) by Dr. A. L. Gillespie of Edinburgh and M.
Fisher; KIDNEY DISEASES (Vol. 15, p. 784), by Dr. J. R. Bradford of
University College Hospital, London, and Dr. Edmund Owen, the famous
English surgeon; BLADDER AND PROSTATE DISEASES (Vol. 4, p. 27); VENEREAL
DISEASES (Vol. 27, p. 983)—these two also by Dr. Owen; SKIN DISEASES
(Vol. 25, p. 190); INSANITY (Vol. 14, p. 597), by Sir John Batty Tuke,
president of the Neurological Society of the United Kingdom, and medical
director of the New Staughton Hall Asylum, Edinburgh, Dr. J. Macpherson,
and Dr. L. C. Bruce, author of _Studies in Clinical Psychiatry_,—for
this article the noted American specialist Dr. Frederick Peterson has
written a section on _Hospital Treatment_ of the insane; NEUROPATHOLOGY
(Vol. 19, p. 429), fully illustrated, by Dr. F. W. Mott, the
distinguished pathologist to the London County Asylums, and editor of
the _Archives of Neurology_; RESPIRATORY SYSTEM, _Pathology_ (Vol. 23,
p. 195), by Dr. Thomas Harris, author of numerous articles on this
subject, and Dr. H. L. Hennessy; BLOOD, _Pathology_ (Vol. 4, p. 82), by
Dr. G. L. Gulland of Edinburgh; HEART, DISEASE (Vol. 13, p. 132), by Sir
J. F. H. Broadbent, author of _Heart Disease and Aneurysm_, etc.; EYE,
_Diseases_ (Vol. 10, p. 94), by Dr. George A. Berry, hon. surgeon
oculist to his Majesty George V; VISION, _Errors of Refraction and
Accommodation_ (Vol. 28, p. 142), by Dr. Ernest Clark of the Central
London Ophthalmic Hospital; EAR, _Diseases of_ (Vol. 8, p. 794), by Dr.
E. C. Baber, late senior surgeon, Brighton and Sussex Throat and Ear
Hospital.

Dr. Harriet L. Hennessy is the author of GYNAECOLOGY (Vol. 12, p. 764).

For more specific details there is the complete list of articles on
different diseases and ailments under their common names. This includes
veterinary diseases, to which branch of medicine an admirable
introduction is furnished by VETERINARY SCIENCE (Vol. 28, p. 2), by Drs.
George Fleming and James MacQueen. In the articles on diseases there
will be found accounts of the latest methods of diagnosis and treatment,
as, for example, the Calmette eye-test in tubercular diseases, serum
treatment and its latest developments, vaccine therapy, etc.

[Sidenote: Therapeutics]

The general article THERAPEUTICS (Vol. 26, p. 793), by Dr. Sir Lauder
Brunton, consulting physician to St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, London,
author of _Modern Therapeutics_, etc., not only discusses both rational
and empirical therapeutics, but, taking up the different parts of the
body considers in detail the therapeutic measures most commonly employed
in the treatment of disease. The subjects of ELECTROTHERAPEUTICS (Vol.
9, p. 249); BATHS (Vol. 3, p. 514); BALNEOTHERAPEUTICS (Vol. 3, p. 284);
HYDROPATHY (Vol. 14, p. 165); AEROTHERAPEUTICS (Vol. 1, p. 270); MASSAGE
(Vol. 17, p. 863) and X-RAY TREATMENT (Vol. 28, p. 887) have separate
articles devoted to them. The last is by Dr. H. L. Jones, clinical
lecturer on medical electricity at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, London.

In connection with the subject of therapeutics, mention must be made of
PHARMACOLOGY (Vol. 21, p. 347), by Professor Stockman of the University
of Glasgow, in which will be found an interesting history of drugs, and
a classification into 28 groups with a description of the effect of each
remedy. To this valuable material Dr. H. L. Hennessy has added a
section, _Terminology in Therapeutics_ (p. 352)—a general explanation of
the common names used in the classification of drugs. The list at the
end of this chapter indicates the separate articles on drugs and on
materials from which the principal drugs are obtained.

[Sidenote: Surgery]

Dr. Charles Creighton of King’s College, Cambridge, writes on the
history of SURGERY (Vol. 26, p. 125) and the famous English Surgeon, Dr.
Edmund Owen the section _Modern Practice of Surgery_ (p. 129) in which
are discussed antiseptic and aseptic surgery, drainage tubes, bloodless
operations, Röntgen rays, use of radium, etc. The article SURGICAL
INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES (Vol. 26, p. 132) is fully illustrated. Dr.
Owen also contributes articles on the surgery of the different organs,
the article BONE, _Diseases and Injuries_ (Vol. 4, p. 200) and many
accounts of diseases and disorders that come within the province of the
surgeon, such as APPENDICITIS (Vol. 2, p. 217); PERITONITIS (Vol. 21, p.
171); HERNIA (Vol. 13, p. 372); FISTULA (Vol. 10, p. 438); VARICOSE
VEINS (Vol. 27, p. 920), and HAEMORRHOIDS (Vol. 12, p. 805). Sir
Alexander R. Simpson, emeritus professor of midwifery and the diseases
of women and children, University of Edinburgh, writes on OBSTETRICS
(Vol. 19, p. 962); Dr. Louis Courtauld, formerly research scholar,
Middlesex Hospital Cancer Laboratories, on TUMOUR (Vol. 27, p. 370); Dr.
Arthur Shadwell, of the Epidemiological Society, on CANCER, with a
special account of cancer research; and H. C. Crouch, teacher of
anaesthetics at St. Thomas’s Hospital, London, on ANAESTHESIA AND
ANAESTHETICS (Vol. 1, p. 907).

[Sidenote: Medical Biographies]

A most interesting, unusual and instructive course of reading on the
history and development of medicine may be based on the biographical
articles alone. In AESCULAPIUS (Vol. 1, p. 276) we learn how the gods of
Greece effected cures. The life story of HIPPOCRATES (Vol. 13, p. 518)
is worthy of note, for the “medical art as we now practice it, the
character of the physician as we now understand it,” both date from him.
For information about the theory that disease originated from an
irregular or inharmonious motion of the body corpuscles we turn to
ASCLEPIADES (Vol. 2, p. 722). An account of the man “out of whom the
greater part of medicine has flowed” is found in GALEN (Vol. 11, p.
398). The biography of the great Arab physician and philosopher AVICENNA
(Vol. 3, p. 62) should not be overlooked, nor the story of the revolt of
PARACELSUS (Vol. 20, p. 749). Important and interesting, too, are the
biographies of HARVEY, WILLIAM (Vol. 13, p. 42); SYDENHAM, THOMAS (Vol.
26, p. 277), the father of English medicine, and HALLER, A. VON (Vol.
12, p. 855), whose work marks the beginning of modern physiology. The
work of MORGAGNI (Vol. 18, p. 831) in pathological anatomy marks an
epoch in medicine, and the description in CULLEN, WILLIAM (Vol. 7, p.
616) of his new doctrine of “irritability” possesses a distinct
interest. The accounts of JENNER, EDWARD (Vol. 15, p. 319), HUNTER, JOHN
(Vol. 13, p. 939) and HAHNEMANN, S.C.F. (Vol. 12, p. 819) describe
momentous events in the history of medicine at the close of the 18th
century, while among the great names of the 19th will be found the
chemist PASTEUR (Vol. 20, p. 892), KOCH, ROBERT (Vol. 15, p. 885),
LISTER (Vol. 16, p. 777) and VIRCHOW, RUDOLF (Vol. 28, p. 110).

[Sidenote: The Allied Sciences]

It has already been noted that the Britannica will prove an invaluable
help to medical specialists in fields of knowledge other than their own.
The regret is often expressed by physicians that it is not easy for them
to study subjects outside their profession, even when these are closely
connected with their work. It is, unfortunately, only too true, that
material for such study is not readily available. But with so complete a
work of reference at his disposal, and with its highly authentic
information skillfully compressed into reasonable space, the medical man
now enjoys a magnificent opportunity to obtain a full acquaintance with
many subjects that he knows will assist him in the work.

It would be impossible to name all the articles here, but the
alphabetical list at the end of this chapter includes them, and the
attention of the physician and surgeon is directed to BACTERIOLOGY (Vol.
3, p. 156), by the late Prof. H. M. Ward of Cambridge and Prof. V. H.
Blackman of the University of Leeds, and especially the section
_Pathological Importance_ (p. 171), which Prof. Robert Muir of Glasgow
University has written; BIOLOGY (Vol. 3, p. 954), a classic article by
the late Professor Huxley, revised and brought up-to-date by Dr. P.
Chalmers Mitchell; HEREDITY (Vol. 13, p. 350), also by Dr. Mitchell;
MENDELISM (Vol. 18, p. 115), a brilliant study of the foundations of an
exact knowledge of the physiological process of heredity, by Prof. R. C.
Punnett of Cambridge; EVOLUTION (Vol. 10, p. 22) and LONGEVITY (Vol. 16,
p. 974), both by Dr. Mitchell; NUTRITION (Vol. 19, p. 921), by Prof. D.
N. Paton and Dr. E. P. Cathcart of Glasgow University; DIETETICS (Vol.
8, p. 214), by the world-famous authority on this subject, the late
Prof. W. O. Atwater, and R. D. Milner, formerly of the U. S. Dept, of
Agriculture; VEGETARIANISM (Vol. 27, p. 967), by Dr. Josiah Oldfield,
senior physician to the Lady Margaret Fruitarian Hospital, Bromley;
CLIMATE _in the Treatment of Disease_ (Vol. 6, p. 526); ACCLIMATIZATION
(Vol. 1, p. 114), by the renowned scientist, Dr. A. Russel Wallace; a
very complete and up-to-date article on VIVISECTION (Vol. 28, p. 153),
by Dr. Stephen Paget; PSYCHOLOGY (Vol. 22, p. 547), by Prof. James Ward
of Cambridge; PSYCHICAL RESEARCH (Vol. 22, p. 544), by Andrew Lang,
which is the key to a series of 25 remarkably interesting articles
covering the entire subject; HYPNOTISM (Vol. 14, p. 201); FAITH HEALING
(Vol. 10, p. 135); SUGGESTION (Vol. 26, p. 48); PHRENOLOGY (Vol. 21, p.
534), by Professor Macalister of Cambridge; TEMPERANCE (Vol. 26, p.
578), by Dr. Arthur Shadwell; MICROSCOPE (Vol. 18, p. 392); BLINDNESS,
_Causes and Prevention_ (Vol. 4, p. 60), by Sir Francis J. Cambell,
principal Royal Normal College for the Blind, London; DEAF AND DUMB
(Vol. 7, p. 880), by Rev. A. H. Payne, formerly of the National Deaf
Mute College, Washington.

The subject of DENTISTRY (Vol. 8, p. 50) is covered by the highest
American authority, Dr. Edward C. Kirk, of the University of
Pennsylvania, and a full account of the anatomy of the teeth will be
found under TEETH (Vol. 26, p. 499), by Dr. F. G. Parsons. It is,
however, in connection with bacteriology, chemistry, metallurgy,
mechanics and other subjects with which the dentist is concerned, rather
than in connection with the technics of his profession, that he will
desire to make use of the Britannica.


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL
      INTEREST AND IMPORTANCE TO MEMBERS OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION

 Abano, Pietro d’.
 Abattoir
 Abdomen
 Abercrombie, J.
 Abercromby, D.
 Abercromby, P.
 Abernethy, J.
 Abortion
 Abscess
 Abscission
 Abu-l-qasim
 Acclimatization
 Acetic Acid
 Ackermann, J. C. G.
 Acland, Sir H. W.
 Acne
 Aconite
 Acromegaly
 Acron
 Actinomycosis
 Acupressure
 Acupuncture
 Adam’s Apple
 Addison’s Disease
 Adenoids
 Adolescence
 Adulteration
 Aegineta, Paulus
 Aerotherapeutics
 Aesculapius
 Aetius
 Agnew, David Hayes
 Ague
 Ala
 Albumin, or Albumen
 Albuminuria
 Alcohol
 Aldehydes
 Alexander of Tralles
 Alienist
 Alimentary Canal
 Aloe
 Alum
 Amaurosis
 Ambulance
 Amman, J. C.
 Amman, Paul
 Ammonia
 Amuck, Running
 Amyl Nitrite
 Anabolism
 Anaemia
 Anaesthesia and Anaesthetics
 Anatomy
 Anderson, Elizabeth G.
 Anel, Dominique
 Aneurysm, or Aneurism
 Angina Pectoris
 Animal Heat
 Anise
 Ankle
 Ankylosis
 Ankylostomiasis
 Anodyne
 Anthrax
 Antipyrine
 Antiseptics
 Aphasia
 Aphemia
 Apnoea
 Aponeurosis
 Apophysis
 Apoplexy
 Apothecary
 Appendicitis
 Apyrexia
 Araroba Powder
 Aretaeus
 Arm
 Arnica
 Arnott, Neil
 Arrowroot
 Arsenic
 Arteries
 Arthritis
 Articulation
 Arytenoid
 Asafetida
 Ascites
 Asclepiades
 Aselli, or Asselio, Gasparo
 Asphyxia
 Asthma
 Astruc, Jean
 Athetosis
 Athletic Sports
 Atrophy
 Aurelianus Caelius
 Auscultation
 Autopsy
 Avenzoar
 Baby-farming
 Bacteriology
 Baldinger, E. G.
 Baldness
 Balneotherapeutics
 Balsam
 Barthez, P. J.
 Bartholinus, Gaspard
 Baths
 Beddoes, Thomas
 Bedlam, or Bethelem Hospital
 Bedsore
 Bell, Sir Charles
 Bell, John
 Belladonna
 Bellini, Lorenzo
 Bence-Jones, Henry
 Bennett, John Hughes
 Benzoic Acid
 Benzoin
 Beri-Beri
 Bernard, Claude
 Bert, P.
 Bhang
 Bibirine
 Bichat, M. F. X.
 Bilharziosis
 Billroth, A. C. T.
 Biology
 Bismuth
 Blackwater Fever
 Bladder
 Bladder and Prostate Diseases
 Blane, Sir Gilbert
 Blindness
 Blister
 Blood
 Blood-letting
 Boerhaave, Hermann
 Boil
 Bone
 Borax
 Borelli, G. A.
 Boric, or Boracic Acid
 Bow-leg
 Boyer, Alexis
 Brain
 Brasdor, Pierre
 Breast
 Bright’s Disease
 Brocklesby, Richard
 Brodie, Sir B. C.
 Bromine
 Bronchiectasis
 Bronchitis
 Bronchotomy
 Broussais, F. J. V.
 Brown, John
 Brown-Séquard, C. E.
 Bunion
 Burdon-Sanderson, Sir John S.
 Burns and Scalds
 Busk, George
 Cabanis, P. J. G.
 Caesarean Section
 Caffeine
 Caisson Disease
 Cajuput Oil
 Calabar Bean
 Caldani, L. M. A.
 Calomel
 Camphors
 Cancer, or Carcinoma
 Cantharides
 Capsicum
 Carbolic Acid, or Phenol
 Carbonic Acid
 Carbuncle
 Cartilage
 Carus, K. G.
 Castor Oil
 Catabolism
 Catalepsy
 Catarrh
 Catechu
 Caul
 Caustic
 Cephalic Index
 Chadwick, Sir Edwin
 Chamomile
 Charcot, Jean Martin
 Charity and Charities
 Chemistry
 Cheselden, William
 Chicken-pox
 Chilblains
 Chirurgeon
 Chloral
 Chlorates
 Chloroform
 Cholera
 Christison, Sir Robert
 Cinchona
 Clark, Sir Andrew
 Clark, Sir James
 Clay, Charles
 Cleft Palate and Hare-Lip
 Climacteric
 Climate
 Clinic
 Clot, A. B.
 Club-foot
 Coal-tar
 Coca, or Cuca
 Cocaine
 Cock, Edward
 Cod-Liver Oil
 Coelom and Serous Membranes
 Colchicum
 Colic
 Collodion
 Colon
 Colt’s Foot
 Coma
 Combe, Andrew
 Connective Tissues
 Connor, Bernard
 Conolly, John
 Constipation
 Convulsions
 Cooper, Sir Astley P.
 Copaiba
 Corn
 Cornaro, Luigi
 Coroner
 Corpulence
 Corrosive Sublimate
 Craniometry
 Cramp
 Crèche
 Cremation
 Creosote
 Cretinism
 Croton Oil
 Croup
 Cruveilhier, Jean
 Cubebs
 Cullen, William
 Cupping
 Curling, T. B.
 Dandelion
 Death
 Delirium
 Dengue
 Dentistry
 Desault, P. J.
 Dextrine
 Diabetes
 Diaphoretics
 Diaphragm
 Diarrhoea
 Dietary
 Dietetics
 Digestive Organs
 Digitalis
 Dilatation
 Dill
 Diphtheria
 Dipsomania
 Disinfectants
 Diuretics
 Dropsy
 Drowning and Life Saving
 Drug
 Drunkenness
 DuBois-Reymond, Emil
 Duchenne, G. B. A.
 Ductless Glands
 Dupuytren, G., baron
 Dwarf
 Dysentery
 Dyspepsia
 Ear
 Eczema
 Elaterium
 Elbow
 Electrocution
 Electrotherapeutics
 Elephantiasis
 Elixir
 Elliotson, John
 Embalming
 Embryology
 Emetics
 Emphysema
 Empyema
 Enteritis
 Epilepsy
 Epistaxis
 Epithelial, Endothelial and Glandular Tissues
 Epsom Salts
 Equilibrium
 Ergot, or Spurred Rye
 Erichsen, Sir John E.
 Erysipelas
 Esmarch, J. F. A. von
 Esquirol, J. E. D.
 Ether
 Ethyl Chloride
 Ettmüller, Michael
 Eucalyptus
 Eugenics
 Eugenol
 Euphorbium
 Evolution
 Excretion
 Extract
 Eye
 Fabricius, Hieronymus
 Face
 Faith Healing
 Fallopius, or Fallopio, Gabriello
 Fusel Oil
 Fauces
 Favus
 Fayrer, Sir Joseph
 Fergusson, Sir William
 Fermentation
 Fernel, Jean François
 Feuchtersleben, E. von
 Fever
 Fibrin
 Filariasis
 Finger
 Fistula
 Flint, Austin
 Floyer, Sir John
 Food
 Foot
 Foot-and-mouth Disease
 Forbes, Sir John
 Formalin, or Formaldehyde
 Formic Acid
 Forster, John C.
 Foster, Sir Michael
 Fothergill, John
 Foundling Hospitals
 Fracastoro, Girolamo
 Freind, John
 Friendly Societies
 Frostbite
 Fructose, or Fruit Sugar
 Fumigation
 Galangal
 Galbanum
 Galen
 Gall
 Gallic Acid
 Galvani, Luigi
 Gamboge
 Gangrene
 Gastric Ulcer
 Gastritis
 Gelsemium
 Giant
 Ginseng
 Glanders, or Farcy
 Glauber’s Salt
 Glycerin, or Glycerol
 Goitre
 Good, John Mason
 Goodsir, John
 Gout
 Gräfe, Albrecht von
 Gräfe, K. F. von
 Graham, Sylvester
 Guaco, Huaco, or Guao
 Guaiacum
 Guarana
 Guinea-worm
 Gull, Sir William W.
 Gymnastics
 Gynaecology
 Haematocele
 Haemophilia
 Haemorrhage
 Haemorrhoids
 Hahnemann, S. C. F.
 Hall, Marshall
 Haller, Albrecht von
 Hallucination
 Hammer-toe
 Hand
 Hart, Earnest Abraham
 Hartshorn, Spirits of
 Harvey, William
 Hashish
 Hawkins, Caesar Henry
 Hay Fever
 Head
 Health
 Heart
 Heberden, William
 Heel
 Henle, F. G. J.
 Hernia
 Herpes
 Hewett, Sir Prescott G.
 Hilton, John
 Hinton, James
 Hip
 Hippocrates
 Hippuric Acid
 Hoffmann, Friedrich
 Holland, Sir Henry
 Homoeopathy
 Hop
 Horehound
 Hospital
 Hufeland, C. W.
 Humane Society, Royal
 Hunger and Thirst
 Hunter, John
 Hunter, William
 Hutchinson, Sir J.
 Hydrastine
 Hydrocele
 Hydrocephalus
 Hydrochloric Acid
 Hydropathy
 Hydrophobia, or Rabies
 Hygiene
 Hypertrophy
 Hypnotism
 Hypochondriasis
 Hysteria
 Iatrochemistry
 Ibn Usaibi’a
 Icthyosis
 Illegitimacy
 Imbecile
 Incubation and Incubators
 Infancy
 Influenza
 Insanity
 Insomnia
 Intestinal Obstruction
 Intestine
 Intoxication
 Iodine
 Iodoform
 Ipecacuanha
 Iron
 Israeli, Isaac ben Solomon
 Jaborandi
 Jalap
 Jaundice
 Jaw
 Jenner, Edward
 Jenner, Sir William
 Joints
 Kala-Azar
 Kámalá
 Kidney Diseases
 Kino
 Kitazato, Shibasaburo
 Knee
 Koch, Robert
 Kousso
 Lactic Acid
 Langenbeck, B. R. K. von
 Lanolin
 Largus, Scribonius
 Laryngitis
 Laudanum
 Lead Poisoning
 Leg
 Leontiasis Ossea
 Leprosy
 Lethargy
 Lichen
 Life
 Ligament
 Linacre, or Lynaker, Thomas
 Ling, Per Henrik
 Linseed
 Lip
 Liquorice
 Lister, Joseph Lister, Baron
 Liston, Robert
 Lithium
 Litmus
 Liver
 Lobe
 Lobelia
 Locomotor Ataxia
 Longevity
 Lumbago
 Lung
 Lupus
 Lycanthropy
 Lymphatic System
 Lymph and Lymph Formation
 MacCormac, Sir William
 Mackenzie, Sir Morell
 Magnesium
 Malaria
 Malta, or Mediterranean, Fever
 Mammary Gland
 Marshall, John
 Massage
 Matrix
 Mead, Richard
 Measles
 Medical Education
 Medical Jurisprudence
 Medicine
 Mendelism
 Ménière’s Disease
 Meningitis
 Mercury
 Mesmer, F. A.
 Metabolic Diseases
 Metabolism
 Microscope
 Midwife
 Milk
 Mineral Waters
 Mitchell, Silas Weir
 Monster
 Morphine
 Mortification
 Mott, Valentine
 Mouth and Salivary Glands
 Mumps
 Murrain
 Muscle and Nerve
 Muscular System
 Mushroom
 Mustard
 Mutilation
 Myelitis
 Myxoedema
 Naevus
 Narcotics
 Navel
 Necrosis
 Nepenthes
 Nerve
 Nervous System
 Nettlerash, or Urticaria
 Neuralgia
 Neurasthenia
 Neuritis
 Neuropathology
 Nicotine
 Nightingale, Florence
 Nitroglycerin
 Nose
 Nosology
 Nostalgia
 Nursing
 Nutrition
 Nux Vomica
 Obstetrics
 Oesophagus
 Officinal
 Oils
 Old-age Pensions
 Olfactory System
 Ophthalmology
 Opium
 Orfila, M. J. B.
 Osteology
 Ovariotomy
 Oxalic Acid
 Oxygen
 Ozone
 Paget, Sir James
 Pain
 Palate
 Pancreas
 Paracelsus
 Paraldehyde
 Paralysis, or Palsy
 Paranoia
 Parasitic Diseases
 Parasitism
 Paré, Ambroise
 Pasteur, Louis
 Pathology
 Pediculosis, or Phthiriasis
 Pellagra
 Pelvis
 Pemphigus
 Pennyroyal
 Pepper, William
 Peppermint
 Pepsin
 Peritonitis
 Perspiration
 Phagocytosis
 Pharmacology
 Pharmacopoeia
 Pharmacy
 Pharyngitis
 Pharynx
 Phenacetin
 Phlebitis
 Phosphorus
 Phrenology
 Phthisis
 Physiology
 Picrotoxin
 Pinel, Philippe
 Pinto
 Piperazin
 Pitcairne, Archibald
 Pityriasis Versicolor
 Placenta
 Plague
 Pleurisy, or Pleuritis
 Pleuro-pneumonia, or Lung-plague
 Pneumonia
 Podophyllin
 Poison
 Polypus
 Possession
 Potassium
 Pott, Percivall
 Poultice
 Pringle, Sir John
 Prognosis
 Protoplasm
 Pruritus
 Prussic Acid
 Psoriasis
 Psorospermiasis
 Psychical Research
 Psychology
 Ptomaine Poisoning
 Puberty
 Public Health, Law of
 Puerperal Fever
 Pulse
 Purpura
 Pyrocatechin
 Quain, Sir Richard
 Quarantine
 Quassia
 Quinine
 Quinsy
 Radcliffe, John
 Radioactivity
 Radium
 Raynaud’s Disease
 Relapsing Fever
 Reproductive System
 Resorcin
 Respiratory System
 Rhamnus Purshiana
 Rhatany, or Krameria Root
 Rheumatism
 Rheumatoid Arthritis
 Rhubarb
 Rickets
 Rinderpest
 Ringworm
 Rokitansky, C. von
 Röntgen Rays
 Rush, Benjamin
 Saccharin
 St. Vitus Dance, or Chorea
 Sal-ammoniac
 Salep
 Salicin, Salicinum
 Salicylic Acid
 Salt
 Sanatorium
 Sandalwood
 Sandarach
 Santonin
 Sarsaparilla
 Savory, Sir William S.
 Scabies, or Itch
 Scalp
 Scarlet Fever, or Scarlatina
 Sciatica
 Scrofula, or Struma
 Scurvy, or Scorbutus
 Sea-sickness
 Seborrhoea
 Semmelweiss, I. P.
 Senega
 Senna
 Sepsis
 Serenus, Sammonicus
 Sewerage
 Shock, or Collapse
 Shoulder
 Sibbald, Sir Robert
 Simon, Sir John
 Simpson, Sir James Y.
 Sinew
 Skeleton
 Skin and Exoskeleton
 Skin Diseases
 Skull
 Slaughter-house
 Sleep
 Sleeping-sickness
 Sloane, Sir Hans
 Smallpox
 Smith, T. S.
 Sneezing
 Sodium
 Somnambulism
 Soranus
 Spikenard, or Nard
 Spinal Cord
 Spirits
 Spleen
 Sprue
 Squill
 Stammering, or Stuttering
 Starvation
 Stethoscope
 Stomach
 Stramonium
 Strophanthus
 Strychnine
 Sugar
 Suggestion
 Suicide
 Sulphonal
 Sulphur
 Sumbul, or Sumbal
 Sunstroke
 Supra-renal Extract
 Surgery
 Surgical Instruments and Appliances
 Sweating-sickness
 Sweetbread
 Sydenham, Thomas
 Syme, James
 Sympathetic System
 Syncope
 Tagliacozzi, Gasparo
 Tannic Acid
 Tapeworms
 Tar
 Taraxacum
 Tartar
 Tartaric Acid
 Teeth
 Temperance
 Terpenes
 Tetanus
 Therapeutics
 Thompson, Sir Henry
 Thorax
 Throat
 Thymol
 Thyroid
 Tincture
 Tongue
 Tonsillitis
 Toxicology
 Tracheotomy
 Trachoma
 Trance
 Trichinosis
 Tuberculosis
 Tumour
 Typhoid Fever
 Typhus Fever
 Ulcer
 Upas
 Urea
 Urethane
 Uric Acid
 Urinary System
 Urotropin
 Vaccination
 Valerian
 Variation and Selection
 Varicose Veins
 Vascular System
 Vaseline
 Vegetarianism
 Veins
 Venereal Diseases
 Verdigris
 Veronal
 Veterinary Science
 Viburnum
 Vivisection
 Voice
 Wakley, Thomas
 Wart
 Water-supply
 Weights and Measures
 Wells, Sir Thomas S.
 Whitlow
 Whooping-cough
 Willis, Thomas
 Wilson, Sir W. J. E.
 Windpipe
 Wine
 Wintergreen
 Witch-hazel
 Wound
 Wrist
 Wry-neck
 X-Ray Treatment
 Yaws
 Yellow Fever
 Zinc
 Zymotic Diseases




                              CHAPTER XXVI
                              FOR LAWYERS


In the days when Marshall and Story, on the bench of the Supreme Court
at Washington, were listening to Webster’s thunder; when Chancellor Kent
was scrutinizing precedents in New York, and Rufus Choate quoting
Justinian at Salem, success at the bar depended upon elaborate rhetoric
and a close study of the Reports. To-day, sound advice is in greater
demand than brilliant oratory, and questions of fact are, as a rule,
more important and more perplexing than questions of law.

The Britannica is the one great Digest of Facts. Its articles cover all
scientific, industrial, commercial and financial subjects. Fifteen
hundred of the world’s foremost specialists, chosen from twenty
different countries, deal not only with all knowledge, but with the
practical application of knowledge in the laboratory, the machine shop,
in the mine, on the ship’s deck and in the ship’s engine-room, in the
railroad office and on the railroad line. Bankers and engineers,
builders and contractors, physicians and surgeons and manufacturers of
every kind describe the work which they have themselves successfully
done. They explain to the lawyer the details of his client’s own
business, which the client is almost always incapable of explaining.
They enable the lawyer to test his client’s knowledge and his client’s
good faith. They show the lawyer what he has to hope or to dread from
expert evidence.

[Sidenote: The Volumes as Used by Lawyers]

In a mining town in Alaska, where the workmen were mostly Servians, a
lawyer recently had an unusual case. The Servians had a church, which in
the absence of the Servian priest, was in the charge of a father or
“papa” of the Russian orthodox church, and he tried to exclude from
their church the entire congregation because they disobeyed him. The
lawyer brought into court the Encyclopaedia Britannica to prove the
independence of the Servian Church from the authority of the Russian
Church. The Britannica was recognized as an authority by the court, and
the Servian congregation won its suit for the use of its church
building.

A Buffalo lawyer in a recent letter to the publishers of the Britannica
told of his being retained in a case involving the qualities of
materials used in the construction of automatic car couplers. He read
many technical works to get information on this subject, but “the
article that to me was most instructive was that on IRON AND STEEL in
the Encyclopaedia Britannica.” He adds, “In my opinion the work is
invaluable to any person who desires the means of handy reference to,
and accurate information on, any topic.” Similar testimony from lawyers
all over the world to the usefulness of the Britannica could be adduced
in great volume.

A brief reference to the different parts of this Guide will show in a
general way the contents and value of the Britannica in the many fields
in which an attorney may need, in connection with the preparation of a
case, immediate and authoritative information on subjects not purely
legal.

But on legal topics, also, the lawyer or the law student will find much
valuable information.

[Sidenote: American Law]

He should read the stimulating and suggestive article on AMERICAN LAW
(Vol. 1, p. 828), by Simeon E. Baldwin, governor of Connecticut,
professor of constitutional and private international law at Yale, and
formerly chief justice of the Supreme Court of Errors, Connecticut.
Governor Baldwin’s article points out the general identity of origin of
American and English law, with the important exception of territory
formerly French or Spanish,—particularly Louisiana,—a point on which the
reader will find fuller information in the articles LOUISIANA (Vol. 17,
p. 57) and EDWARD LIVINGSTON (Vol. 16, p. 811). Besides he calls
attention to the fact that the state and not the nation is for the most
part the legislative unit and the legislative authority. And this leads
to a consideration of the great part played in American jurisprudence by
the Civil War and the consequent changes in the Federal Constitution,
especially the Fourteenth Amendment, which has been the basis of so many
recent cases in the Supreme Court and has “readjusted and reset the
whole system of the American law of personal rights” by transferring
final jurisdiction from state to Federal courts.

Within the Southern states the Reconstruction period affected local law
in various ways: by putting political power into the hands of outsiders
(“carpet baggers,” etc.), by the social revolution consequent on the
abolition of slavery, and by the commercial assimilation of the South to
the North.

Governor Baldwin points out that the judicial department has been made
partly administrative by the artificial distribution under most state
constitutions of governmental powers into executive, legislative and
judicial, overlooking the administrative, and making the courts the
interpreters of statutes and giving to them the power of deciding
whether or not statutes are constitutional.

That the police powers of the states are more and more liberally
interpreted by the Federal Supreme Court is an interesting tendency,
especially when the student remembers that in the last year or so
certain states (notably Washington, c. 74, _Laws_ 1911, Compensation of
Injured Workmen) have definitely stated the police power as the basis of
acts which the state supreme court might otherwise have declared
unconstitutional as depriving of property without due process of law.

The article on American law is supplemented:

(a) in a general way by the valuable contribution of James Bryce (author
of _The American Commonwealth_, and late British ambassador to the
United States) on the Constitution and Government of the United States
and of the states (Vol. 27, p. 646—an article which would fill about 50
pages of this Guide).

[Sidenote: State Statutes]

(b) more particularly, under the articles on the separate states (as
well as on Alaska, Hawaii, Philippines and Porto Rico), by the
description of the state or local constitution with an outline of
characteristic and peculiar statutes. For instance, in the article
ALABAMA (Vol. 1, p. 459), the first in the Britannica on a separate
state of the Union, there is a general sketch of the constitution and
government with particular attention to these points: term of judiciary,
6 years; legislative sessions, quadrennial; law against lobbying;
executive may not succeed himself; sheriffs whose prisoners are lynched
may be impeached; grandfather clause, practically disfranchising the
negro—with a summary of Giles _v._ Harris, 189 U. S. 474; Jim Crow law;
disfranchisement for vote-buying or selling; Australian ballot law;
anti-pass law; freight rebate law; homestead exemptions; wife’s earnings
separate property; women and child labour laws; peonage; liquor laws.

(c) by special articles, such as HOMESTEAD AND EXEMPTION LAWS (Vol. 13,
p. 639), ORIGINAL PACKAGE (Vol. 20, p. 273) and INTERSTATE COMMERCE
(Vol. 14, p. 711; equal to about 10 pages of this Guide), by Prof. Frank
A. Fetter of Princeton (formerly Cornell), which deal with purely
American legal topics.

(d) by legal sections in general economic articles, for instance: in
RAILWAYS, the section on _American Legislation_, by Prof. F. H. Dixon of
Dartmouth, author of _State Railroad Control_; in TRUSTS, by Prof. J. W.
Jenks, the great American authority on the subject; in EMPLOYERS’
LIABILITY; in TRADE UNIONS and in STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS, both by Carroll
D. Wright, late U. S. Commissioner of Labor; BANKRUPTCY, by Edward
Manson, author of _Law of Bankruptcy_; and in INSURANCE (Vol. 14,
especially p. 662 c).

(e) by general legal articles like: COMMON LAW; CRIMINAL LAW, by W. F.
Craies, editor of Archbold _On Criminal Pleading_; LIQUOR LAWS, by
Arthur Shadwell, author of _Drink, Temperance and Legislation_; MEDICAL
JURISPRUDENCE, by H. H. Littlejohn, professor of forensic medicine in
the University of Edinburgh; MILITARY LAW, by Sir John Scott, former
deputy judge-advocate-general, British Army; NAVIGATION LAWS, by James
Williams, of Lincoln College, Oxford; PRESS LAWS; SEAMEN, LAWS, RELATING
TO, etc.

and (f) by sections and paragraphs on American law in hundreds of
articles on legal topics—for list see below.

[Sidenote: Biographies of Lawyers]

The following list of American jurists does not include all American
lawyers about whom there are separate articles in the Britannica, but
will serve to suggest a brief course of biographical readings which the
lawyer could not duplicate even in a special and expensive work on the
American bar:

 SAMUEL SEWALL (Vol. 24, p. 733)
 JOHN RUTLEDGE (Vol. 23, p. 945)
 SAMUEL CHASE (Vol. 5, p. 956)
 FRANCIS DANA (Vol. 7, p. 792)
 JOHN LOWELL (Vol. 17, p. 76)
 OLIVER ELLSWORTH (Vol. 9, p. 294)
 JOHN JAY (Vol. 15, p. 294)
 ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON (Vol. 16, p. 812)
 LUTHER MARTIN (Vol. 17, p. 794)
 THEOPHILUS PARSONS (Vol. 20, p. 868)
 JOHN MARSHALL (Vol. 17, p. 770)
 EDMUND RANDOLPH (Vol. 22, p. 886)
 JAMES KENT (Vol. 15, p. 735)
 EDWARD LIVINGSTON (Vol. 16, p. 811)
 BUSHROD WASHINGTON (Vol. 28, p. 344)
 ROGER BROOKE TANEY (Vol. 26, p. 396)
 SAMUEL HOAR (Vol. 13, p. 542)
 HORACE BINNEY (Vol. 3, p. 949)
 JAMES WILSON (Vol. 28, p. 693)
 WILLIAM PINKNEY (Vol. 21, p. 627)
 LEMUEL SHAW (Vol. 24, p. 813)
 DANIEL WEBSTER (Vol. 28, p. 459)
 SIMON GREENLEAF (Vol. 12, p. 548)
 HENRY WHEATON (Vol. 28, p. 583)
 RICHARD RUSH (Vol. 23, p. 857)
 JOHN BOUVIER (Vol. 4, p. 336)
 JOSEPH STORY (Vol. 25, p. 969)
 LEVI WOODBURY (Vol. 28, p. 790)
 JAMES HALL (Vol. 12, p. 847)
 REVERDY JOHNSON (Vol. 15, p. 462)
 HUGH S. LEGARÉ (Vol. 16, p. 373)
 RUFUS CHOATE (Vol. 6, p. 258)
 BENJAMIN F. BUTLER (Vol. 4, p. 881)
 DAVID DUDLEY FIELD (Vol. 10, p. 321)
 S. P. CHASE (Vol. 5, p. 955)
 JOHN J. CRITTENDEN (Vol. 7, p. 471)
 HAMILTON FISH (Vol. 10, p. 427)
 BENJAMIN R. CURTIS (Vol. 7, p. 652)
 J. S. BLACK (Vol. 4, p. 18)
 JUDAH P. BENJAMIN (Vol. 3, p. 739)
 JOHN Y. MASON (Vol. 17, p. 840)
 GEORGE TICKNOR CURTIS (Vol. 7, p. 651)
 R. H. DANA (Vol. 7, p. 792)
 SAMUEL J. TILDEN (Vol. 26, p. 970)
 SAMUEL F. MILLER (Vol. 18, p. 464).
 STEPHEN J. FIELD (Vol. 10, p. 322)
 W. M. EVARTS (Vol. 10, p. 4)
 FRANCIS WHARTON (Vol. 28, p. 575)
 MORRISON R. WAITE (Vol. 28, p. 246)
 T. W. DWIGHT (Vol. 8, p. 741)
 E. J. PHELPS (Vol. 21, p. 363)
 STANLEY MATTHEWS (Vol. 17, p. 899)
 L. Q. C. LAMAR (Vol. 16, p. 100)
 C. C. LANGDELL (Vol. 16, p. 172)
 D. W. VOORHEES (Vol. 28, p. 211)
 T. F. BAYARD (Vol. 3, p. 554)
 HORACE GRAY (Vol. 12, p. 391)
 JOSEPH HODGES CHOATE (Vol. 6, p. 258)
 MELVILLE W. FULLER (Vol. 11, p. 296)
 WAYNE MACVEAGH (Vol. 17, p. 269)
 JOHN MARSHALL HARLAN (Vol. 12, p. 954)
 RICHARD OLNEY (Vol. 20, p. 91)
 CUSHMAN K. DAVIS (Vol. 7, p. 866)
 OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES (Vol. 13, p. 616)
 DAVID BENNETT HILL (Vol. 13, p. 464)
 ELIHU ROOT (Vol. 23, p. 711)
 PHILANDER C. KNOX (Vol. 15, p. 882)

Of great value to the student of law, as widening his scope, would be a
course of more general reading. This should include:

(a) the articles LAW, JURISPRUDENCE and COMPARATIVE JURISPRUDENCE, by
Paul Vinogradoff, Corpus professor of jurisprudence at Oxford.

(b) articles on national and other legal systems, such as

ENGLISH LAW, _History_, by the late Frederick W. Maitland, Downing
professor of English law at Cambridge.

ANGLO-SAXON LAW, by Paul Vinogradoff.

GERMANIC LAWS, EARLY, by Professor Christian Pfister, of the Sorbonne.

CODE NAPOLÉON, by Jean Paul Esmein, professor of law in the University
of Paris, and ROMAN LAW, probably one of the most remarkable articles in
the new edition and of the utmost importance (as in a less degree are
the articles CODE and CODE NAPOLÉON) to the student of civil law. It is
based on the well-known article contributed to the Ninth Edition of the
Britannica by James Muirhead, professor of civil law, Edinburgh; but the
article is actually the work of the reviser, Henry Goudy, regius
professor of civil law, Oxford, and it may well be called the best
present treatment of the subject. The article is a brief text-book in
itself, containing matter equivalent in length to nearly 200 pages of
this Guide. The treatment is historical, beginning with the almost
mythical regal period and throwing light on the laws before the XII
Tables, but this does not mean that the later period, legally more
important, is not treated with proper fullness so that the practical as
well as the theoretical is considered.

[Sidenote: Some Legal Systems]

Slightly remoter systems are the subjects of separate articles: SALIC
LAW, by Professor Pfister of the Sorbonne; BREHON LAWS, by Lawrence
Ginnell, M. P., author of a monograph on the subject; WELSH LAWS; an
elaborate article on the little-known subject GREEK LAW, by John Edwin
Sandys of Cambridge, author of _History of Classical Scholarship_;
INDIAN LAW, by Sir William Markby, reader in Indian Law at Oxford,
formerly judge of the High Court of Calcutta; MAHOMMEDAN LAW (a subject
no longer alien to the American because of the large number of
Mahommedans in the Philippines), by D. B. Macdonald, professor in
Hartford Theological Seminary, and author of _Development of Muslim
Theology_; and BABYLONIAN LAW (by C. H. W. Johns, Master of St.
Catharine’s, Cambridge, author of _The Oldest Code of Laws_, etc.),
containing a summary of the famous code of King Khammurabi.

The following list does not include the biographies of lawyers and is
not a complete list of all topics pertaining to law in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, but it will give some idea of the scope of the legal
department of the work.

 Abandonment
 Abatement
 Abdication
 Abduction
 Abettor
 Abeyance
 Abjuration
 Abode
 Abrogation
 Abscond
 Abstract of Title
 Acceptance
 Acceptilation
 Access
 Accession
 Accessory
 Accommodation Bill
 Accomplice
 Accord
 Accountant-General
 Accretion
 Accumulation
 Accusation
 Acknowledgment
 Act
 Action
 Act of Parliament
 Act of Petition
 Address, The
 Ademption
 Adjournment
 Adjudication
 Adjustment
 Administration
 Administrator
 Admiralty, High Court
 Admiralty Jurisdiction
 Admission
 Adoption
 Adscript
 Adultery
 Advancement
 Adventure
 Advocate
 Advocates, Faculty of
 Advowson
 Affidavit
 Affiliation
 Affinity
 Affray
 Affreightment
 Age
 Agent
 Agistment
 Agnates
 Alabama Arbitration
 Alderman
 Alias
 Alibi
 Alien
 Alienation
 Aliment
 Alimony
 Allegiance
 Alliance
 Allocatur
 Allodium
 Allonge
 Allotment
 Allowance
 Alluvion
 Ambiguity
 Amendment
 Amercement
 American Law
 Amicus Curiae
 Amnesty
 Amortization
 Analyst
 Ancient Lights
 Angary
 Anglo-Saxon Law
 Annates
 Annexation
 Annoy
 Answer
 Apology
 Appanage
 Apparitor
 Appeal
 Appearance
 Appointment, Power of
 Apportionment
 Apportionment Bill
 Appraiser
 Appropriation
 Appurtenances
 Aram, Eugene
 Arbitration
 Arbitration, International
 Arches, Court of
 Aristocracy
 Arraignment
 Array
 Arrest
 Arrestment
 Arrondissment
 Arson
 Art and Part
 Articles of Association
 Assault
 Assembly, Unlawful
 Assessment
 Assessor
 Assets
 Assignment, Assignation, Assignee
 Assize
 Associate
 Assumpsit
 Asylum, Right of
 Attachment
 Attainder
 Attaint, Writ of
 Attempt
 Attestation
 Attorney
 Attorney-General
 Attornment
 Auctions
 Audience
 Autocracy
 Autonomy
 Average
 Avizandum
 Award
 Babylonian Law
 Back-bond
 Bail
 Bailiff and Bailie
 Bailment
 Ballot
 Bank Holidays
 Bankruptcy
 Banns of Marriage
 Bar, The
 Bargain and Sale
 Barmote Court
 Barratry
 Barrington, George
 Base fee
 Basilica
 Basoche
 Bastard
 Bastinado
 Baylo
 Beadle
 Beheading
 Belligerency
 Bench
 Benefice
 Beneficiary
 Bequest
 Bering Sea Arbitration
 Bet and Betting
 Betterment
 Bigamy
 Bill
 Bill of Exchange
 Bill of Sale
 Birth
 Blackmail
 Black Rod
 Blanch Fee, or Blanch Holding
 Blasphemy
 Blinding
 Blockade
 Blue-book
 Boarding-house
 Bocland
 Body-snatching
 Boiling to Death
 Bona Fide
 Bond
 Boot
 Borough
 Borough English
 Bottomry
 Bound, or Boundary
 Brachylogus
 Branding
 Branks
 Brawling
 Breach
 Brehon Laws
 Breviary of Alaric
 Bribery
 Brief
 Britton
 Burgage
 Burgess
 Burglary
 Burial and Burial Acts
 Burke, William
 Burning to Death
 By-law
 Cabinet
 Cadastre
 Camera
 Cangue
 Canon Law
 Canton
 Capital Punishment
 Capitulary
 Capitulation
 Caption
 Captive
 Capture
 Cargo
 Carrier
 Case
 Casus Belli
 Caucus
 Caveat
 Cemetery
 Cessio Bonorum
 Cestui, Cestuy
 Challenge
 Chamberlain
 Chambers
 Champerty, or Champarty
 Chance-medley
 Chancery
 Chantage
 Chargé d’affaires
 Charging Order
 Charter
 Chartered Companies
 Charter-Party
 Chattel
 Cheating
 Children, Law relating to
 Children’s Courts
 Chiltern Hundreds
 Chose
 Church Rate
 Churchwarden
 Churchyard
 Cinque Ports
 Circuit
 Citation
 Citizen
 City
 Civil Law
 Civil List
 Civil Service
 Clergy, Benefit of
 Clerk
 Closure
 Code
 Code Napoléon
 Codicil
 Coercion
 Cognizance
 Coif
 Coinage Offences
 Collateral
 Collusion
 Colony
 Comity
 Commercial Court
 Commercial Law
 Commission
 Commissioner
 Commitment
 Common Law
 Common Lodging-House
 Common Pleas, Court of
 Commons
 Commonwealth
 Company
 Compensation
 Compromise
 Comptroller
 Compurgation
 Conacre
 Concert
 Conditional Fee
 Conditional Limitation
 Confarreatio
 Confession and Avoidance
 Confiscation
 Congé d’Elire
 Congress
 Conjugal Rights
 Conquest
 Consanguinity, or Kindred
 Conseil de famille
 Conservator
 Consideration
 Consignment
 Consistory Courts
 Consolidation Acts
 Consort
 Conspiracy
 Constable
 Constituency
 Constitution and Constitutional Law
 Consul
 Consulate of the Sea
 Contempt of Court
 Contraband
 Contract
 Contumacy
 Conversion
 Conveyancing
 Convoy
 Coparcenary
 Copyhold
 Copyright
 Co-respondent
 Coroner
 Corporal Punishment
 Corporation
 Corpse
 Corrupt Practices
 Costs
 Counsel and Counsellor
 Counterfeiting
 County
 County Court
 Court
 Court Baron
 Court Leet
 Court-martial
 Covenant
 Coverture
 Covin
 Credentials
 Crime
 Criminal Law
 Criminology
 Crimp
 Crown Debt
 Crown Land
 Cruelty
 Culprit
 Curator
 Curtesy
 Curtilage
 Custom
 Customary Freehold
 Custos Rotulorum
 Cy-près
 Damages
 Day
 Death
 Debentures
 Debt
 Declaration
 Declaration of Paris
 Declarator
 Decree
 De Donis Conditionalibus
 Deed
 Defamation
 Default
 Defeasance
 Defence
 Defendant
 Del Credere
 Demesne
 Demise
 Democracy
 Demurrage
 Demurrer
 Denizen
 Deodand
 Department
 Deportation or Transportation
 Deposit
 Deputy
 Derelict
 Desertion
 Detainer
 Detinue
 Digest
 Dilapidation
 Diligence
 Diplomacy
 Directors
 Disability
 Discharge
 Disclaimer
 Discovery
 Disorderly House
 Dissolution
 Distress
 District
 Divorce
 Doctors’ Commons
 Document
 Domestic Relations
 Domicile
 Donatio Mortis Causa
 Dower
 Dowry
 Dragoman
 Drawing and Quartering
 Droit
 Duke of Exeter’s Daughter
 Durbar
 Duress
 Earl Marshal
 Earnest
 Easement
 Eavesdrip
 Ecclesiastical Commissioners
 Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
 Ecclesiastical Law
 Edict
 Ejectment
 Election
 Elections
 Electrocution
 Elegit
 Embargo
 Embassy
 Embezzlement
 Emblements
 Embracery
 Eminent Domain
 Emperor
 Enclave
 English Law
 Englishry
 Entail
 Envoy
 Equity
 Error
 Escheat
 Estate
 Estate and House Agents
 Estate Duty
 Estoppel
 Estovers
 Estreat
 Evidence
 Execution
 Executors and Administrators
 Exequatur
 Exhumation
 Exile
 Expatriation
 Expert
 Express
 Expropriation
 Expulsion
 Extenuating Circumstances
 Exterritoriality
 Extortion
 Extradition
 Factor
 Faculty
 False Pretences
 Faubourg
 Federal Government
 Fee
 Felo De Se
 Felony
 Feoffment
 Ferry
 Fetters and Handcuffs
 Feu
 Fictions
 Fiduciary
 Fieri Facias
 Fine
 Finger Prints
 Fishery, Law of
 Fixtures
 Fiat
 Fleet Prison
 Fleta
 Flotsam, Jetsam and Ligan
 Foreclosure
 Foreign Office
 Foreshore
 Forest Laws
 Forfeiture
 Forgery
 Franchise
 Frank-almoign
 Frank-marriage
 Fraud
 Freebench
 Freehold
 Freeman
 Freight
 Fuero
 Gallows, or Gibbet
 Game Laws
 Gaming and Wagering
 Garnish
 Garrote
 Gavelkind
 Geneva Convention
 Germanic Laws, Early
 Gift
 Glebe
 Goodwill
 Government
 Grant
 Gravamen
 Greek Law
 Gross
 Ground Rent
 Guarantee
 Guardian
 Guerrilla
 Guillotine
 Habeas Corpus
 Hanging
 Hanaper
 Handwriting
 Haro, Clameur de
 Hegemony
 Heir
 Heirloom
 Hereditament
 Heriot
 Heritable Jurisdictions
 High Seas
 Highway
 Hinterland
 Hire-Purchase Agreement
 Hiring
 Holiday
 Homage
 Home Office
 Homicide
 Horning, Letters of
 Hotch-pot
 Household, Royal
 Hue and Cry
 Hundred
 Husband and Wife
 Hypothec
 Identification
 Ignoramus
 Ignorance
 Immunity
 Impeachment
 Impotence
 Impressment
 Incendiarism
 Incest
 Inclosure
 Incorporation
 Indemnity
 Indenture
 Indian Law
 Indictment
 Indorsement
 Inebriety, Law of
 Infamy
 Infant
 Infanticide
 In Forma Pauperis
 Information
 Informer
 Inheritance
 Inhibition
 Initials
 Injunction
 Inn and Innkeeper
 Inns of Court
 Innuendo
 Inquest
 Insanity
 Instalment
 Instrument
 Intent
 Interdiction
 Interesse Termini
 Interest
 International Law
 Interpellation
 Interpleader
 Interpretation
 Interstate Commerce
 Intestacy
 Intransigent
 Inventory
 I. O. U.
 Jactitation
 Joinder
 Joint
 Jointure
 Jougs, Juggs, or Joggs
 Judge
 Judge-Advocate-General
 Judgment
 Judgment Debtor
 Judgment Summons
 Judicature Acts
 Jurat
 Jurisdiction
 Jurisprudence
 Jurisprudence, Comparative
 Jury
 Jus primae noctis
 Jus Relictae
 Justice
 Justice of the Peace
 Justiciary, High Court
 Justification
 Juvenile Offenders
 Ketch, John
 Kidnapping
 King’s Bench, Court of
 Knight-Service
 Knout
 Kurbash
 Laches
 Lading, Bill of
 Landlord and Tenant
 Land Registration
 Lapse
 Larceny
 Law
 Law Merchant
 Lease
 Legacy
 Legation
 Legitim
 Legitimacy and Legitimation
 Lesion
 Letters Patent
 Libel and Slander
 Liberty
 Licence
 Lien
 Limitation, Statutes of
 Liquidation
 Liquor Laws
 Local Government
 Local Government Board
 Lodger and Lodgings
 Lord Advocate
 Lord Chamberlain
 Lord Chief Justice
 Lord Great Chamberlain
 Lord High Chancellor
 Lord High Constable
 Lord High Steward
 Lord High Treasurer
 Lord Justice Clerk
 Lord Justice-General
 Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
 Lord President of the Council
 Lords Justices of Appeal
 Lords of Appeal
 Lord Steward
 Lost Property
 Lotteries
 Lynch Law
 Magistrate
 Mahommedan Law
 Maiden
 Maiming
 Maintenance
 Majority
 Mandamus, Writ of
 Mandarin
 Mandate
 Manifest
 Manor
 Mansion
 Manslaughter
 Man-traps
 Mare Clausum and Mare Liberum
 Maritime Territory
 Marriage
 Marshalsea
 Martial Law
 Master and Servant
 Master of the Horse
 Master of the Rolls
 Maxims, Legal
 Mayhem
 Mayor
 Mediation
 Medical Jurisprudence
 Meeting
 Memorandum of Association
 Merger
 Mesne
 Messuage
 Military Law
 Ministry
 Miscarriage
 Misdemeanour
 Misprision
 Mistake
 Monarchy
 Monition
 Mortgage
 Mortmain
 Motion
 Multiplepoinding
 Municipality
 Muniment
 Murder
 Mutiny
 Nationality
 Naturalization
 Navigation Laws
 Negligence
 Negotiable Instrument
 Neutrality
 Next Friend
 Nisi Prius
 Noise
 Nolle Prosequi
 Nonconformity, Law relating to
 Nonfeasance, Misfeasance, Malfeasance
 Nonsuit
 North Sea Fisheries Convention
 Notary or Notary Public
 Notice
 Novation
 Nuisance
 Nullification
 Oath
 Obiter Dictum
 Obligation
 Obscenity
 Office
 Oligarchy
 Ordeal
 Order in Council
 Ordinance
 Ordinary
 Original Package
 Ouster
 Outlawry
 Overt Act
 Oyer and Terminer
 Pacific Blockade
 Pandects
 Paraphernalia
 Pardon
 Parish
 Parlement
 Parliament
 Parricide
 Parson
 Partition
 Partnership
 Party Wall
 Passport
 Patents
 Patents of Precedence
 Patron and Client
 Paymaster-General
 Payment
 Payment of Members
 Peace
 Peace, Breach of
 Peace Conferences
 Peine forte et dure
 Peerage
 Penalty
 Penology
 Pension
 Perjury
 Perpetuity
 Person, Offences against the
 Personal Property
 Personation
 Petition
 Picketing
 Pillory
 Pirate and Piracy
 Plaintiff
 Pleading
 Plebiscite
 Pledge
 Plurality
 Plutocracy
 Police
 Police Courts
 Posse Comitatus
 Possession
 Post & Postal Service
 Potwalloper
 Power of Attorney
 Praemunire
 Preamble
 Prerogative
 Prerogative Courts
 Prescription
 Press Laws
 Prime Minister
 Primogeniture
 Principal and Agent
 Prison
 Privateer
 Privilege
 Privy Council
 Privy Purse
 Privy Seal
 Prize or Prize of War
 Probate
 Probation
 Procedure
 Process
 Procès-verbal
 Proclamation
 Proctor
 Procuration
 Procurator
 Profanity
 Prohibition
 Promoter
 Property
 Prorogation
 Prosecution
 Prospectus
 Protectorate
 Provisional Order
 Provost
 Proxy
 Public House
 Puisne
 Purchase
 Quantum Meruit
 Quarantine
 Quare Impedit
 Quarter Sessions
 Queen Anne’s Bounty
 Quorum
 Quo Warranto
 Rack
 Ragman Rolls
 Raid
 Rape
 Rate
 Real Property
 Rebellion
 Receipt
 Receiver
 Recess
 Recidivism
 Recognizance
 Record
 Recorder
 Reeve
 Referee
 Referendum and Initiative
 Refresher
 Regent
 Register
 Registration
 Release
 Remainder, Reversion
 Remand
 Remembrancer
 Rent
 Repairs
 Repeal
 Replevin
 Representation
 Reprieve
 Reprisals
 Request, Letters of
 Requests, Court of
 Rescue
 Reservation
 Residence
 Resident
 Residue
 Respite
 Respondent
 Restraint
 Retainer
 Reward
 Ridings
 Riot
 Robbery
 Roman Law
 Rundale
 Sacrilege
 Salary
 Sale of Goods
 Salic Law and other Frankish Laws
 Salvage
 Sanction
 Satisfaction
 Scandal
 Scavenger’s Daughter
 Schedule
 Scire Facias
 Scot and Lot
 Scrip
 Scrutiny
 Sea Laws
 Seamen, Laws relating to
 Search or Visit and Search
 Secession
 Secret
 Secretary of State
 Security
 Sederunt, Act of
 Sedition
 Seduction
 Seignory or Seigniory
 Seisin
 Senate
 Sentence
 Sequestration
 Sergeant-at-Law
 Serjeanty
 Servitude
 Session
 Set-off
 Settlement
 Sexton
 Share
 Shelley’s Case, Rule in
 Sheppard, John (Jack)
 Sheriff
 Shire
 Sign Manual, Royal
 Simony
 Slander
 Socage
 Soke
 Solicitor
 Solicitor-General
 Sovereignty
 Speaker
 Specification
 Specific Performance
 Spheres of Influence
 Spring-gun
 Spy
 State
 State, Great Officers of
 State Rights
 State Trials
 Statute
 Stipend
 Stocks
 Stocks and Shares
 Stolen Goods
 Subinfeudation
 Succession
 Succession Duty
 Suffrage
 Summary Jurisdiction
 Summons
 Sunday
 Superannuation
 Supercargo
 Supply
 Supreme Court of Judicature
 Surety
 Surrender
 Surrogate
 Suzerainty
 Swearing
 Syndic
 Syndicate
 Taille
 Tally
 Tanistry
 Tenant
 Tenant-right
 Tenement
 Tenure
 Term
 Theatre
 Theft
 Thegn
 Threat
 Tichborne Claimant
 Ticket-of-leave
 Time
 Tipstaff
 Tithes
 Tithing
 Toleration
 Toll
 Tort
 Torture
 Town
 Trade, Board of
 Transfer
 Tread-mill
 Treason
 Treasure Trove
 Treasury
 Treaties
 Trespass
 Trial
 Tribute
 Trover
 Truck
 Trust and Trustees
 Turpin, Richard
 Twelve Tables
 Udal
 Ukaz or Ukase
 Ultimatum
 Underwriter
 University Courts
 Uses
 Valuation and Valuers
 Venue
 Verdict
 Vestry
 Veto
 Vicar
 Vice-Chancellor
 Viceroy
 Vidocq, F. E.
 Vigilance Committee
 Vizier
 Vote and Voting
 Voucher
 Wager
 Wainewright, T. G.
 War, Laws of
 Warden
 Warrant
 Warrant of Attorney
 Warranty
 Warren
 Waste
 Water Rights
 Waters, Territorial
 Welsh Laws
 Wergild
 Westminster Statutes
 Wheel, Breaking on the
 Whig and Tory
 Whip
 Whipping or Flogging
 Wild, Jonathan
 Will or Testament
 Witness
 Woolsack
 Works and Public Buildings, Board of
 Wreck
 Writ
 Writers to the Signet




                             CHAPTER XXVII
                       FOR BANKERS AND FINANCIERS


[Sidenote: Social History]

Of all classes of business men, bankers and financiers study most
closely the general tendencies of public opinion and the general course
of industrial and commercial development. Each day’s financial news
reports a position which has been reached in the path of a movement of
which the origin and earlier course—and therefore the direction—must be
sought in the record of past months and years, and sometimes in the
record of a past century. But the banker who turns to the standard
histories in his library with the desire to trace the course of any
gradual and long-continued development is generally disappointed. It is
only of late that historical investigation has been directed to social
and commercial activities rather than to politics and wars. Yet the
history of civilization may be said to lie in the course of finance and
commerce much more than in party strife and in civil and international
wars. For the latter always arrest for the moment, even if they
ultimately further, the progress of civilization.

[Sidenote: International Finance]

The new Britannica has been called “the most comprehensive of all
surveys of past and present civilization,” and its treatment of finance
and commerce possesses a breadth and sweep directly due to the
international character of the book. The American financier knows that
under existing conditions he must take into account the laws and usages
of foreign countries in regard to banking, currency, taxation, stock
exchange transactions, corporations and all the other methods and
appliances used in dealing with money and credit. The Britannica could
not have covered this broad field authoritatively if its articles had
all been written by Americans instead of being contributed, as they are,
by specialists of twenty countries. And the very first step, in
examining any question of American finance, may be to consider what has
been done abroad. For example, there has been adopted in Louisiana a
system of rural credit such as was strongly urged, for more general use,
during President Taft’s administration. That would seem to be purely a
matter of internal policy. But for a description of the actual working
of such a system, the sources of information are in the Britannica
article RAIFFEISEN (Vol. 22, p. 817), the German banker who perfected
the system of agrarian credits, in the article SCHULZE-DELITZSCH (Vol.
24, p. 383), the Saxon economist who founded the German central bureau
of co-operative societies, and in the article CO-OPERATION (Vol. 7, p.
82), where the Danish system of financing farmers is described and
compared with the German and French methods.

Systematic reading in the Britannica on financial subjects should begin
with the article FINANCE (Vol. 10, p. 347, equivalent to 20 pages of
this Guide), by C. F. Bastable, professor of political economy in the
University of Dublin, whose books on economics have been largely read in
the United States. This article deals with state revenue and
expenditure, or _public_ finance, after pointing out the prevailing
looseness in the use of the word finance. It is interesting to know that
“in the later middle ages, especially in Germany, the word _finance_
acquired the sense of usurious or oppressive dealing with money and
capital.” So long ago did an unpopular meaning attach to a term
connected with “big business.” The same is true of the word _usury_,
which originally meant use, or interest; and the Britannica in an
article on USURY (Vol. 27, p. 811) says “usury, if used in the old sense
of the term could embrace a multitude of modes of receiving interest
upon capital to which not the slightest moral taint is attached.” In
each case there may have been some reason besides chance for the
development of the unpleasant meaning, and it has always been the custom
of the spendthrift and the gambler to make the wrong use of words as
well as of business methods. But what we call public finance was a
century ago called political economy, “political” being used strictly to
apply to the state, and “economy” in its original sense of housekeeping
or house-rule. The word “economy” has thus become broader, as the word
“usury” has become narrower, in significance.

[Sidenote: Early Economics]

It is curious to see how one page after another of the historical
section of this article describes theories of finance which are to-day
propounded by popular agitators as if they were absolutely new and not
only describes them but shows how they were tried and how they failed.
The eastern empires taxed land produce, usually to the extent of one
fourth or one fifth (two tithes). In Athens, under a more elaborate
system, the state owned and administered agricultural land and silver
mines, and yet this state ownership, instead of making for democratic
equality, resulted in too rigid a separation of classes; and the
Athenian attempt to surtax the rich citizens in order to defray the cost
of public games and theatrical performances and to equip ships (in this
case a close parallel to certain recent German legislation) led, as
class taxation always does, to ingenious evasions and, in the end,
increased the power it sought to restrict.

In Rome, home taxes were suspended as soon as conquests brought tribute
from Spain and Africa. But taxes were always the curse of the provinces,
and the vexatious _method_ of the tax “may be regarded as an additional
tax.” “The defects of the financial organization were a serious
influence in the complex of causes that brought about the fall of the
Republic.” The early Empire took its revenues from public lands, from
monopolies, from the land tax, from customs, and from taxes on
inheritances (5%), sales (10%) and the purchase of slaves (40%). There
was no just distribution of taxation among the territorial divisions,
and the burden fell too much upon the actual workers and their
employers. In the kingdoms which succeeded the Empire after its fall,
Roman customs survived in finance, as in all departments of government;
and there was a want of coherent policy until the time of Charlemagne,
when centralization produced a better system. But scientific taxation
did not really exist until, in the 15th century, under Charles VII, the
first French standing army was created, and its needs led to a new and
more intelligent system. In England, the co-ordination and control of
public revenue and expenditure was similarly due to the growth of the
navy. Since then the tendency has been to include taxes in general
categories; the need for national credit has developed a system of
national debts; and expenditures and receipts are now governed by
legislative sanction. Local finance has been revolutionized by modern
business methods, too slowly adopted it is true, and by the gradual
change from private to public control of water supply, lighting and
transportation.

[Sidenote: Taxation and Tariff]

The articles TAXATION, NATIONAL DEBT and TARIFF should be read after
this article on public finance. TAXATION (Vol. 26, p. 458; equivalent to
25 pages of this Guide), by Sir Robert Giffen, formerly
Controller-General of the British Board of Trade, classifies taxes,
points out that direct and indirect taxes are not intrinsically
different and that such a classification is merely a matter of
convenience, and the article proceeds to describe the principal taxes.
It should be supplemented by reading the sections on finance in the
articles on various countries and especially by the article ENGLISH
FINANCE (Vol. 9, p. 458; equivalent to 25 pages in this Guide), the
section on Finance in the article UNITED STATES (Vol. 27, p. 660) and
similar sections in the articles on each of the states of the Union.
These articles give definite information about public debts, national or
state, but the student should read carefully the main treatment in the
article NATIONAL DEBT (Vol. 19, p. 266). The articles TARIFF (Vol. 26,
p. 422), by Prof. F. W. Taussig of Harvard, author of _The Tariff
History of the United States_; PROTECTION (Vol. 22, p. 464), by Edmund
Janes James, president of the University of Illinois and author of the
well-known _History of American Tariff Legislation_; and FREE TRADE
(Vol. 11, p. 88), by William Cunningham, author of _Growth of English
Industry and Commerce_, will be of great interest. The student should
read besides the sketches in the Britannica of HENRY CLAY (Vol. 6, p.
470), by Carl Schurz, of WILLIAM MCKINLEY (Vol. 17, p. 256), ROGER Q.
MILLS (Vol. 18, p. 475), and of other American tariff-leaders, and, for
the tariff reform movement in England, the articles on JOSEPH
CHAMBERLAIN (Vol. 5, p. 813) and ARTHUR J. BALFOUR (Vol. 3, p. 250).
Before turning from public to private finance the reader should study
the articles EXCHEQUER (Vol. 10, p. 54) and TREASURY (Vol. 27, p. 228).

[Sidenote: Private Finance]

For what may be called _private_ finance, the student should turn first
to the article BANKS AND BANKING (Vol. 3, p. 334; equivalent to nearly
60 pages in this Guide), by Sir R. H. I. Palgrave, director of Barclay &
Co., Ltd., Bankers; Charles A. Conant, author of _The Principles of
Money and Banking_; and Sir J. R. Paget, author of the _Law of Banking_.
Further information on the early history of banking in the United States
will be found in the historical section of the article UNITED STATES
(Vol. 27, especially p. 697), and in the article ANDREW JACKSON (Vol.
15, p. 107) by Prof. W. G. Sumner of Yale.

[Sidenote: Currency]

Next in his course of reading, he should study the article MONEY (Vol.
18, p. 694; equivalent to 45 pages in this Guide), by C. F. Bastable.
This deals with: the functions and varieties of money, including coined
money and all else that can take its place _in facilitating exchange_,
_in estimating comparative values_, _as a standard of value_ or of
_deferred payments_, as _a store of value_; the determining causes of
the value of money and of the quantity of money required by a country,
the credit theory, early forms of currency—greenstones, ochre, shells,
furs, oxen, grain; metals as money; coinage and state control;
representative money, and credit as money; economic aspects of the
production and consumption of precious metals; review of the history of
some important currencies—Greek, Roman, medieval, English and French
coinages are treated in the article NUMISMATICS (Vol. 19, pp. 869–911,
equivalent to 135 pages of this Guide, with 6 plates and 11 other text
illustrations); which discusses such questions as the constitution of
money; typical currency systems; statistics of production of gold and
silver since the discovery of America, and coinage systems. Other
relevant articles are BIMETALLISM, and MONETARY CONFERENCES for the
relation of the metals; and the articles GOLD, SILVER, SEIGNIORAGE,
DEMONETIZATION, GRESHAM’S LAW, TOKEN MONEY and GREENBACKS. In the
article on the GEORGE JUNIOR REPUBLIC (Vol. 11, p. 749), the “children’s
state” at Freeville, N. Y., the student will find an interesting proof
of the relation of “token” to “real” money. “The government issued its
own currency in tin and later in aluminium and ‘American’ money could
not be passed within the 48 acres of the Republic until 1906, when
depreciation forced the Republic’s coinage out of use and ‘American’
coin was made legal tender.”

[Sidenote: Banking]

  For information as to the methods of financial business the reader
  should study the articles SAVINGS BANKS (Vol. 24, p. 243) by Sir G. C.
  T. Bartley, founder of the National Penny Bank, and Bradford Rhodes,
  founder of the 34th St. National Bank, N. Y. FRIENDLY SOCIETIES (Vol.
  11, p. 217); TRUST COMPANY (Vol. 27, p. 329), by Charles A. Conant,
  author of _The Principles of Money and Banking_; CLEARING HOUSE (Vol.
  6, p. 476); LETTER OF CREDIT (Vol. 16, p. 501); STOCK EXCHANGE (Vol.
  25, p. 930); BILL OF EXCHANGE (Vol. 3, p. 940); EXCHANGE (Vol. 10, p.
  50); FUTURES (Vol. 11, p. 375); TIME BARGAINS (Vol. 26, p. 988);
  MARKET (Vol. 17, p. 731), by Wynnard Hooper, financial editor of _The
  Times_, London, with sections on Movements of Prices, Cycles, Tendency
  to Equilibrium, Disturbance of Equilibrium, Future Delivery, Corners,
  Money Market, The Great Banks, Foreign Loans, and Discount Houses;
  CONSOLS (Vol. 6, p. 979); COUPON (Vol. 7, p. 318); DIVIDEND (Vol. 8,
  p. 331); and PREMIUM (Vol. 22, p. 279).

Information on distinctive banking and business laws in the separate
states will be found in the section on finance of the article on each
state. For instance in the article OKLAHOMA (Vol. 20, p. 60) there is a
summary of the bank deposit guaranty fund.

For insurance see the chapter in this Guide _For Insurance Men_.

[Sidenote: Lives of Financiers]

In financial biography, as in history, theory and practice, the
Britannica is valuable because of its full, clear and authoritative
treatment. The student will find articles on great financiers, such as
the Astors, the Vanderbilts, the Barings, the Rothschilds, James Law,
George Peabody, James Fisk, Jay Gould, E. H. Harriman, James J. Hill, J.
P. Morgan; and on great authors on the subjects of economics and
finance,—for instance, Malthus, Adam Smith, Walter Bagehot, Ricardo,
Roscher, Boehm von Bawerk, Thorold Rogers, H. C. Carey, E. R. A.
Seligman, F. A. Walker, J. W. Jenks, F. W. Taussig, Richmond Mayo-Smith
and A. T. Hadley.


    ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA OF
                          INTEREST TO BANKERS

 Account
 Accountants
 Achenwall, Gottfried
 Adams, Henry Carter
 Agio
 Aguado, A. M.
 Alcavala
 Aldrich, N. W.
 Allport, Sir J. J.
 Alstromer, Jonas
 Amortization
 Angel
 Anna
 Annuity
 Arbitrage
 Armour, P. L.
 Ashley, W. J.
 Assignats
 Astor, John Jacob (and family)
 Atkinson, Edward
 Attwood, Thomas
 Audit and Auditor
 Backwardation
 Bagehot, Walter
 Balance of Trade
 Bank Notes
 Bank Rate
 Banks and Banking
 Barbon, Nicholas
 Baring (family)
 Barter
 Bastiat, Frédéric
 Bates, Joshua
 Baudrillart, H. J. L.
 Bawbee
 Baxter, Robert Dudley
 Bemis, E. W.
 Bezant
 Biddle, Nicholas
 Bill of Exchange
 Bimetallism
 Blanqui, J. A.
 Bliss, C. N.
 Block, Maurice
 Bodin, Jean
 Bodle
 Boehm von Bawerk
 Boisguilbert, Sieur de
 Book-keeping
 Bourse
 Breaking Bulk
 Brentano, L. J.
 Broker
 Bucketshop
 Budget
 Bullion
 Buying in
 Cairnes, John Elliott
 Call
 Capital
 Carey, Henry Charles
 Carli-Rubbi
 Carrying-over
 Cash
 Chase, S. P.
 Cheque, or Check
 Chevalier, Michel
 Child, Sir Josiah
 Circular Note
 Claflin, H. B.
 Clark, John Bates
 Clearing House
 Cohn, Gustav
 Coin
 Coeur, Jacques
 Colston, Edward
 Combination
 Commerce
 Commercial Treaties
 Consols
 Contango
 Cooke, Jay
 Co-operation
 Cooper, Peter
 Cossa, Luigi
 Coulisse
 Coupon
 Courcelle-Seneuil, J. G.
 Cournot, A.
 Coutts, Thomas
 Cover
 Credit
 Crédit Foncier
 Crockford, William
 Crore
 Crown (coin)
 Cunningham, William
 Custom Duties
 Custom House
 Davenant, Charles
 Decker, Sir Matthew
 Decimal Coinage
 Delessert, J. P. B.
 Delfico, Melchiorre
 Demonetization
 Dewey, Davis Rich
 Dime
 Discount
 Distribution
 Dividend
 Dock Warrant
 Dollar
 Drawback
 Drexel, A. J.
 Ducat
 Ely, Richard Theodore
 Engel, Ernst
 English Finance
 Exchange
 Exchequer
 Excise
 Farr, William
 Farrer, Baron
 Farthing
 Florin
 Field, Cyrus West
 Fisk, James
 Fix, Theodore
 Fouquet, Nicolas
 Franc
 Free Trade
 Friendly Societies
 Futures
 Gabelle
 Gallatin, Albert
 Ganilh, Charles
 Garnier, C. J.
 Garnier, Marquis
 Genovesi, Antonio
 George, Henry
 Giffen, Sir Robert
 Gilds
 Gilbart, James William
 Gioja, Melchiorre
 Girard, Stephen
 Goldsmid (family)
 Gould, Jay (and family)
 Grain Trade
 Greenbacks
 Gresham, Sir Thomas
 Gresham’s Law
 Groat
 Guinea
 Gurney (family)
 Hadley, A. T.
 Hamilton, Alexander
 Hamilton, Robert
 Hanna, M. A.
 Harriman, Edward H.
 Haxthausen, L. von
 Hermann, F. B. W. von
 Hill, James J.
 Horner, Francis
 Horton, Samuel Dana
 Hudson, George
 Hufeland, Gottlieb
 Income Tax
 Ingram, J. K.
 Insurance
 Invoice
 Jakob, L. H. von
 Jenks, J. W.
 Jesup, M. K.
 Jevons, William S.
 Jones, Richard
 Kay, Joseph
 Laing, Samuel
 Lakh
 Laveleye, E. L. V. de
 Law, John
 Lawrence, Amos
 Le Play, P. G. Frédéric
 Leroy-Beaulieu, P. P.
 Leslie, Thomas E. C.
 Letter of Credit
 Levasseur, Pierre Emile
 Levi, Leone
 Lingen, Baron
 Lipton, Sir T. J.
 Lira
 List, Friedrich
 Lloyd’s
 M’Culloch, John R.
 Mackay, John William
 Macleod, Henry Dunning
 Making-up Price
 Malthus, Thomas Robert
 Mark
 Market
 Marshall, Alfred
 Marx, Heinrich Karl
 Mayo-Smith, Richmond
 Mint
 Mohur
 Moidore
 Monopoly
 Monetary Conferences (International)
 Money
 Money-lending
 Moon, Sir Richard
 Moratorium
 Morgan, John Pierpont
 Morris, Robert
 Morton, L. P.
 Mun, Thomas
 National Debt
 Newmarch, William
 North, Sir Dudley
 Octroi
 Overstone, 1st baron
 Par
 Paterson, William
 Pauperism
 Pawnbroking
 Peabody, George
 Pender, Sir John
 Penny
 Penrhyn, 2nd baron
 Peseta
 Petty, Sir William
 Picayune
 Pistole
 Poll-tax
 Pound
 Premium
 Price, Bonamy
 Production
 Profit-sharing
 Protection
 Proudhon, P. J.
 Pyx
 Quesnay, François
 Raiffeisen, F. W.
 Rau, Karl Heinrich
 Rebate
 Reciprocity
 Revenue
 Ricardo, David
 Rockefeller, J. D.
 Rodbertus, K. J.
 Rogers, James Edwin
 Roscher, W. G. F.
 Rothschild (family)
 Royalty
 Rupee
 Sadler, Michael Thomas
 Sage, Russell
 Saint-Simon, Comte de
 Savings Banks
 Say, Jean Baptiste
 Say, Leon
 Schäffle, A. E. F.
 Schmoller, Gustav
 Schulze-Delitzsch, F. H.
 Seigniorage
 Seligman, E. R. A.
 Senior, Nassau William
 Sequin
 Shekel
 Shell-money
 Sherman, John
 Shilling
 Slater, John Fox
 Smith, Adam
 Sou
 Sovereign (coin)
 Spreckels, Claus
 Stag
 Stamp
 Standards Department
 Sterling
 Steuart, Sir J. D.
 Stewart, A. T.
 Stock Exchange
 Sumner, W. G.
 Tael
 Tariff
 Taxation
 Taussig, Frank William
 Thornton, Henry
 Thornton, W. T.
 Time Bargains
 Title Guarantee Companies
 Token Money
 Tonnage and Poundage
 Tontine
 Tooke, Thomas
 Torrens, Robert
 Torrens, William Torrens M’Cullagh
 Trusts
 Trust Company
 Tucker, Josiah
 Vanderbilt, Cornelius (and family)
 Wagner, Adolf
 Wages
 Walker, Francis Amasa
 Walras, M. E. L.
 Wanamaker, John
 Watkin, Sir E. W.
 Wealth
 Wells, David Ames
 Window Tax
 Wolowski, L. F. M. R.
 Wright, Carroll D.
 Zollverein




                             CHAPTER XXVIII
   FOR CIVIL SERVICE MEN AND WOMEN AND STUDENTS PREPARING FOR SERVICE
                              EXAMINATIONS


Federal, state and municipal civil service includes so many specialized
branches that a number of the chapters in Part 1 of this Guide, devoted
to courses of reading adapted to various occupations (such as _For
Teachers_, _For Engineers_, _For Builders and Contractors_) will supply
useful indications. Part 2 of the Guide, containing classified courses
of educational reading, will point to articles especially serviceable to
those who are preparing for examinations and, for that reason, desire to
review the ground they covered at school or college.

Part 4 of the Guide, with its special references to the subjects to
which administration and legislation are chiefly directed, should be
carefully examined. There the reader will find lists of articles dealing
with schools and institutions; the defective classes; crime and alcohol;
revenue and finance; ballot representation and suffrage; trusts,
competition, co-operation and socialism; labour and immigration;
legislation and the administration of justice; foreign relations and the
expansion of the United States.

[Sidenote: International Comparisons]

The present chapter, in order that repetition may be avoided, deals only
with the aspects of federal, state and municipal government which are
most closely related to civil service organization. The article CIVIL
SERVICE (Vol. 6, p. 412) devotes nearly as much space to the British as
to the American service, and its information as to British organization,
examinations, salaries and pensions will greatly interest those to whom
the details needed for an international comparison have not been
elsewhere accessible. Until 1855 all British appointments were by
nomination; and although the service was quite free from the abominable
system of secretly taxing salaries in order to support party funds, that
was about all that can be said for it. There was hardly a pretense of
selection for merit. Influential families and the relatives and personal
friends of ministers of state and of ladies whom kings delighted to
honor monopolized the appointments. Many posts were pure sinecures, and
in many others the work was done by a substitute to whom the nominee
paid less than half the salary or fees he received. Under George III the
system was at its worst, and the discontent that was aroused in the
American colonies by the maladministration of colonial affairs was “one
of the efficient causes of the American revolution.” The reforms begun
in 1855 had by 1870 been so successful that since then open competition
has been the general rule; and where nomination is still required, as in
the Foreign Office and the Education Department, searching examinations
must be passed. Women are employed in the post-office, board of
agriculture, customs, India office, department of agriculture, local
government board and home office (factory inspectors, etc.). The age for
compulsory retirement is 65, but the commissioners may prolong this five
years in exceptional cases. Subjects of examinations, salaries and
pensions are described in the article. Since 1859 there has been a
superannuation pension of ¹⁰⁄₆₀ of the annual salary and emoluments to
any one serving 10 years and less than 11, and an additional sixtieth
for each year’s service more than ten.

[Sidenote: Civil Service in the United States]

In the same article there is an historical treatment of civil service in
the United States and of its gradual reform and extension since 1883.
This may well be supplemented by a study of the American party system of
government and of the “spoils system” under which party loyalty and
personal service to a party machine became the test of a candidate’s
fitness for office. For this the student should refer to the section
(Vol. 27, p. 646) on _Constitution and Government_, of the article
UNITED STATES, written by James Bryce, author of _The American
Commonwealth_ and formerly British ambassador to the United States; see
p. 658–659, especially. There is also much information in the section
_History_ of the same article, especially paragraphs 168, 169 (p. 697)
on the beginnings of the spoils system in Jackson’s time, paragraph 333
(p. 722) on the beginnings of reform under Hayes, and paragraph 343 (p.
724) on Cleveland and civil service reform, etc.; and biographies of
Andrew Jackson, W. L. Marcy and Martin Van Buren (for the spoils system)
and of George William Curtis, E. L. Godkin, Carl Schurz, R. B. Hayes,
Grover Cleveland, Benjamin Harrison, William McKinley and Theodore
Roosevelt.

Information in regard to the civil service systems of states and cities
may be found in separate state and city articles,—in addition to the
material on state and city systems in the articles already mentioned.

[Sidenote: “General Information” Papers]

The wide-awake student who has read this far in this chapter and has
referred to the articles mentioned in the Britannica, will now be saying
to himself: “There is evidently much valuable information in the
encyclopaedia about the history and status of civil service reform, and
this seems as full and complete for the United States as for Great
Britain. If other topics are as fully treated in the Britannica, it will
be invaluable to me in preparation for general information papers for
civil service examinations.” And he will be right. For instance, the
government employe must know more about the government and its machinery
and history than does the average “man in the street”,—and he can learn
this from the Britannica.

As has already been pointed out, the main treatment of the government of
the United States in the Britannica is by James Bryce. This means that
it is authoritative and that it is interesting and that in both these
qualities it is far superior to the usual text book of “civics” or
“civil government.” It occupies pp. 646–661 of volume 27, and is
equivalent to about 50 pages of this Guide—so that it is more than a
bare outline. And it is followed by a valuable bibliography of the
subject to guide the student to the best books on any special topic
which he may wish to pursue further.

But this is far from being all the information in the Britannica on the
subject. The contribution of Mr. Bryce is only a part of the article
UNITED STATES. The entire article would take up nearly 400 pages if
printed in the style of this Guide. It treats the physical geography,
geology, climate, fauna and flora, population, industries and commerce,
government, finance, army and history of the country—the equivalent of
225 pages of this Guide is devoted to _History_ alone. All parts of this
article contain valuable information about the country; and this article
is supplemented by hundreds of others:—

(a) Articles on each of the states, arranged much as in the article
UNITED STATES with sections on history and government serving as an
authoritative summary of the salient facts, and making up a complete
course on state “civics,” government and history;

(b) Articles on cities and towns with similar treatment of the
distinctive elements in the government of each, and of the main points
in their history;

(c) Separate articles on the important rivers, lakes, mountains and
other topics in physical geography;

(d) Separate articles on topics in American history and government: such
as NULLIFICATION, STATE RIGHTS, FUGITIVE SLAVE LAWS, ELECTORAL
COMMISSION; and

(e) Biographies of great Americans, famous in war, politics,
administration, business, science, art, religion,—in short all fields of
activity.

In brief, whether for an examination on general information, on civics,
on history, or on the special branch of the civil service to which the
student wishes to be appointed, no book will give as valuable and
complete information as the Britannica.




                              CHAPTER XXIX
                           FOR ARMY OFFICERS


[Sidenote: A New Departure]

It is often said of an article in the Britannica that it is “_the last
word_ on the subject,” so thoroughly has the authority of the book been
recognized. This is quite as true of military articles as of those in
any other field; but of the military articles it may also be said that
they are the _first word_. Of course, there have been, in previous
editions of the Britannica and, to a less degree in minor works of
general reference, articles on military history and biography. But in
the new Britannica, for the first time, all branches of military
knowledge are included, and the spirit of the entire treatment is
comparative and critical. The military student will find a discussion
not merely of Napoleon’s influence on army organization or Frederick’s
influence on cavalry (in the articles on these two leaders), but also of
the influence of army organization on Napoleon (in the articles on the
French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Campaigns), and of cavalry
drill on the peculiar generalship of Frederick (in such articles as
Seven Years’ War, on Hohenfriedberg, and on Rossbach). Put more
concretely, the novelty consists in the inclusion of articles on wars,
campaigns and battles, chosen because of their importance in military as
well as in political history, and treated from the point of view of the
military critic and with particular attention to the lessons they
contain for the modern army officer. The care with which the battles and
campaigns of the American Civil War are analyzed and criticized will be
of singularly great interest to the American soldier, who will
immediately notice among the contributors to the military department of
the Britannica such names as those of Capt. C. F. Atkinson, author of
_The Wilderness and Cold Harbour_, Major G. W. Redway, author of
_Fredericksburg: A Study in War_, Col. G. F. R. Henderson, author of
_Stonewall Jackson and the American Civil War_, and Col. F. N. Maude,
lecturer in military history, University of Manchester.

[Sidenote: Army]

The best starting point for a study of military affairs in the
Britannica is the article ARMY (Vol. 2, p. 592; equivalent to more than
100 pages of this Guide). This “key” article may be outlined as follows:

  _General History_

  Early Armies—_Egypt_ (chariots, infantry, archers). _Babylon_ and
  _Assyria_ (horsemen, charioteers, etc.). _Persian_, largely cavalry;
  the first “organized” army. _Greece_,—compulsory service; citizen
  militia; heavy infantry the strong arm; phalanx, the Greek formation.
  _Sparta_,—a nation in arms. _Greek_ mercenaries. _Epaminondas_ and
  _Thebes_—new phalanx tactics, “oblique order”; development of
  cavalry. _Alexander_ and _Macedon_—a modified Theban system.
  _Carthage_—mercenary troops led by great generals, with modification
  of phalanx for greater elasticity. _Rome_—army under the Republic; its
  characteristics; under the Empire; see also separate article ROMAN
  ARMY (Vol. 23, p. 471), by Professor F. J. Haverfield of Oxford. _The
  Dark Ages_, the Byzantines, and the development of Feudalism. Medieval
  Mercenaries. Infantry in Feudal Times. _The Crusades_. _The Period of
  Transition_ (1290–1490), development of English archers and of
  professional soldiery,—_condottieri_, _Swiss_, _Landsknechts_. _The
  Spanish army_: “at the disposal of its sovereign, trained to the due
  professional standard and organized in the best way found by
  experience.” _The Sixteenth Century_—rise of the heavy cavalry armed
  with pistols, and fall of the pikemen. _Dutch System_—attention to
  minute detail; William the Silent and Maurice of Nassau. _Thirty
  Years’ War_—the _Werbe-system_, small standing army to be increased by
  levy at time of need. _The Swedish Army_—conscription and feudal
  _indelta_; Gustavus. _The English Civil War_—real national armies;
  Cromwell and the “New Model” only an incident without influence on
  army organization. _Standing Armies_. French pre-eminence after
  Rocroi. Small field armies, well-fed and sheltered for economy’s sake.
  _18th Century organization_: “linear” formation and its negative
  results. _Frederick the Great_: the art of war a formal science. _The
  French Revolution_: a “nation in arms,” a war-machine more powerful
  than Frederick’s. The conscription in France. _Napoleon_—his attempt
  to make a dynastic army out of the “nation in arms.” _The Grande
  Armée_ of 1805–1806; development of artillery; the army corps. The
  Wars of Liberation: new Prussian army; excellent Austrian
  organization. _Armies of 1815–1870_. _American Civil War_,—its slow
  decision. Contrast between French and Prussian staff systems in 1870.
  _Modern Developments_: German model followed slavishly except in Great
  Britain and the United States.

  _Present Day Armies_: The general accounts of existing armies, and of
  the past organizations of each country, are supplemented by detailed
  information in the articles on different countries. Especial attention
  should be given to the military information in the article on Japan.
  Army Systems: _Compulsory Service_; _Conscription_; _Voluntary
  Service_; _Militia_.

  _Army Organization_

  The three chief arms—their relative importance: proportion on peace
  footing—5 or 6 guns per 1000 men, 16 cavalry soldiers to 1000 men of
  other arms; proportion in war—Russian (1905) 3½ guns per 1000 men of
  other arms, 60 cavalry to 1000 infantry; Japanese (1905), 2½ field
  guns per 1000 men, 37 cavalry to 1000 infantry. _Command_: _Brigade_;
  _Division_; _Army Corps_, its constitution; _Army_; _Chief Command_ of
  group of armies; chief of general staff and his relations to
  commander-in-chief—for example, von Moltke and King William. _Branches
  of Administration_—war office and general staff.

  _Table_: Comparative strength of Various Armies.

  _British Army_, _Indian Army_, _Canadian Forces_.
  _Austrian Army_.
  _French Army_.
  _German Army_.
  _Italian Army_.
  _Russian Army_.
  _Spanish Army_.
  _Turkish Army_.
  _United States Army_.
  _Armies of minor countries_.

  _Bibliography_ (2000 words)

[Sidenote: Theory and Practice]

Next in order the student should turn to the article WAR (Vol. 28, p.
305; equivalent to 40 pages of this Guide), by Col. G. F. R. Henderson,
well known for his books on the American Civil War (_Fredericksburg_,
_Stonewall Jackson_, etc.), with a section on _Laws of War_, by Sir
Thomas Barclay. Col. Henderson’s article lays down important general
principles. An analysis of modern conditions shows that improved methods
of communication have made war a much speedier process, in which the
victorious general cannot make mistakes at the outset. That intellect
and education count for more than stamina and courage was the lesson of
the Franco-Prussian War—a lesson learned by the Prussians before that
war. Modern war is a science and the amateur has little chance; in this
respect things have changed. “It is impossible to doubt that had the
Boers of 1899 possessed a staff of trained strategists, they would have
shaken the British Empire to its foundations.” There must be a concert
between diplomacy and strategy. Civilian war ministers cannot solve
strategic problems. The greater deadliness of modern warfare, and the
greater moral effect of being under fire call for better foresight,
strategy and _morale_. The relation of army and navy is discussed and
the new doctrine of “sea-power” explained. (See the chapter _For Naval
Officers_ in this Guide). The remaining topics in the article are:
weakness of allied armies; railways and sea as lines of operation;
amphibious power; value of unprofessional troops and the need of
professional leaders.

[Sidenote: Arms of Service]

In the articles INFANTRY (Vol. 14, p. 517; 2 plates; equivalent to 35
pages of this Guide) and ARTILLERY (Vol. 2, p. 685; 2 plates; equivalent
to 30 pages of this Guide), both by Capt. Atkinson, and in the article
CAVALRY (Vol. 5, p. 563; illustrated with 2 plates and 1 cut; in length
equivalent to 30 pages of this Guide), by Col. F. N. Maude, the student
will find an elaborate treatment of the history, organization and
tactics (especially since 1870) of each of these arms. For details of
their organization and equipment he should read the articles ENGINEERS,
STAFF, MOUNTED INFANTRY, SUPPLY AND TRANSPORT (MILITARY), OFFICERS,
AMBULANCE, FORTIFICATION, MACHINE GUNS, COAST DEFENCE, ORDNANCE,
BALLISTICS, SIGHTS, RIFLE, GUN, PISTOL, EXPLOSIVE, GUNPOWDER, GUNCOTTON,
CORDITE and NITRO-GLYCERINE. In many geographical articles there are
descriptions of the world’s great fortifications, e. g., _Paris_,
_Antwerp_, and _Verdun_. Other topics of a more miscellaneous character
are covered by the articles ARMY SIGNALLING, PIGEON POST, SIGNALS, WAR
GAME, MANOEUVRES, KITE, etc.

The military use of aeroplanes and balloons is very fully shown in the
articles FLIGHT and AERONAUTICS.

[Sidenote: Strategy and Tactics]

Before taking up a systematic course in military history, there are two
general articles that the military student should read: TACTICS (Vol.
26, p. 347; equivalent in length to 20 pages of this Guide), by Maj.
Neill Malcolm, editor of the _Science of War_; and STRATEGY (Vol. 25, p.
986; equivalent to 35 pages of this Guide), by Col. F. N. Maude. The
former article should be compared with the sections on tactics in the
articles INFANTRY, CAVALRY and ARTILLERY. Major Malcolm makes much of
the continuity of military history, comparing Metaurus and Ramillies
with the fighting in Manchuria, and Wellington at Maya with Oyama in his
contest with Kuropatkin. The mistakes that have been made once should
not be made again; at least the careful student of tactical history may
see to it that if they are repeated, it is done by his opponent and not
by himself. Modern tactics are different from ancient because of greater
fire-power and improved methods of transportation. Cavalry tactics are
in an uncertain condition; there is no recent practice to serve as a
guide, since neither in South Africa in the Boer war nor in Manchuria
during the Russo-Japanese conflict was cavalry much used. Infantry must
co-operate to make artillery bombardment effective. An interesting
discussion of offensive and defensive fighting is summed up in the words
“To the true general the purely defensive battle is unknown” and as
evidence are adduced Wellington at Salamanca and Oyama at Sha-ho.
Oyama’s victory in the latter battle, it is pointed out, shows the
increased ease of the process of envelopment, which has resulted in
discarding corps artillery in favour of divisional artillery. The
importance—and the possibility—of the counter stroke; the danger of
using for the relief of one’s own troops forces which might better be
launched at the enemy’s weakest spot; and the similar unwisdom of any
negative tactics, adopted to avoid loss, as in “holding attacks”—are the
other principal points made in the article.

The article STRATEGY should be read in conjunction with the articles
ARMY and WAR. It is impossible to summarize or outline it here, but it
is worth noting that the article closes with a definition and discussion
of the following terms: _Base_; _Line of Communication_; _Line of
Operations_; _Exterior Lines_; _Obstacles_.

[Sidenote: Military History and Criticism]

For a reasoned history of warfare in more detail than has been given in
the general articles already alluded to, the reader will find some
outline like the following valuable, the arrangement being roughly
chronological and all words in _Italics_ being titles of articles in the
Britannica.

  _Marathon_; _Darius_; _Miltiades_; _Herodotus_.

  _Thermopylae_; _Leonidas_; _Salamis_.

  _Peloponnesian War_; _Pericles_; _Cleon_; _Pylos_; _Brasidas_;
  _Alcibiades_; _Critias_; _Thucydides_; _Xenophon_.

  _Epaminondas_; _Mantineia_.

  _Philip II of Macedon_; _Olynthus_; _Chaeroneia_; _Alexander the
  Great_; _Arrian_.

  _Pyrrhus_.

  _Roman Army_; _Caudine Forks_; _Punic Wars_; _Carthage_; _Hanno_;
  _Hannibal_; _Hasdrubal_; _Mago_; _Trasimene_; _Fabius_ (Cunctator);
  _Cannae_; _Scipio Africanus_; _Scipio Aemilianus_; _Aemilius Paulus_;
  _Perseus_; _Marius_; _Jugurtha_; _Sulla_; _Sertorius_; _Pompey_;
  _Caesar_; _Antonius_ (Mark Antony).

  _Charles Martel_.

  _Charlemagne_.

  _William I_ (of England); _Hastings_; _Standard, Battle of_.

  _Crusades_ (equivalent to 90 pages of this Guide); _Godfrey of
  Bouillon_; _Raymund of Toulouse_; _Richard I_ (of England); _Philip
  II_ (of France); _Saladin_; _Henry VI_ (Roman Emperor); _Baldwin I_;
  _Frederick II_; _Louis IX_ (of France).

  _Bouvines._

  _Bannockburn_; _Robert Bruce_.

  _Hundred Years’ War_; _Philip VI_; _Edward III_; _Crécy_; _John of
  Bohemia_; _Edward_ (the Black Prince); _Calais_; _Poitiers_; _John II_
  (of France); _Lancaster, House of_ (for John of Gaunt); _Bertrand Du
  Guesclin_; _Henry V_ (of England); _Agincourt_; _Joan of Arc_; _1st
  Duke of Bedford_ (John Plantagenet); Count of _Dunois_.

  _Wars of the Roses_; _St. Albans_; _Towton_; _Earl of Warwick_
  (Richard Neville); _Edward IV_.

  _Ravenna_, battle of; _Bayard_ (the chevalier); _Gaston de Foix_;
  _Pescara_; _Navarro_; _Marignan_; _Francis_ I (of France).

  _Flodden_; _James IV_ (of Scotland); _Norfolk, 3rd Duke_.

  _St. Quentin_ (1557); _Coligny_; _Montmorency_ (constable); _Emmanuel
  Philibert_.

  _Alva_; _William the Silent_ (Vol. 28, p. 672); _Maurice of Nassau_;
  _Farnese_ (duke of Parma).

  _Thirty Years’ War_; _Maximilian I_ (of Bavaria); _Frederick V_
  (elector palatinate; Vol. 11, p. 59); _Mansfeld_; _Tilly_;
  _Wallenstein_; _Gustavus Adolphus_; _Breitenfeld_; _Lützen_; _Bernhard
  of Saxe-Weimar_; duc de _Rohan_; _Frederick Henry_; _Gallas_; _Banér_;
  _Piccolomini_; _Turenne_; _Torstensson_; _Condé_; _Freiburg_; _Mercy_;
  _Nördlingen_; _Wrangel_ (1613–1676); _Fronde_.

  _Great Rebellion_ (English Civil Wars of 1642–52); _Charles I_ (of
  England); _Prince Rupert_; _Essex_ (2nd Earl, Vol. 9, p. 782);
  _Edgehill_; _John Hotham_; _Baron Hopton_; _Sir William Waller_; _Duke
  of Newcastle_ (1592–1676); _Fairfax of Cameron_ (2nd and 3rd Barons);
  _Sir Bevil Grenville_; _Oliver Cromwell_; _Manchester_, 2nd Earl of
  (Vol. 17, p. 543); _Marston Moor_; _Leven_; _Skippon_; _Argyll, 8th
  Earl_; _Montrose_; _Lord Newark_; _Goring_; _Naseby_; _John Lambert_;
  _Charles Fleetwood_; _Dunbar_; _Thomas Harrison_.

  _Dutch Wars_; _Louis XIV_; _Condé_; _Frederick William of
  Brandenburg_; _Turenne_; _Montecucculi_; _William III_ (of England);
  _Duke of Luxembourg_; _Charles of Lorraine_ (Vol. 17, p. 11).

  _Vauban._

  _Grand Alliance, War of_; _Catinat_; _Luxembourg_; _Vauban_;
  _Fleurus_; _Louvois_; _Duc de Boufflers_; _Coehoorn_; _William III of
  England_; _Steenkirk_; _Neerwinden_; _Villeroi_.

  _Spanish Succession_; _Marlborough_; _Eugene of Savoy_; _Villars_;
  _Peterborough_; _Ruvigny_; _Catinat_; _Vendôme_; _Blenheim_;
  _Ramillies_; _Oudenarde_; _Malplaquet_; _Berwick_.

  _Polish Succession War._

  _Austrian Succession_; _Frederick the Great_; _Count von Schwerin_;
  _L. A. Khevenhüller_; _Duc de Broglie_; _Traun_; _Charles_ (of
  Lorraine; Vol. 5, p. 936); _Seckendorf_; _George II_ (of England);
  _Noailles_; _Conti_ (Vol. 7, p. 28); _Hohenfriedberg_; _Fontenoy_;
  comte de _Saxe_ (marshal); Duke of _Cumberland_; _Ligonier_;
  _Belle-Isle_.

  _Seven Years’ War_ (with 5 diagrams): _Frederick the Great_; _Clive_;
  _Amherst_; _Wolfe_; comte de _Lally_; _Montcalm_; Count von _Browne_;
  _Ferdinand_ (of Brunswick); _Daun_; _Zieten_; _F. E. J. Keith_;
  _Seydlitz_; _Rossbach_; _Soubise_ (1715–1787); _Leuthen_; _Loudon_;
  _Kunersdorf_; _Finck_; _Minden_; _Sackville_, 1st Viscount; _Granby_.

  _American War of Independence_; _Lexington_; _Concord_; _Bunker Hill_;
  _Joseph Warren_; _Israel Putnam_; _Thomas Gage_; _William Howe_;
  _Ethan Allen_; _Ticonderoga_; _George Washington_; _Benedict Arnold_;
  _Richard Montgomery_; _Long Island_; _Rufus Putnam_; _William
  Alexander_; _Trenton and Princeton_; _Henry Knox_; _Brandywine_;
  _Germantown_; _Burgoyne_; _Bennington_; _John Stark_; _Saratoga_;
  _George Rogers Clark_; _Sir Henry Clinton_; _Monmouth_; _John
  Sullivan_; _Anthony Wayne_; _William Moultrie_; _Charleston_ (S. C.);
  _Francis Marion_; _Thomas Sumter_; _Andrew Pickens_; _Horatio Gates_;
  _Nathanael Greene_; _Cornwallis_; _Kalb_; _Camden_; _King’s Mountain_;
  _Daniel Morgan_; _Henry Lee_; _Tarleton_; _Eutawville_; _Lafayette_;
  _Yorktown_.

  _French Revolutionary Wars_ (with 6 diagrams); _Dumouriez_;
  _Kellerman_ (1735–1820); _Custine_; _Jemappes_; _Gribeauval_;
  _Neerwinden_ (1793); _Clerfayt_; _Vendée_; _L. N. M. Carnot_;
  _Jourdan_; _Wattignies_; _Joubert_; _Frederick Augustus, Duke of
  York_; _Souham_; _Moreau_; _Kray von Krajova_; _Vandamme_; _Pichegru_;
  _Marceau_; _Charles_, archduke of Austria (Vol. 5, p. 935); _Masséna_;
  _Napoleon_; _Augereau_; _Serurier_; _Joubert_; _Sir W. Sidney Smith_;
  _Kléber_; _Alexandria_; _Oudinot_; _Suvarov_; _Borodino_; _Macdonald_;
  _Marengo_; _Murat_; _Lannes_; _Berthier_; _Bautzen_.

  _Napoleonic Campaigns_ (9 diagrams; and see, on p. 233 of Vol. 19,
  “The Military Character of Napoleon”); _Napoleon_; _Wrede_; _Murat_;
  _Charles XIV_ (Bernadotte); _Marmont_; _Davout_; _Ney_; _Lannes_;
  _Soult_; _Berthier_; _Angereau_; _Dupont de l’Etang_; _Austerlitz_;
  _Kutusov_; _Hohenlohe_ (Vol. 13, p. 572); _Blücher_; _Lasalle_;
  _Massenbach_; _Kalckreuth_; _Scharnhorst_; _Lefebvre-Desnoëttes_;
  _Count von Bennigsen_; _Eylau_; _Friedland_; _Grouchy_; _Mortier_;
  _Senarmont_; _Oudinot_; _Massena_; _Aspern-Essling_; _Charles_,
  archduke of Austria; _Bellegarde_; _Wagram_; _Beauharnais_;
  _Macdonald_; Jerome _Bonaparte_ (Vol. 4, p. 195); _Barclay de Tolly_;
  _Bagration_; _Victor-Perrin_; _Yorck von Wartenburg_; _Lauriston_;
  _Wittgenstein_; _Bautzen_; _Schwarzenberg_; _Gouvion St. Cyr_;
  _Dresden_ (battle).

  _Peninsular War_; _Junot_; _Murat_; _Dupont de l’Etang_; _Moncey_;
  _Palafox y Melzi_; _Wellington_; _Sir John Moore_; Sir David _Baird_;
  _Talavera_; _Suchet_; _Sebastiani_; _Foy_; _Lord Hill_; _Lord
  Lynedoch_; W. C. _Beresford_; _Salamanca_; _Clausel_; _O’Donnell_;
  _Vitoria_; _Sir William Napier_.

  _American War_ of 1812; Isaac _Brock_; _Dearborn_; _Baltimore_;
  _Washington_; _New Orleans_; Andrew _Jackson_; Jacob _Brown_; James
  _Wilkinson_; and for sea-fighting the titles in the chapter of this
  Guide: _For Naval Officers_.

  _Waterloo Campaign_ (with 3 maps); _Napoleon_; _Murat_;
  _Schwarzenberg_; _Barclay de Tolly_; _Wellington_; _Blücher_; _Lord
  Hill_; _Anglesey_; _D’Erlon_; _Gneisenau_; _Gérard_; _Grouchy_;
  _Vandamme_; _Thielmann_; _Bülow_ (1755–1816); _Ney_; _Exelmans_;
  _Pajol_; _Picton_.

  _Greek Independence_; _Ypsilanti_; _Mavrocordato_; _Coraës_;
  _Dundonald_; _Sir Richard Church_.

  _Russo-Turkish Wars_ (1828–29); _Paskevich_; _Diebitsch_ (1877–78);
  _Osman_; _Skobelev_; _Plevna_ (with diagram); _Todleben_; _Shipka
  Pass_.

  _Crimean War_ (with 2 diagrams): _Gorchakov_; _Hess_; _Raglan_; _Saint
  Arnaud_; _Canrobert_; _Pelissier_; _Menshikov_ (1787–1869); _Bosquet_;
  _Todleben_; _Alma_; _Balaklava_; _Scarlett_; _Cardigan_; _Inkerman_;
  _Sir George Brown_; _Sir George Cathcart_; _Kinglake_.

  _Italian Wars_ (1848–1870); _Radetzky_; _Charles Albert_ of Sardinia
  (Vol. 5, p. 938); _Durando_; _Pepe_; _Victor Emmanuel_; _Pelissier_;
  _Canrobert_; _La Marmora_; _Napoleon III_; _Forey_; _MacMahon_;
  _Bazaine_; _Wimpffen_; _Benedek_; _Niel_; _Custozza_; _Cialdini_.

  _American Civil War_; _Bull Run_; _McDowell_; _Beauregard_; _J. E.
  Johnston_; _R. E. Lee_; _Rosecrans_; _Lexington, Mo._; _Fremont_;
  _Nathaniel Lyon_; _F. P. Blair, Jr._; _Pope_; _Burnside_; _B. F.
  Butler_; _McClellan_; _A. S. Johnston_; _G. H. Thomas_; _U. S. Grant_;
  _C. F. Smith_; _Lew Wallace_; _McClernand_; _Halleck_; _O. M.
  Mitchel_; _Shiloh_; _N. P. Banks_; _T. J. (Stonewall) Jackson_;
  _Shenandoah_; _Fair Oaks_; _Seven Days_; _A. P. Hill_; _D. H. Hill_;
  _J. E. B. Stuart_; _Braxton Bragg_; _Longstreet_; _Bull Run (second
  battle)_; _Ewell_; _Sigel_; _Hooker_; _Kearny_; _Fitz-John Porter_;
  _Antietam_; _E. V. Sumner_; _Hood_; _Burnside_; _Van Dorn_;
  _Fredericksburg_; _W. B. Franklin_; _John F. Reynolds_; _D. N. Couch_;
  _Stone River_; _Hardee_; _A. McD. McCook_; _T. L. Crittenden_; _G. H.
  Thomas_; _J. C. Breckinridge_; _McPherson_; _Chancellorsville_; _T. F.
  Meagher_; _Meade_; _Gettysburg_; _O. O. Howard_; _Doubleday_; _Early_;
  _Hancock_; _Sickles_; _Vicksburg_; _J. H. Morgan_; _Chickamauga_; _N.
  B. Forrest_; _Chattanooga_; _Sheridan_; _Wilderness_ (4 diagrams);
  _Fitz-Hugh Lee_; _J. H. Wilson_; _G. K. Warren_; _John Sedgwick_;
  _Merritt_; _R. H. Anderson_; _Spottsylvania_; _Cold Harbor_;
  _Petersburg_; _Shenandoah Valley_; _Cedar Creek_; _W. T. Sherman_;
  _Marietta_; _Atlanta_; _Slocum_; _Schofield_; _Joseph Wheeler_; _J. A.
  Logan_; _Nashville_; _Richmond_; _Appomatox Court-House_; _Durham, N.
  C._

  _Seven Weeks’ War_ (with 2 diagrams): _William I_ (of Germany);
  _Moltke_; _Benedek_; _Frederick III_ (of Germany); _Frederick Charles_
  (of Prussia; Vol. 11, p. 61); _Steinmetz_; _Blumenthal_;
  _Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen_ (Vol. 13, p. 573b); _Goeben_; and see _Italian
  Wars_ above.

  _Franco-German War_; _Napoleon III_; _Niel_; _Moltke_; _William I_ (of
  Germany); _Steinmetz_; _Frossard_; _MacMahon_; _Wörth_ (with plan);
  _Bazaine_; _Metz_ (2 plans); _Alvensleben_; _Canrobert_; _Bourbaki_;
  _Leboeuf_; _Manteuffel_; _Caprivi_; _Prince Frederick Charles_;
  _Sedan_ (with plan); _Vinoy_; _Wimpffen_; _Gallifet_; _Werder_;
  _Gambetta_; _Freycinet_; _Aurelle de Paladines_; _Orleans_;
  _Bourbaki_; _Le Mans_; _Chanzy_; _Faidherbe_; _Belfort_; _Clinchant_;
  _Paris_.

  _Servo-Bulgarian War_; _Alexander of Bulgaria_ (Vol. 1, p. 544);
  _Milan of Servia_.

  _Greco-Turkish War_; _Edhem Pasha_.

  _Spanish-American War_; _Joseph Wheeler_; _F. V. Greene_; _Roosevelt_;
  _Miles_.

  _Transvaal_ (Vol. 27, pp. 203 sqq. for Boer War of 1899–1902);
  _Kruger_; _Cronje_; _P. J. Joubert_; _Sir George White_; _Buller_;
  _Lord Roberts_; _Lord Kitchener_; _J. H. De la Rey_; _Christian
  DeWet_; _Louis Botha_.

  _Russo-Japanese War_ (with 4 diagrams); _Kuroki_; _Kuropatkin_;
  _Inouye_; _Oku_; _Nozu_; _Oyama_.

[Sidenote: A Military Encyclopaedia]

The military student will see from what has already been said that the
Britannica is not merely a general work of reference but a valuable aid
in the study of military history, biography, theory, practice and
phraseology. The following alphabetical list names only the chief of the
articles in the Britannica which make it a military cyclopaedia. As has
been noticed above, many articles are special treatises in themselves
dealing with many related topics, and—for instance—articles on wars or
campaigns contain elaborate descriptions of separate battles. Many
topics are treated in the Britannica, even if they are not in the
following list, and their whereabouts may be readily learned by turning
to the Index volume.

 Abatis
 Accoutrement
 Acinaces
 Adjutant
 Adjutant-general
 Adye, Sir John Miller
 Aelian (Aelianus Tacticus)
 Aemilius, Paulus
 Aeneas Tacticus
 Aeronautics
 Agincourt, Battle of
 Aide-de-camp
 Albert, Charles, of Sardinia
 Alcibiades
 Alexander
 Alexander the Great
 Alexander, William
 Alexander of Bulgaria
 Alexandria
 Alignment
 Allan, Ethan
 Alma
 Alva
 Alvensleben
 Ambush
 Ammunition
 American Civil War
 American War of 1812
 American War of Independence
 Amherst
 Anderson, R. H.
 Anglesey
 Antietam
 Antonius (Mark Antony)
 Antwerp
 Archery
 Argyll, 8th Earl
 Armet
 Arms and Armour
 Army
 Army Corps
 Army Signalling
 Arnold, Benedict
 Arquebus
 Arrian
 Arsenal
 Artillery
 Asclepiodotus
 Aspern-Essling
 Assegai
 Atlanta
 Augereau
 Augsburg, War of the League of
 Augustus, Frederick, Duke of York
 Aurelle de Paladines
 Austerlitz
 Austrian Succession, War of the
 Aventail or Avantaille
 Bagration
 Bailey
 Baird, Sir David
 Balaklava
 Baldwin I
 Ballistics
 Bandolier
 Banér
 Banks, N. P.
 Bannockburn
 Barbette
 Barclay de Tolly
 Barracks
 Barricade
 Basinet
 Bastion
 Batta
 Battalion
 Battering Ram
 Battle
 Bautzen
 Bayonet
 Bazaine
 Bayard (the Chevalier)
 Beauharnais
 Beauregard
 Bedford, 1st Duke of
 Belfort
 Bellegarde
 Belle-Isle
 Benedek
 Bennigsen, Count von
 Bennington
 Beresford, W. C.
 Bernhard of Saxe-Weimar
 Berthier
 Berwick
 Bivouac
 Blair, F. P., Jr.
 Blenheim
 Blockhouse
 Blücher
 Blumenthal
 Blunderbuss
 Bomb
 Bombardier
 Bombardment
 Bonaparte, Jerome
 Borodino
 Bosquet
 Botha
 Boufflers, Duc de
 Boulevard
 Bourbaki
 Bouvines
 Bragg, Braxton
 Brandywine
 Brasidas
 Breckinridge, J. C.
 Breitenfeld
 Brevet
 Brialmont, H. A.
 Brigade
 Brigandine
 Benedetto Brin
 Bronsart von Schellendorf, Paul
 Brown, Sir George
 Brown, Jacob
 Brown Bess
 Browne, Count von
 Bruce, Robert
 Bullet
 Buller
 Bull Run
 Bull Run (second battle)
 Bülow, Dietrich Heinrich
 Bunker Hill
 Burgonet, or Burganet
 Burgoyne
 Burnside
 Busby
 Butler, B. F.
 Cadet
 Cadre
 Caesar
 Calais
 Caliver
 Caltrop
 Camden
 Camp
 Campaign
 Canadian Forces
 Cannac
 Cannon
 Canrobert
 Canteen
 Cantonment
 Capitulation
 Caponier
 Caprivi
 Captain
 Carabiniers
 Carbine
 Cardigan
 Carnot, L. N. M.
 Carronade
 Carthage
 Cartridge
 Carrington, H. B.
 Casemate
 Case-Shot
 Cashier
 Castle
 Catapult
 Cathcart, Sir George
 Catinat
 Caudine Forks
 Cavalry
 Cedar Creek, Va.
 Chaeroneia
 Chancellorsville
 Chanzy
 Chaplain
 Charlemagne
 Charles, Archduke of Austria
 Charles I (of England)
 Charles XIV (Bernadotte)
 Charles Martel
 Charleston, S. C.
 Chassepot
 Chattanooga, Tenn.
 Chesney, C. C.
 Chesney, Sir G. T.
 Chevaux-de-frise
 Church, Sir Richard
 Chickamauga Creek
 Cialdini
 Circumvallation, Lines of
 Clark, George Rogers
 Clausel
 Clausewitz, Karl von
 Claymore
 Cleon
 Clerfayt
 Clinchant
 Clinton, Sir Henry
 Clive
 Coast Defence
 Coastguard
 Coehoorn
 Cold Harbor
 Coligny
 Colonel
 Colours, Military
 Colour-sergeant
 Commander
 Commandeer
 Commando
 Commissariat
 Concord
 Condé
 Condottiere
 Conscription
 Conti
 Coraés
 Cordite
 Cormontaingne, Louis de
 Cornwallis
 Corporal
 Corps
 Couch, D. N.
 Counterscarp
 Countersign
 Court Marshal
 Cox, J. D.
 Crécy
 Crimean War
 Crilias
 Crittenden, T. L.
 Cromwell, Oliver
 Cronje
 Crusades
 Cuirass
 Cuirassiers
 Cumberland, Duke of
 Custine
 Custozza
 Cutlass
 Dagger
 Dannewerk
 Darius
 Daun
 Davout
 Dearborn
 Defile
 Depot
 D’Erlon
 De la Rey
 Devolution, War of
 De Wet
 Diebitsch
 Dirk
 Division
 Dodge, Theodore A.
 Donelson, Fort
 Doubleday
 Dragoon
 Dresden
 Du Guesclin, Bertrand
 Dumouriez
 Dunbar
 Dundonald
 Dunes
 Dunois, Count of
 Dupont de l’Etang
 Düppel
 Durando
 Dutch Wars
 Early
 Echelon
 Edgehill
 Edhem Pasha
 Edward (the Black Prince)
 Edward III
 Edward IV
 Emmanuel Philibert
 Emmanuel, Victor
 Enceinte
 Enfilade
 Engineers, Military
 Ensign
 Epaminondas
 Epaulette
 Essex
 Eugene of Savoy
 Eutawville
 Ewell
 Exelmans
 Explosives
 Eylau
 Fabius (Cunctator)
 Faidherbe
 Fairfax of Cameron
 Fair Oaks, Va.
 Farnese (Duke of Parma)
 Fascine
 Ferdinand (of Brunswick)
 Filibuster
 Finck
 Fleetwood, Charles
 Fleurus
 Flodden
 Flying
 Flying Column
 Foix, Gaston de
 Folard, Jean Charles
 Fontenoy
 Forey
 Forlorn Hope
 Forrest, N. B.
 Fortification and Siegecraft
 Foy
 Francis I (of France)
 Franco-German War
 Franklin, W. B.
 Frederick II
 Frederick III (of Germany)
 Frederick V
 Frederick Charles (of Prussia)
 Frederick Henry
 Frederick the Great
 Frederick William of Brandenburg
 Fredericksburg, Va.
 Freiburg im Breisgau
 Fremont, J. C.
 French Revolutionary Wars
 Freycinet
 Friedland
 Frigate
 Fronde
 Frossard
 Fugleman
 Fusilier
 Gabion
 Gage, Thomas
 Gallas
 Galliffet
 Gambetta
 Garrison
 Gates, Horatio
 Gauntlet
 General
 George II of England
 Gerard
 Germantown
 Gettysburg
 Gingall or Jingal
 Glacis
 Gneisenau
 Godfrey of Bouillon
 Goeben
 Gorchakov
 Gorget
 Goring
 Gouvion St. Cyr
 Granby
 Grand Alliance, War of the
 Grant, U. S.
 Grape
 Great Rebellion
 Greco-Turkish War
 Greek Fire
 Greek Independence, War of
 Greene, F. V.
 Greene, Nathanael
 Grenade
 Grenadier
 Grenville, Sir Bevil
 Gribeauval
 Grouchy
 Guards and Household Troops
 Guardship
 Guibert, Comte de
 Guichard, Karl Gottlieb
 Gun
 Guncotton
 Gunner
 Gunpowder
 Gun-Room
 Gustavus Adolphus
 Halbert
 Halleck, H. W.
 Hamley, Sir Edward
 Hancock
 Hannibal
 Hanno
 Hardee
 Harper’s Ferry, W. Va.
 Harrison, Thomas
 Hasdrubal
 Hastings
 Haversack
 Heliograph
 Helmet
 Henderson, G. F. R.
 Henry V (of England)
 Henry VI (Roman Emperor)
 Herodotus
 Herrings, Battle of the
 Hess
 Hill, A. P.
 Hill, D. H.
 Hill, Lord Rowland
 Hohenfriedberg
 Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen
 Holster
 Hood
 Hooker
 Hopton, Baron
 Hostage
 Hotham, John
 Howard, O. O.
 Howe, William
 Howitzer
 Hull, William
 Hundred Years’ War
 Hussar
 Infantry
 Inkerman
 Inouye
 Isly
 Italian Wars
 Jackson, Andrew
 Jackson, T. J. (“Stonewall”)
 James IV (of Scotland)
 Japan, _Army_
 Jemappes
 Joan of Arc
 John of Bohemia
 John II of France
 Johnston, A. S.
 Johnston, J. E.
 Jomini, Baron A. H.
 Joubert, P. J.
 Jourdan
 Jugurtha
 Junot
 Kalb
 Kalckreuth
 Kearny
 Keith, F. E. J.
 Kellermann
 Khaki
 Khevenhüller, L. A.
 Kinglake
 King’s Mountain
 Kitchener, Lord
 Kite
 Kléber
 Knobkerrie
 Knox, Henry
 Kray von Krajova
 Kriegspiel
 Kruger
 Kunersdorf
 Kuroki
 Kuropatkin
 Kutusov
 Laager
 Lafayette
 Lally, Comte de
 Lambert, John
 La Marmora
 Lancaster, House of
 Lance
 Landsknecht
 Landsturm
 Landwehr
 Langlois, H.
 Lannes
 Lasalle
 Lauriston
 Leboeuf
 Lee, Fitz-Hugh
 Lee, Henry
 Lee, R. E.
 Lefebvre-Desnoëttes
 Legion
 Leipzig
 Le Mans
 Leonidas
 Leuthen
 Leven
 Lexington
 Ligonier
 Linstock
 Logan, J. A.
 Long Island, N. Y.
 Longstreet
 Lorraine, Charles of
 Loudon
 Louis IX (of France)
 Louis XIV
 Louvois
 Lützen
 Luxembourg
 Luxembourg, Duke of
 Lord Lynedoch
 Lyon, Nathaniel
 McClellan
 McClernand
 McCook, A. McD.
 Macdonald
 McDowell
 McPherson
 Macedon
 Machine Gun
 MacMahon
 Mago
 Major
 Malleson, George Bruce
 Malplaquet
 Mameluke
 Manchester, 2d Earl of
 Military Manoeuvres
 Mansfeld
 Manteuffel
 Mantineia
 Marathon
 Marceau
 March
 Marengo
 Marietta, Ga.
 Marignan
 Marion, Francis
 Marius
 Marlborough
 Marmont
 Marston Moor
 Martello Tower
 Martial Law
 Martinet
 Masséna
 Massenbach
 Massinissa
 Matross
 Maurice of Nassau
 Mavrocordato
 Maximilian I (of Bavaria)
 Meade
 Meagher, T. F.
 Menshikov
 Mercenary
 Mercy
 Merritt
 Metz
 Meuse Line
 Milan of Servia
 Miles
 Military Law
 Militia
 Miltiades
 Minden
 Minute Men
 Mitchel, O. M.
 Moat
 Moltke
 Moncey
 Monmouth
 Montalembert
 Montcalm
 Montecucculi
 Montgomery, Richard
 Montmorency (constable)
 Montrose
 Moore, Sir John
 Moreau
 Morgan, Daniel
 Morgan, J. H.
 Morion
 Mortier
 Moselle Line
 Moultrie, William
 Mounted Infantry
 Murat
 Musket
 Muster
 Mutiny
 Napier, Sir William
 Napoleon
 Napoleonic Campaigns
 Napoleon III
 Naseby
 Nashville
 Navarro
 Needle-gun
 Neerwinden
 Newark, Lord
 Newcastle, Duke of
 New Orleans
 Ney
 Niel
 Nitro-glycerine
 Noailles
 Nördlingen
 Norfolk, 3rd Duke
 Nozu
 O’Donnell, H. J.
 Officers
 Oku
 Olynthus
 Onosander
 Ordnance
 Orleans
 Osman
 Oudenarde
 Oudinot
 Oyama
 Pajol
 Palafox y Melzi
 Panoply
 Parade
 Parados
 Parallels
 Paris
 Parole
 Partisan
 Paskevich
 Pasley, Sir C. W.
 Patrol
 Pavis, or Pavise
 Pelissier
 Peloponnesian War
 Peninsular War
 Pericles
 Perseus
 Pescara
 Petard
 Peterborough
 Petersburg Campaign
 Petronel
 Petty-Officer
 Phalanx
 Philip II (of Macedon)
 Philip II (of France)
 Philip VI
 Piccolomini
 Pichegru
 Pickens, Andrew
 Picket
 Picton
 Pigeon Post
 Pike
 Pistol
 Platoon
 Pneumatic Gun
 Poitiers
 Polish Succession, War of the
 Polyaenus
 Pompey
 Poniard
 Pontoon
 Pope
 Porter, Fitz-John
 Press Gang
 Propellants
 Punic Wars
 Purser
 Putnam, Israel
 Putnam, Rufus
 Pylos
 Pyrrhus
 Quadrilateral
 Quiver
 Radetzky
 Raglan
 Ramillies
 Range-finder, Telemeter or Position-finder
 Rapier
 Rapparee
 Ravenna
 Raymund of Toulouse
 Razzia
 Reconnaissance
 Redan
 Redoubt
 Regiment
 Retrenchment
 Réveillé
 Reynolds, John F.
 Richard I (of England)
 Ricochet
 Richmond
 Rifle
 Roberts, Lord
 Rocket
 Rohan, duc de
 Roosevelt
 Ropes, J. C.
 Rosecrans
 Roses, Wars of the
 Rossbach
 Rupert, Prince
 Russo-Japanese War
 Russo-Turkish Wars
 Rüstow, Friedrich W.
 Ruvigny
 Sackville, 1st Viscount
 Saint Arnaud
 St. Quentin
 Salade, Sallet or Salet
 Saladin
 Salamanca
 Salamis
 Saratoga, Battles of
 Saxe, Comte de (marshal)
 Scabbard
 Scarlett
 Scharnhorst
 Schiavone
 Schofield
 Schwarzenberg
 Schwerin, Count von
 Scimitar
 Scipio Aemilianus
 Scipio Africanus
 Scout
 Sebastiani
 Seckendorf
 Sedan
 Sedgwick, John
 Senarmont
 Sentinel or Sentry
 Sepoy
 Serjeant
 Sertorius
 Servo-Bulgarian War
 Sérurier
 Seven Days’ Battle
 Seven Weeks’ War
 Seven Years’ War
 Seydlitz
 Shenandoah Valley Campaign
 Sheridan
 Sherman, W. T.
 Shield
 Shiloh
 Shipka Pass
 Sickles
 Siege
 Sigel
 Sights
 Signal
 Silesian Wars
 Sirdar
 Skippon
 Skobelev
 Sling
 Slocum
 Smith, C. F.
 Smith, Sir W. Sidney
 Soubise
 Souham
 Soult
 Sowar
 Spahis
 Spanish-American War
 Spanish Succession, War of The
 Spear
 Spontoon
 Spottsylvania
 Spur
 Spy
 Squadron
 Staff, military
 Standard, Battle of
 Stark, John
 Steenkirk
 Steinmetz
 Stiletto
 Stone River
 Stony Point
 Strategy
 Strelitz
 Stuart, J. E. B.
 Suchet
 Sulla
 Sullivan, John
 Sumner, E. V.
 Sumter, Thomas
 Supply and Transport (Military)
 Sutler
 Suvarov
 Swold
 Sword
 Tactics
 Talavera de la Reina
 Target
 Tarleton
 Tattoo
 Thermopylae
 Thielmann
 Thirty Years’ War
 Thomas, G. H.
 Thucydides
 Ticonderoga, N. Y.
 Tilly
 Todleben
 Torstensson
 Towton
 Transvaal
 Trasimene
 Traun
 Traverse
 Trébuchet
 Trenton and Princeton
 Troop
 Turenne
 Ulan
 Uniforms
 Vandamme
 Van Dorn
 Vauban
 Vedette
 Vegetius
 Vendée
 Vendôme
 Verdun
 Verdy du Vernois
 Veteran
 Vexillum
 Vicksburg
 Victor-Perrin
 Villars
 Villeroi
 Vinoy
 Visor
 Vitoria
 Volunteers
 Wagram
 Wallace, Lewis
 Waller, Sir William
 Wallenstein
 Ward Room
 War Game
 Warrant Officer
 Warren, G. K.
 Warren, Joseph
 Warwick, Earl of
 Washington, George
 Waterloo Campaign
 Wattignies
 Wayne, Anthony
 Weapon
 Wellington
 Werder
 Wheeler, Joseph
 White, Sir George
 Wilderness, Va.
 Wilkinson, James
 William the Silent
 William I (of England)
 William III (of England)
 William I (of Germany)
 Wilson, J. H.
 Wimpffen
 Wittgenstein
 Wolfe
 Wood, Sir H. E.
 Worth
 Wrangel
 Wrede
 Xenophon
 Yataghan
 Yeomanry
 Yorck von Wartenburg
 Yorktown, Va.
 Ypsilanti
 Zieten
 Zouave




                              CHAPTER XXX
                           FOR NAVAL OFFICERS


The scope of a naval officer’s professional interests is so broad that
the present chapter of this Guide could not, without duplicating other
chapters, indicate all the aspects of the Britannica with which he is
directly concerned. And he will find that his use of the Britannica is
simplified by the subdivisions about to be specified, which virtually
present his subjects under four different heads. Of course he may be
called upon, in the exercise of his duties, simultaneously to think and
to act in all his capacities, to concentrate upon the swift solution of
one problem his knowledge of warfare, of shipbuilding, of navigation and
of mechanical engineering; but his reading upon these topics naturally
divides itself into these four parts.

[Sidenote: Three Other Relevant Chapters]

Inasmuch as army officers, even when they are at sea, are passengers,
and, save in relation to the discipline of their troops, have nothing to
do with the ship’s management, it could not be assumed that the present
chapter would appeal to them. But naval officers, when co-operating in a
land expedition, need to employ every kind of knowledge that is of use
to army officers, and as the chapter _For Army Officers_ in this Guide
would therefore in any case be read by them, it has seemed convenient to
include in it the description of those articles in the Britannica which
deal with war in general.

The chapter _For Marine Transportation Men_ in this Guide is also one to
which the naval officer should refer, as it deals with ships and
navigation in general. The articles SHIP and SHIPBUILDING mentioned in
that chapter are (except for the historical section of the former) by
Sir Philip Watts, designer of the British “Dreadnoughts” and
“Super-Dreadnoughts;” and the article SHIPPING is by Douglas Owen, of
the Royal Naval War College at Portsmouth. Obviously these and many
other articles described in that chapter are of the greatest importance
to naval officers.

The chapter _For Engineers_ in this Guide describes the articles dealing
with steam engines, internal combustion engines, electrical machinery
and fuels of all kinds; and it would be a waste of space to repeat in
this chapter a summary of the Britannica treatment of these subjects.

All three of the chapters mentioned should therefore be treated as
forming constituent parts of the general plan of this present chapter,
in which the naval officer will find no repetition of their contents.

[Sidenote: The Key Article]

The article to which he will naturally first turn is NAVY AND NAVIES
(Vol. 19, p. 299), by David Hannay, author of _A Short History of the
Royal Navy_. This article is equivalent to 60 pages of this Guide in
length. It contains:

  _Naval Personnel._

  Sketches of the _Administrative History of navies_: _Athenian_;
  _Roman_; _Byzantine_; _Medieval_; _British_, with special attention to
  the period since the Restoration, and the reforms under James II when
  Samuel Pepys was secretary;

  _French_—modern navy dating from the time of Richelieu;

  _Spanish_—a great navy without an organization before the 18th
  century;

  _Dutch_—good seamen and well-fed, led by able admirals, but
  unorganized, and unimportant after the 17th century;

  _United States_—the first great extra-European power on the sea;

  _Russian_—dating from the reign of Peter the Great, when it was
  organized and led by foreigners.

  _The Balance of Navies in History_: influence of sea-power—“when
  Napoleon fell, the navy of Great Britain was not merely the first in
  the world; it was the only powerful navy in existence.” _Modern
  Rivalry_ between Italy and Germany (1871), United States (1890),
  Japan; England and the Dual Alliance—“naval scares” since 1874;
  British Naval Defence Act of 1889; Russia’s navy crushed (1904); new
  navies rivalling Great Britain and France,—Italy, Germany, United
  States, Japan.

  _Latest developments_: “Dreadnoughts”; Building Programmes.

  _Bibliography_ (about 1800 words).

  _Naval Strategy and Tactics_.

  _Historical evolution_: inter-relation of the ship’s capacity and
  armament.

  _Early history_: ramming demanded oars for propulsion; small warships,
  large fighting crews,—no blockade, short cruises;

  _Greek and Roman methods_: boarding introduced by Romans; “bearding,”
  that is, fortifying with iron bands across the bows, an early form of
  armor plate.

  _Sailing ships_: ramming discarded; “line ahead” formation displaces
  “line abreast”; principles of fighting tactics—order at beginning to
  be kept throughout, thus no advantage taken of enemy’s disorder;
  Clerk’s theories (1790–97)—not maximum safety but immediate mêlée the
  _desideratum_; Suffren, Rodney and Howe and their disregard of
  accepted tactics.

  _Improved shipbuilding and modern times_: New problems—steam
  propulsion, its gain in speed, but its dependence on fuel; fleet in
  being; risk of transporting troops while enemy is unbeaten; ramming
  and pell-mell battles forbidden by torpedoes; searchlight as check to
  torpedoes; failure of attempts to “bottle up” harbours; gun-fire still
  the great factor; position; speed; submarines still an unknown factor.

  _Bibliography_.

[Sidenote: Naval Administration]

The first part of this article NAVY AND NAVIES should be supplemented by
the article ADMIRALTY ADMINISTRATION (Vol. 1, p. 195), by Admiral Sir R.
Vesey Hamilton, and, for the United States, the late Admiral W. T.
Sampson. The American part of this article describes the divisions and
the working of the Navy Department, its bureaus, judge advocate-general,
office of naval intelligence, boards etc.; and there is additional
information on the subject in such articles as DOCKYARDS, and UNITED
STATES NAVAL ACADEMY.

For the legal side of naval administration the reader should study the
article ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION (Vol. 1, p. 205), by Sir Walter
Phillimore, former president of the International Law Association (and
author of the Britannica article ADMIRALTY, HIGH COURT OF), and, for the
United States, by J. Arthur Barrett; and also the general articles
INTERNATIONAL LAW (Vol. 14, p. 694), by Sir Thomas Barclay, author of
_Problems of International Practice and Diplomacy_, and INTERNATIONAL
LAW, PRIVATE (Vol. 14, p. 701), by Dr. John Westlake, formerly professor
of international law, Cambridge University, and member for the United
Kingdom of the International (Hague) Court of Arbitration; as well as
such special articles as SEARCH (Vol. 24, p. 560), by Sir Thomas
Barclay, and SEA LAWS (Vol. 24, p. 535), by Sir Travers Twiss.

[Sidenote: Policy, Strategy, Tactics]

It has already been noticed that the closing part of the article NAVY
AND NAVIES dealt with strategy and tactics in a general way. This
subject is treated in fuller detail by Admiral Sir Cyprian Bridge,
G.C.B. (former Director of Naval Intelligence, British Navy, author of
_Sea-Power and other Studies_) in two articles SEA-POWER (Vol. 24, p.
548) and SEA, COMMAND OF THE (Vol. 24, p. 529). Each of these articles
will be of great value and interest to the naval officer as a summary
and criticism of the theories of Captain A. T. Mahan and Vice-Admiral P.
H. Colomb; and this will be made evident by the brief outline of the two
articles which follows.

  Article, SEA-POWER—Use of the term to mean (1) a state pre-eminently
  strong at sea; and (2)—as in this article—the various factors in a
  state’s naval strength. Thucydides as a forerunner of Mahan; he makes
  Pericles in comparing Athenian resources with those of her enemies
  comment on the importance of “sea-power.”

  The meaning of sea-power can only be learned historically. Although
  there have been more land-wars, “the course of history has been
  profoundly changed more often by contests on the water.” Salamis saved
  Greece and held back Oriental invasion. The loss of the Peloponnesian
  War by Athens was due to her weakening sea-power. The First Punic War,
  Roman rather than Carthaginian control of the Mediterranean, was won
  by Roman naval predominance. Mahommedan conquest spread west in Africa
  only with the creation of a navy. The crusades could not have
  continued had not Mahommedan naval power sunk as the Venetian, Pisan,
  and Genoese grew. The defeat of Genoa by Venice gave the latter a
  right to perform the ceremony of “wedding the sea” with a ring as
  token of “perpetual sway.” Lepanto (1571) the end of Turkish
  sea-power.

  Spanish and Portuguese sea-power crushed by English growth and the
  loss of the Armada. Early English naval history: the importance of the
  battle of Dover in 1217. Appearance of standing navies. The New World
  and its influence on sea-power. The sea-power of the Dutch; its sudden
  rise; its basis in foreign trade; the Dutch wars with England resulted
  in England’s becoming the first great naval power, but did not crush
  the United Provinces because of their sea-power. Torrington and the
  “Fleet in Being” in 1690. Change in naval operations in 17th
  century—the scene thereafter in the enemy’s waters, not near the coast
  of England.

  The 18th century. Rise of Russia’s sea-power—an artificial creation.
  Seven Years’ War and its gains to Great Britain. War of American
  Independence: British mistakes—the enemy’s coast _not_ considered the
  frontier. Wars of the French Revolution and Empire: Great Britain’s
  advantage not in organization, discipline or “science,” but in
  sea-experience.

  The War of 1812. “The British had now to meet the _élite_ of one of
  the finest communities of seamen ever known.... In any future war
  British sea-power, great as it may be, should not receive shocks like
  those that it unquestionably did suffer in 1812.”

  Later Manifestations of Sea-Power. American Civil War—“By dominating
  the rivers the Federals cut the Confederacy asunder; and, by the power
  they possessed of moving troops by sea at will, perplexed and harassed
  the defence, and facilitated the occupation of important points.”
  Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78—Turkish control of Black Sea forced
  Russians to invade by land through the difficult Balkans. Chilean
  Civil War of 1891—an army defeated by a navy. Chino-Japanese War of
  1894–95—Japanese navy in transport work and in crushing last
  resistance. Spanish-American War: “Spaniards were defeated by the
  superiority of the American sea-power.”

  Article, SEA, COMMAND OF THE—Sketch of Sovereignty of the Sea; Command
  different from Sovereignty or Dominion.

  Attempts to gain Command: Dutch Wars.

  Strategic Command or Control—largely the power of carrying out
  considerable over-sea expeditions at will. Seeking the enemy’s fleet.
  Temporary command in smaller operations.

[Sidenote: Special Historical Articles]

As for the army officer, so the Britannica has for the naval officer
many separate articles on wars, campaigns, battles, generals,
commanders. The following list of articles will serve as a guide to a
course of reading constituting a history of naval warfare, furnishing
the concrete separate facts on which are based the articles already
described.

  _Ancient History._

  _Greece_: articles _Salamis_, _Themistocles_, _Xerxes I_,
  _Peloponnesian War_, _Pericles_.

  _Rome_: articles _Punic Wars_, _Carthage_, _Pompey_, _Actium_.

  _Medieval History._

  _Crusades_; _Swold_; _Dover, Battle of_; _Sluys, Battle of_;
  _Espagnols sur Mer_ (and article _Edward III_), _Chioggia_ (and
  articles _Venice_ and _Genoa_).

  _16th Century._

  _Lepanto_ (and article _Don John of Austria_).

  _Armada_ (and articles on _Howard_, _Hawkins_, _Drake_, _Frobisher_,
  _Raleigh_, _Richard Grenville_, and the other heroes of this first
  bright glow of England’s naval glory).

  _The Era of Sailing Vessels._

  _Dutch Wars_ (and articles _Tromp_, _Robert Blake_, _Ayscue_, _De
  Ruyter_, _Cornelius De Witt_, _William Penn_, _George Monk_, _Sir John
  Lawson_, _James II_, _Prince Rupert_, _First Earl of Sandwich_,
  _Abraham Duquesne_).

  _Grand Alliance, Naval Operations_ (and articles _Earl of Torrington_,
  and _Beachy Head, Battle of_; _La Hogue_, _Earl of Oxford_ [Edward
  Russell] and _Tourville_).

  _Spanish Succession, Naval Operations_ (and _Château-Renault_,
  _Benbow_, _Rooke_, _Cloudesley Shovel_, _Duguay-Trouin_, _Forbin_).

  _Austrian Succession, Naval Operations_ (and the articles _Edward
  Vernon_, _Lord Anson_, _Toulon, Battle of_, and _Thomas Mathews_,
  marking the official sanction in England of an absurd formal system of
  tactics).

  _Seven Years’ War, Naval Operations_ (and _Boscawen_, _Byng_, _Hawke_,
  _Pocock_, _Quiberon_).

  _American War of Independence, Naval Operations_ (and _Esek Hopkins_,
  _John Paul Jones_, _Comte d’Estaing_, _Suffren St. Tropez_, _Thomas
  Truxtun_, _Lord Howe_, _John Byron_, _Hotham_, _Hyde Parker_,
  _Rodney_, _Guichen_, _Comte de Grasse_).

  _French Revolutionary Wars, Naval Operations_ (and _First of June,
  Battle of_, _Howe_, _Villaret de Joyeuse_, _Lord Bridport_, _Lord
  Hood_, _Earl of St. Vincent_ [John Jervis], _St. Vincent, Battle of_,
  _Lord Keith_, _Lord Duncan_, _Nile_, _Nelson_, _Sir Thomas
  Troubridge_).

  _Napoleonic Campaigns, Naval Operations_ (and _Baron de Saumarez_,
  _Copenhagen, Battle of_, _Sir Hyde Parker_, _Sir Robert Calder_,
  _Villeneuve_, _Trafalgar_, _Lord Collingwood_).

  _American War of_ 1812 (and _John Rodgers_, _Isaac Hull_, _William
  Bainbridge_, _Stephen Decatur_, _David Porter_, _Oliver Hazard Perry_,
  _Sir Philip Broke_, _Thomas Macdonough_).

  And _Lissa_ (1811), closely resembling Trafalgar, and _Navarino_,
  decisive for Greek Independence.

  _The Era of Steam._

  _American Civil War_ (and _Hampton Roads_, _Andrew Hull Foote_, _New
  Madrid_, _D. G. Farragut_, _D. D. Porter_, _W. B. Cushing_).

  _Chile-Peruvian War._

  _Chilean Civil War._

  _Chino-Japanese War_ (and see _Ito_).

  _Spanish-American War_ (and see the articles _W. T. Sampson_, _W. S.
  Schley_, _George Dewey_, _Pascual Cervera y Topete Cervera_).

  _Russo-Japanese War_ (and _Togo_, _Dogger Bank_, _Tsushima_).

[Sidenote: Armaments]

The subject of _armaments_ is treated in the articles SHIP and
SHIPBUILDING (see chapter _For Marine Transportation Men_), ARMOUR
PLATES, with illustrations, by Major William Egerton Edwards, late
lecturer at the Royal Naval War College, Greenwich, ORDNANCE,
AMMUNITION, TORPEDO, etc.

The following is an alphabetical list of articles in the Britannica of
especial interest to naval officers or other students of naval warfare.

 Actium
 Admiral
 Admiralty Administration
 Admiralty Jurisdiction
 American Civil War
 American War of Independence
 American War of 1812
 Ammunition
 Anson, Lord
 Armada
 Armour Plates
 Arms and Armour
 Ayscue
 Bainbridge, William
 Beachy Head
 Benbow
 Beresford
 Blake, Robert
 Boscawen
 Bridport, Lord
 Broke, Sir Philip
 Byng
 Byron, John
 Calder, Sir Robert
 Camperdown
 Carthage
 Casemate
 Case-shot
 Cervera
 Château-Renault
 Chile-Peruvian War
 Chilean Civil War
 Chino-Japanese War
 Chioggia
 Coaling Stations
 Coast Defence
 Coast Guard
 Codrington
 Coligny
 Collingwood, Lord
 Colomb
 Commodore
 Copenhagen, Battle of
 Crusades
 Cushing, W. B.
 Decatur, Stephen
 d’Estaing
 De Ruyter
 De Saumarez, Baron
 Dewey, George
 De Witt, Cornelius
 Dockyards
 Dogger Bank
 Dover, Battle of (1217)
 Drake
 Duguay-Trouin
 Duilius
 Duncan, Lord
 Duquesne, Abraham
 Dutch Wars
 Edward III
 Espagnols sur Mer
 Farragut, D. G.
 Fireship
 First of June
 Flagship
 Fleet
 Flying Column
 Foote, Andrew Hull
 Forbin
 French Revolutionary Wars
 Frigate
 Frobisher
 Genoa
 Grand Alliance
 Grasse, Comte de
 Grenville, Richard
 Greek Independence
 Guardship Perry,
 Guichen
 Hampton Roads
 Hawke
 Hawkins
 Hood, Lord
 Hopkins, Esek
 Hotham
 Howard
 Howe, Lord
 Hull, Isaac
 International Law
 James II
 Jones, John Paul
 Keith, Lord
 La Hogue
 Lawson, Sir John
 Lepanto
 Liner
 Lissa (1811, 1866)
 Macdonough, Thomas
 Madrid, New
 Mahan
 Marines
 Mathews, Thomas
 Meloria
 Miaoulis
 Midshipman
 Monk, George
 Napoleonic Campaigns
 Nauarchia
 Naucrary
 Naval Operations
 Navarino
 Navy and Navies
 Nelson
 Nile, Battle of the
 Ordnance
 Oxford, Earl of
 Parker, Hyde
 Parker, Sir Hyde
 Peloponnesian War
 Penn, William
 Pepys
 Pericles
 Perry, Oliver Hazard
 Piracy
 Pocock
 Pompey
 Porter, David
 Porter, D. D.
 Privateer
 Punic Wars
 Quiberon, Battle of
 Raleigh
 Range-finder
 Rodgers, John
 Rodney
 Rooke
 Rupert, Prince
 Russo-Japanese War
 Saint-Bon
 Saint Vincent
 Saints, Battle of the
 Salamis
 Sampson, W. T.
 Sandwich, 1st Earl of
 Schley, W. S.
 Sea, Command of the
 Sea Laws
 Seamanship
 Sea-Power
 Search
 Seven Years’ War
 Ship, Shipbuilding
 Shovel, Cloudesley
 Sluys
 Spanish-American War
 Spanish Succession
 Squadron
 Submarine Mines
 Suffren, St. Tropez
 Swold
 Themistocles
 Togo
 Torpedo
 Torrington
 Toulon, Battle of
 Tourville
 Trafalgar
 Tromp
 Troubridge, Sir Thomas
 Truxtun, Thomas
 Tsushima
 U. S. Naval Academy
 Venice
 Vernon, Edward
 Villaret de Joyeuse
 Villeneuve
 Xerxes I




                                PART II
COURSES OF EDUCATIONAL READING TO SUPPLEMENT OR TAKE THE PLACE OF SCHOOL
                         OR UNIVERSITY STUDIES




                              CHAPTER XXXI
                                 MUSIC


The general articles on music in the Encyclopaedia Britannica provide an
illuminative discussion of broad artistic principles which cannot fail
to stimulate the musical sense and perception of the professional or the
amateur. The technical and critical treatment of the subject was
directed by Donald F. Tovey, composer, pianist, and author of _Essays in
Musical Analysis_; and no one could be better fitted for the work of
organizing this department of the Britannica. He was assisted by W. H.
Hadow, the well-known musical writer and composer, J. A. Fuller
Maitland, musical critic of _The Times_ (London), E. J. Dent, author of
_Alessandro Scarlatti and His Works_, R. H. Legge, principal musical
critic on the _Daily Telegraph_ (London), and others; and the section
treating of musical instruments was organized and contributed by Miss
Kathleen Schlesinger, the greatest living authority on the subject.

In mapping out courses of reading the subject is divided into sections
as follows: (1) Evolution, (2) Theory, (3) Musical Forms, (4) Musical
Instruments.

The article MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 72), by Donald Tovey, which contains a
masterly account of the development of the art from the earliest time
down to the present day, provides the reader with just that general
survey which enables him to see the whole picture in perspective. This
he will naturally turn to first, but to fill out the picture there are a
number of other articles which he will wish to read. In the following
scheme the evolution of the art has been sketched in skeleton, so that
the student may have before him a guide to the study of any period in
which he is specially interested. This outline serves to show how very
thoroughly the ground is covered in the new Encyclopaedia Britannica.


                         (1) EVOLUTION OF MUSIC

        _Subject for Reading_                     _Article_

                          _PRE-HARMONIC STAGE_
 Primitive Music.                    MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 72).

                                     SONG (Vol. 25, p. 406).

 Musical sense first awakened by the DANCE (Vol. 7, p. 795); see also
   rhythm of the dance.                RHYTHM (Vol. 23, p. 278).

 Legendary account of the invention  DAVID (Vol. 7, p. 859).
   of music by a Judean.

 Hebrew music: setting of the        PSALMS, BOOK OF (Vol. 22, p. 539
   Psalms.                             and p. 536).

 Suggested Jewish origin of some     PLAIN SONG (Vol. 21, p. 706).
   Gregorian Tunes.

 Dawn of modern music in Greece.     GREEK LITERATURE (Vol. 12, p. 509).
   Connection of music with lyric
   poetry. Terpander of Lesbos (660
   B.C.) adds 3 strings to the
   4–stringed lyre, giving compass
   of octave.

 Characteristics of Greek music.     MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 73); see also
   Pythagoras (6th century, B.C.)      PYTHAGORAS (Vol. 22, p. 699).
   fixes the intervals of the
   harmonic series and of the
   diatonic scale.

 The Greek scale shows a latent      LYRE (Vol. 17, p. 178); see also
   harmonic sense, though octaves      ORCHESTRA (Vol. 20, p. 168);
   only allowed.                       AULOS (Vol. 2, p. 917); CITHARA
                                       (Vol. 6, p. 395).

                                     HARMONY (Vol. 13, p. 1).

 Pitch in Greek music.               PITCH, MUSICAL (Vol. 21, p. 661).

 Other primitive systems without     CHINA, _Literature_ (Vol. 6, p. 228
   influence on modern music.          and p. 215).

 Chinese adopted Pythagorean system;
   a lost art recovered in 3rd
   century, A.D.

 Indian music—Scale of 22 intervals. SANSKRIT (Vol. 24, p. 181).

 Siamese music: 7 tone scale;        SIAM (Vol. 25, p. 5).
   orchestras perform in unison.

 The music of the North American     INDIANS, NORTH AMERICAN (Vol. 14,
   Indian.                             p. 470).

  Biographies of musicians of the primitive, non-harmonic, period in the
  Britannica are: TERPANDER, 7th century B.C.; PYTHAGORAS, 6th century
  B.C.; ARISTOXENUS, 4th century; ALYPIUS, 3rd century B.C.; ARISTIDES,
  QUINTILIANUS, 3rd century.


                           _HARMONIC ORIGINS_

The Greeks found that by doubling the melody at the octave a greater
sonority resulted. It was a great step from this to the discovery that
two separate tunes could be combined which should be satisfying to the
ear. With this discovery modern harmony may be said to have begun.

              _Subject_                           _Article_

 Awakening of the harmonic sense.    MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 74); HARMONY
                                       (Vol. 13, p. 1).

 The Grecian modes modified into the PLAIN SONG (Vol. 21, p. 705); see
   ecclesiastical by Ambrose in the    also AMBROSE (Vol. 1, p. 798),
   4th century.                        and GREGORY (Vol. 12, p. 567).

 Following Hucbald, “beatus Guido    GUIDO OF AREZZO (Vol. 12, p. 687);
   inventor musicae” in the 11th       see also HUCBALD (Vol. 13, p.
   century, invents names for the      847).
   notes and improves system of
   notation.

 The Troubadour becomes a learned    ADAM DE LA HALE, 13th century (Vol.
   musician in the 13th century.       1, p. 171); MACHAUT (Vol. 17, p.
                                       233).

 After Dunstable of England and      DES PRÉS, JOSQUIN (Vol. 8, p. 103);
   Dufay of the Netherlands had        see also BINCHOIS, EGIDIUS (Vol.
   invented counterpoint comes the     3, p. 948).
   first great composer, heralding
   the advent of the “Golden Age.”


                            _THE GOLDEN AGE_

[Sidenote: The First Great Climax]

Composers were not long content with the simple combination of two
tunes. They soon found that three tunes so treated afforded a yet richer
texture, and the extension to the elaborate polyphony of 16th century
choral music was an inevitable step. An elaborate system of
prohibitions, based on the limitations of the human voice, and the
difficulty of attacking certain intervals, shackled the composer at
every turn and formed the basis of theories of counterpoint which
endured almost to our time. Despite the restrictions imposed by their
rules, the structure raised by the great composers of the first half of
the 16th century was of amazing richness and complexity.

        _Subject of Reading_                      _Article_

 The Riot of Choral Polyphony in the MUSIC, _The Golden Age_ (Vol. 19,
   16th century.                       p. 75); see also HARMONY (Vol.
                                       13, p. 2); INSTRUMENTATION,
                                       _Vocal Styles of 16th Century_
                                       (Vol. 14, p. 651).

 Musical forms brought to great      CONTRAPUNTAL FORMS, _Canonic Forms
   perfection in this period those     and Devices_, _Counterpoint on a
   in which texture holds first        Canto Fermo_ (Vol. 7, p. 42); see
   place.                              also MASS, _Polyphonic Masses_
                                       (Vol. 17, p. 849); MADRIGAL (Vol.
                                       17, p. 295); MOTET (Vol. 18, p.
                                       905).

 Leaders of musical thought in the   LASSO, Orlando (Vol. 16, p. 237);
   “Golden Age.”                       TALLIS, T. (Vol. 26, p. 377);
                                       PALESTRINA (Vol. 20, p. 627).

[Sidenote: Composer of the Golden Age]

  Composers of the “Golden Age,” following the polyphonic tradition of
  the early 16th century, biographies of whom appear in the Britannica,
  are: _Netherlandish_: ARCADELT, JACOB, 1514–1556; LASSO, ORLANDO, c.
  1530–1594; _German_: FINCK, HERMANN, 1527–1558; ECCARD, JOHANN,
  1553–1611; AICHINGER, GREGOR, leader of Reformation church music, c.
  1565–1628; _French_: GOUDIMEL, C., c. 1510–1572; _English_: WILBYE,
  JOHN, 16th century, famous for his madrigals; MERBECK, JOHN, d. 1585;
  BENNETT, JOHN, d.c. 1614; BATESON, T., d. 1630, a composer of
  madrigals; TALLIS, T., c. 1515–1585, “father of English cathedral
  music”; FARRANT, R., c. 1530–1581; BYRD, WM., 1543–1623; MORLEY, T.,
  1557–1603; GIBBONS, ORLANDO, 1583–1625; _Italian_: ANIMUCCIA,
  GIOVANNI, c. 1490–1571; ZARLINO, GIOSEFFO, 1517–1590, fixed the
  diatonic scale as now accepted; PALESTRINA, GIOVANNI PIERLUIGI DA,
  1526–1594; BANCHIERE, ADRIANO, c. 1557–1634, fought against monodist
  revolt—see below; ANERIO (brothers), c. 1560–1620; ARTUSI, G. M., 16th
  century, opposed Monteverdi’s innovations—see below; _Spanish_:
  VICTORIA, TOMMASSO L. DA, c. 1540–1613.


                     _THE FIRST ROMANTIC MOVEMENT_

The last word in polyphony seemed to have been said by such masters as
Orlando Lasso, and Palestrina, and a change into new paths was
inevitable. Moreover, men’s minds were craving something more directly
stimulating than the passionless web of ecclesiastical polyphony, which
was the glory of the 16th century. Freedom was sought from the
conventions of modal counterpoint. The monodist revolt was the result.

              _Subject_                           _Article_

 Revolt against the overelaboration  MUSIC, _The Monodic Revolution_
   of texture.                         (Vol. 19, p. 76); HARMONY,
                                       _Modern Harmony_ (Vol. 13, p. 4).

 Prominence given to solo part       SONG (Vol. 25, p. 406); ARIA (Vol.
   rather than to choral effect        2, p. 489).
   leads to development of the aria.

 The leader in the new paths, the    MONTEVERDE, CLAUDIO (Vol. 18, p.
   pioneer of modern harmony.          778).

 The first oratorio (1600).          ORATORIO (Vol. 20, p. 161); see
                                       also CAVALIERE, EMILIO DEL (Vol.
                                       5, p. 563).

 The first opera (1600).             OPERA (Vol. 20, p. 121); see also
                                       PERI, JACOPO (Vol. 21, p. 144).

 The monodic impulse synchronizes    VIOLIN (Vol. 28, p. 103); see also
   with the startling development of   AMATI (Vol. 1, p. 783); GUARNIERI
   the violin family by the Cremona    (Vol. 12, p. 660); STRADIVARI
   makers.                             (Vol. 25, p. 977).

[Sidenote: Famous Monodists]

  Among distinguished composers of this period and school are:
  _English_: BULL, JOHN, c. 1562–1628; FORD, THOMAS, b. 1580; LAWES,
  HENRY, 1595–1662; _Italian_: CAVALIERE, E. DEL, c. 1550–1602; PERI,
  JACOPO, b. 1561; GABRIELE, GIOVANNI, 1557–c. 1612, early experimenter
  in chromatic harmony; CACCINI, GIULIO, 1558–1615; MONTEVERDE, CLAUDIO,
  1567–1643; ALLEGRI, GREGORIO, c. 1570–1652; FRESCOBALDI, GIROLAMO,
  1583–1644, famous also as a teacher; AGOSTINO, P., 1593–1639; CAVALLI,
  F., 1596–1676, popularized opera; CARISSIMI, G., c. 1604–1674,
  popularized oratorio; ROSSI, LUIGI DE. All the above have separate
  articles assigned to them in the Britannica.


                      _THE 17th CENTURY AND AFTER_

[Sidenote: The Second Great Climax]

Those who revolted from the traditions of the polyphonic school went, as
was inevitable, too far. A reaction was equally inevitable, for the
language of the new music was unformed and was in danger of being
stereotyped into the emptiest of formulas. The welding of the old and
new ideas was all that was needed to prepare the way for the colossal
achievement of a Bach or a Beethoven. It was a busy period when the
rules of counterpoint were reviewed and revised, when theories of
harmony as a distinct science took shape. But, save for the work of such
men as Purcell, the Englishman (Vol. 22, p. 658), born 100 years before
his time, the 17th century was mainly one of preparation. The next great
climax came in the first half of the 18th century.

              _Subject_                           _Article_

 The renascence of texture, the      MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 77); HARMONY
   welding of polyphony and monody.    (Vol. 13, p. 4).

 Publication in 1715 of the famous   FUX, JOHANN JOSEPH (Vol. 11, p.
   _Gradus ad Parnassum_, the first    375).
   complete theory of counterpoint.

 The first systematic theory of      RAMEAU, J. P. (Vol. 22, p. 874).
   harmony published in 1722.

 The second great climax in music.   MUSIC, _Bach and Handel_ (Vol. 19,
                                       p. 78).

 The achievement of Johann Sebastian BACH, J. S. (Vol. 3, p. 124); see
   Bach.                               also CONTRAPUNTAL FORMS (Vol. 7,
                                       p. 41); CONCERTO (Vol. 6, p.
                                       825); OVERTURE (Vol. 20, p. 384);
                                       SUITE (Vol. 26, p. 51); ORATORIO
                                       (Vol. 20, p. 161); CANTATA (Vol.
                                       5, p. 209); MASS, _Lutheran
                                       Masses_ (Vol. 17, p. 850);
                                       VARIATIONS (Vol. 27, p. 912);
                                       INSTRUMENTATION, _Decoration_ and
                                       _Orchestral Schemes_ (Vol. 14, p.
                                       651 and p. 655).

[Sidenote: 17th and 18th Century Composers]

  Composers of the period who have separate notices in the Britannica
  are: _Italian_: CESTI, M. A., c. 1620–1669; COLONNA, GIOVANNI P., c.
  1637–1695; PASQUINI, B., 1637–1710; STRADELLA, ALESSANDRO, 1645–1682;
  CORELLI, ARCANGELO, 1653–1713, first classic of the violin; STEFFANI,
  A., 1653–1728; SCARLATTI, ALESSANDRO, 1659–1725, largely created
  language of modern music; PITONI, G. O., 1657–1743; LOTTI, ANTONIO, c.
  1667–1740; CLARI, G. C. M., c. 1669–1745; BONONCINI, G. B., c.
  1672–1750; ALBINONI, T., c. 1674–1745; ASTORGA, EMANUELE D’,
  1681–1736; DURANTE, FRANCESCO, 1684–1755; MARCELLO, B., 1686–1739;
  VINCI, LEONARDO, 1690–1730; LEO, LEONARDO, 1694–1744; LOGROSCINO,
  NICOLA, c. 1700–1763; PERGOLESI, GIOVANNI BATTISTA, 1710–1736;
  ALBERTI, DOMENICO, c. 1710–1740; _French_: CAMBERT, R., 1628–1677;
  LULLY, JEAN-BAPTISTE, c. 1623–1687, inventor of the classical French
  opera style; _English_: LOCKE, MATTHEW, c. 1630–1677; BLOW, JOHN,
  1648–1708; PURCELL, HENRY, 1658–1695; CROFT, WILLIAM, 1678–1727;
  HANDEL, GEORGE FREDERICK, 1685–1759; GREENE, MAURICE, 1695–1755;
  _German_: BACH, JOHANN SEBASTIAN, 1685–1750; HASSE, JOHANN A.,
  1699–1783; EBERLIN, J. E., 1702–1762.


                        _THE RISE OF THE SONATA_

[Sidenote: The Third Great Climax]

Bach, like Palestrina, seemed to have closed a period; and for nearly a
hundred years after his death his influence on the course of musical
development was astonishingly small. Again men sought new channels of
expression and found them in instrumental music. But a structure less
loosely knit than the suite form was needed if the new ideas were to be
adequately stated, and the sonata grew into being, a form which has
sufficed to this day as a medium for the noblest thoughts of the great
composers. The 18th century saw, too, the reform of the opera by Gluck,
a great development of orchestral resources, and the rise of the string
quartette in chamber music.

              _Subject_                           _Article_

 The new language: evolution of the  MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 79); SONATA,
   sonata from the suite.              _Sonata Style_ (Vol. 25, p. 394);
                                       see also SCARLETTI, DOMINICO
                                       (Vol. 24, p. 302); and BACH, K.
                                       P. E. (Vol. 3, p. 130).

 Reform of the opera.                OPERA (Vol. 20, p. 123); see also
                                       GLUCK (Vol. 12, p. 138); PICCINNI
                                       (Vol. 21, p. 579); MOZART (Vol.
                                       18, p. 951).

 The rise of the symphony and the    MUSIC, _The Symphonic Classes_
   string quartette, development of    (Vol. 19, p. 78); SONATA FORMS
   the sonata.                         (Vol. 25, p. 395); SYMPHONY (Vol.
                                       26, p. 290); see also HAYDN (Vol.
                                       13, p. 110).

 The growth of the orchestra.        INSTRUMENTATION, _Symphonic_ (Vol.
                                       14, p. 652); see also HAYDN (Vol.
                                       13, p. 110).

 The third great climax. The         BEETHOVEN, L. VON (Vol. 3, p. 644);
   perfection of the sonata form.      see also SONATA FORMS (Vol. 25,
                                       p. 397); INSTRUMENTATION (Vol.
                                       14, p. 653); VARIATIONS (Vol. 27,
                                       p. 913); MASS (Vol. 17, p. 850).

  Biographies of the following composers of the period appear in the
  Britannica: _German and Austrian_: BACH, KARL PHILIPP EMANUEL,
  1714–1788; GLUCK, C. W., 1714–1787; HILLER, J. A., 1728–1804; HAYDN,
  FRANZ JOSEPH, 1732–1809; DITTERSDORF, KARL DITTERS VON, 1739–1799;
  WINTER, P., c. 1755–1825; MOZART, WOLFGANG AMADEUS, 1756–1791; HIMMEL,
  F. H., 1765–1814; BEETHOVEN, LUDWIG VAN, 1770–1827; _French_: GOSSEC,
  F. J., 1734–1829; GRETRY, A. E. M., 1741–1813; MEHUL, ETIENNE H.,
  1763–1817; LESUEUR, JEAN FRANÇOIS, c. 1763–1837; BOIELDIEU, F. A.,
  1775–1834; _English_: ARNE, T. A., 1710–1778, preserved English
  tradition in face of Handelian obsession; BOYCE, WILLIAM, 1710–1779;
  JACKSON, W., 1730–1803; BATTISHILL, J., 1738–1801; ARNOLD, S.,
  1740–1802; DIBDIN, C., 1745–1814; SHIELD, W., 1748–1829; STORACE, S.,
  1763–1796; ATTWOOD, T., 1765–1838; WESLEY, SAMUEL, 1766–1837, father
  of modern organ playing; _Italian_: SCARLATTI, DOMENICO, 1685–1757;
  MARTINI, G. B., 1706–1784; GALUPPI, BALDASSARE, 1706–1785; JOMMELLI,
  N., 1714–1774; GUGLIELMI, P., 1727–1804; PICCINNI, N., 1728–1800;
  SARTI, GIUSEPPE, 1729–1802; SACCHINI, A. M. G., 1734–1786; PAISIELLO,
  G., 1741–1816; BOCCHERINI, LUIGI, 1743–1805, last real master of suite
  form; CIMAROSA, D., 1749–1801; SALIERI, A., 1750–1825; CHERUBINI,
  1760–1842; PAER, F., 1771–1839.


                              _NEW PATHS_

Early in the 19th century the wave of romanticism broke over Europe. The
effect on music was not nearly so violent as was the monodic revolt of
the 16th–17th centuries, since the resources and technique of the art
had now been developed; but it was nevertheless striking and showed
itself in several directions, but mainly in two: lyrical and dramatic.
The short compositions of Field, Schumann, and Chopin, and the
development of the art song are instances of the former; the whole range
of programme music, of which the symphonic poem is the prototype, is
evidence of the latter; while in opera the reforms started by Gluck were
carried to their logical conclusion by Wagner. Two other movements are
also significant; the return to Bach and a recognition of his amazing
modernity, and the pronounced revival of national characteristics in
music, as shown particularly in the new English, Russian, and Bohemian
Schools.

              _Subject_                           _Article_

 The Romantic Period.                MUSIC, _From Beethoven to Wagner_
                                       (Vol. 19, p. 79).

 The Romantic in opera.              WEBER, CARL MARIA F. E. VON (Vol.
                                       28, p. 455); SONG (Vol. 25, p.
                                       409).

 The first great lyrical song        SCHUBERT, FRANZ PETER (Vol. 24, p.
   writer.                             379); SONG (Vol. 25, p. 409).

 The Romantic in the symphony.       PROGRAMME MUSIC (Vol. 22, p. 424);
                                       see also BERLIOZ, HECTOR (Vol. 3,
                                       p. 791).

 The rediscovery of Bach.            BACH, J. S. (Vol. 2, p. 124);
                                       MENDELSSOHN (Vol. 18, pp.
                                       121–124).

 Development of song forms.          SONG (Vol. 25, p. 410); see also
                                       SCHUMANN, ROBERT (Vol. 24, p.
                                       384); WOLF, HUGO (Vol. 28, p.
                                       771); BRAHMS, J. (Vol. 4, p.
                                       390).

 Discontent with the sonata form.    SYMPHONIC POEM (Vol. 26, p. 289);
                                       LISZT, F. (Vol. 16, p. 780).

 Gluck’s idea realised; union of     MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 80); OPERAS,
   music                               _Leit-Motif_ with drama.
                                                          (Vol. 20, p.
                                       125); WAGNER, W. RICHARD (Vol.
                                       28, p. 236).

 The last of the royal line of       BRAHMS, JOHANNES (Vol. 4, p. 389);
   German composers shows vitality     SONATA FORMS, _Sonata since
   of the sonata form.                 Beethoven_ (Vol. 25, p. 398).

 Modern Tendencies.                  MUSIC (Vol. 19, p. 82); see also
                                       STRAUSS, RICHARD (Vol. 25, p.
                                       1003); DEBUSSY, ACHILLE (Vol. 7,
                                       p. 906).

  Composers of this period, who have had separate articles assigned to
  them in the Britannica, follow: the growth of national schools will be
  noted.

[Sidenote: 19th Century Composers]

  _German and Austrian_: GANSBACHER, J. B., 1778–1844; KREUTZER, K.,
  1780–1849; SPOHR, LUDWIG, 1784–1859; WEBER, CARL MARIA F. E. VON,
  1786–1886; MEYERBEER, G., 1791–1863; HAUPTMANN, M., 1792–1868; LÖWE,
  J. K. G., 1796–1869; SCHUBERT, FRANZ PETER, 1797–1828; LORTZING, G.
  A., 1801–1851; STRAUSS, JOHANN, 1804–1849, king of valse composers;
  MENDELSSOHN-BARTHOLDY, J. L. F., 1809–1847; NICOLAI, OTTO, 1810–1849;
  SCHUMANN, ROBERT ALEXANDER, 1810–1856; HILLER, F., 1811–1885; WAGNER,
  RICHARD, 1813–1883; HELLER, STEPHEN, 1815–1888; FRANZ, ROBERT,
  1815–1892, song composer; ABT, FRANZ, 1819–1885, art folk-song; SUPPE,
  F. VON, 1820–1895; RAFF, J. J., 1822–1882; CORNELIUS, CARL AUGUST
  PETER, 1824–1874, song writer; BRUCKNER, ANTON, 1824–1896, Wagnerian
  symphonist; REINECKE, C. H. C., 1824–1910; LASSEN, EDUARD, 1830–1904;
  JOACHIM, JOSEPH, 1831–1907; BRAHMS, JOHANNES, 1833–1897; BRUCH, MAX,
  b. 1838; RHEINBERGER, J. G., 1839–1901; GOETZ, HERMANN, 1840–1876;
  NESZLER, V., 1841–1890: HUMPERDINCK, E., b. 1854; WOLF, HUGO,
  1860–1903; STRAUSS, RICHARD, b. 1864.

  _French_: AUBER, D. F. E., 1782–1871; HEROLD, L. J. F., 1791–1833;
  HALEVY, J. F. F. E., 1799–1862; BERLIOZ, HECTOR, 1803–1869; DAVID, F.,
  1810–1876; THOMAS, C. L. AMBROISE, 1811–1896; GOUNOD, C. F.,
  1818–1893; OFFENBACH, J., 1819–1880; FRANCK, CESAR, 1822–1890, founder
  of Modern French School; LALO, E., 1823–1892; REYER, E., b. 1823;
  LECOCQ, A. C., b. 1832; BENOIT, P. L. L., 1834–1901; SAINT-SAËNS,
  CHARLES CAMILLE, b. 1835; DUBOIS, F. C. T., b. 1837; BIZET, GEORGES,
  1838–1875; JONCIERES, V., 1839–1903; CHABRIER, A. E., 1841–1894;
  AUDRAN, E., 1842–1901; MASSENET, J. E. F., 1842–1912; FAURE, GABRIEL,
  b., 1845; WIDOR, CHARLES MARIE, b. 1845; GODARD, BENJAMIN L. P.,
  1849–1895; PLANQUETTE, R., b. 1850; D’INDY,. P. M. T. V., b. 1851;
  MESSAGER, A. C. P., b. 1853; BRUNEAU, ALFRED, b. 1857; CHAMINADE,
  CÉCILE, b. 1861; BEMBERG, HERMAN, b. 1861; DEBUSSY, CLAUDE ACHILLES,
  b. 1862.

  _Belgian_: The violinist YSAYE, b. 1858.

  _Italian_: SPONTANI, G. L. P., 1774–1851; ROSSINI, G. A., 1792–1868;
  DONIZETTI, G., 1798–1848; BELLINI, V., 1801–1835; VERDI, GIUSEPPE,
  1813–1901; PONCHIELLI, AMILCARE, 1834–1886, on whom have modelled
  themselves, Mascagni, Leoncavallo, etc.; BOITO, ARRIGO, b. 1842;
  SGAMBATI, G., b. 1843; LEONCAVALLO, R., b. 1858; PUCCINI, G., b. 1858;
  MASCAGNI, P., b. 1863.

  _British_: HORSLEY, WM., 1774–1858; SMART, SIR GEORGE T., 1776–1867;
  BISHOP, SIR H. R., 1786–1855; PEARSALL, R. L. DE, 1795–1856; FIELD,
  JOHN, 1782–1837, inventor of the nocturne; GOSS, SIR JOHN, 1800–1880;
  HATTON, J. L., 1800–1886; BARNETT, J., 1802–1890; BENEDICT, SIR
  JULIUS, 1804–1885; BALFE, M. W., 1808–1870; WESLEY, S. S., 1810–1876;
  HULLAH, JOHN P., 1812–1884; MACFARREN, SIR G. A., 1813–1887; WALLACE,
  WM. V., 1814–1865; PIERSON, H. H., 1815–1873; BENNETT, SIR WM.
  STERNDALE, 1816–1875; OUSELEY, SIR F. A. G., 1825–1889; BACHE, F. E.,
  1833–1858; CLAY, F., 1838–1889; BARNBY, SIR J., 1838–1896; STAINER,
  SIR JOHN, 1840–1901; SULLIVAN, SIR ARTHUR S., 1842–1900; CELLIER,
  ALFRED, 1844–1891; MACKENZIE, SIR A. C., b. 1847; PARRY, SIR C. HUBERT
  H., b. 1848, on whom fell the mantle of Purcell; THOMAS, ARTHUR
  GORING, 1850–1892; COWEN, F. J., b. 1852; STANFORD, SIR CHARLES
  VILLIERS, b. 1852; ELGAR, SIR EDWARD, b. 1857; MACCUNN, HAMISH, b.
  1868.

  _Bohemian_: SMETANA, F., 1824–1884, founder of modern Bohemian School;
  DVOŘÁK, ANTON, 1841–1904.

  _Hungarian_: GUNG’L, JOSEF, 1810–1889; LISZT, FRANZ, 1811–1886;
  GOLDMARK, KARL, b. 1832; PADEREWSKI, I. J., b. 1860.

  _Polish_: CHOPIN, FREDERIC FRANÇOIS, 1810–1849; MOSZKOWSKI, MORITZ, b.
  1854.

  _Russian_: GLINKA, M. IVANOVICH, 1803–1857, founder of national
  school; DARGOMIJSKY, A. SERGEIVICH, 1813–1869; RUBINSTEIN, ANTON,
  1829–1894; BORODIN, A. PORFYRIEVICH, 1834–1887; MOUSSORGSKY, M.
  PETROVICH, 1835–1881; BALAKIREV, M. ALEXEIVICH, b. 1836; TSCHAIKOVSKY,
  PETER ILICH, 1840–1893; RIMSKY-KORSAKOV, N. ANDREIEVICH, 1844–1908;
  GLAZUNOV, A. CONSTANTINOVICH, b. 1865.

  _Norwegian_: The violinist BULL, OLE, 1810–1880; KJERULF, HALFDAN,
  1815–1868; SVENDSEN, J. S., b. 1840; GRIEG, EDVARD HAGERUP, 1843–1907.

  _Danish_: GADE, NIELS W., 1817–1890.

  _Sweden_: WENNERBERT, G., 1817–1901, song writer.

  _American_: EMMETT, D. D., started “negro minstrels,” 1815–1904;
  FOSTER, STEPHEN C., 1826–1864, song writer; EICHBERG, JULIUS,
  1824–1893, founded Boston Conservatory of Music; BUCK, DUDLEY,
  1839–1909; MACDOWELL, EDWARD ALEXANDER, 1861–1908. For notices of
  other modern composers and their tendencies—see MUSIC, _Recent Music_
  (Vol. 19, p. 82).

[Sidenote: Musical Historians]

  Famous musical historians and writers on music, whose biographies are
  in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, are: ARISTOXENUS, 4th century B.C.;
  PRAETORIUS, M., 1571–1621; PERUSCH, J. C., 1667–1752; BARNARD, JOHN,
  17th century; HAWKINS, SIR JOHN, 1710–1789; GERBERT, M., 1720–1793;
  BURNEY, CH., 1726–1814; GERBER, 1746–1819; FORKEL, J. N., 1749–1818;
  BAINI, G., 1775–1844; NOVELLO, V., 1781–1861; CALLCOTT, J. W.,
  1766–1821; FETIS, F. J., 1784–1871; CHORLEY, H. F., 1808–1872;
  CHAPPELL, WM., 1809–1888; DWIGHT, JOHN S., 1813–1893; AMBROS, A. W.,
  1816–1876; GROVE, SIR GEORGE, 1820–1900.


                        (2) THEORETICAL ARTICLES

“In the beginning,” said Hans von Bülow, “was rhythm,” and as RHYTHM
(Vol. 23, p. 277) is the skeleton of every musical phrase and formula,
the interesting article by Donald Tovey on rhythm in music may well
serve as an introduction to the other subjects in this section. Passing
to the elements, the articles SOUND, _Diatonic Scale_ (Vol. 25, p. 448)
and PLAIN SONG (Vol. 21, p. 705) should be read. In the former article
the physical basis of the modern scale is determined, while in the
latter an account is given of the modes which for centuries were the
vehicles of musical expression. In the article MUSICAL NOTATION (Vol.
19, p. 86) the steps by which the present system of recording music was
reached are noted, and in PITCH, MUSICAL (Vol. 21, p. 660), the whole of
this interesting and vexed subject is reviewed by Alfred J. Hipkins, a
high authority, formerly hon. curator of the Royal College of Music. The
article MELODY (Vol. 18, p. 96) contains in addition to a discussion of
the terms a series of useful definitions (e.g., conjunct and disjunct
motion) and several musical examples. This brings us to the main
articles of this section—COUNTERPOINT (Vol. 7, p. 315), HARMONY (Vol.
13, p. 1) and INSTRUMENTATION (Vol. 14, p. 651). All are by Donald Tovey
and all are brilliant. In particular the article HARMONY deserves the
most careful study, especially interesting being the sections _Tonality_
and _Key-relationship_. The article on counterpoint is mainly a
definition of the principles involved and is introductory both to
Harmony and to Contrapuntal Forms. In INSTRUMENTATION the question of
colour is discussed from the historical and aesthetic aspects,
accompanied by valuable analysis of the colour schemes of various
composers from the choral writers of the “Golden Age” down to Wagner and
Richard Strauss.

[Sidenote: Theorists]

  Famous theorists who have helped to establish the grammar of music are
  the following: TERPANDER, 7th century B.C., founder of Greek music
  (Vol. 26, p. 647); PYTHAGORAS, 6th century, B.C., said to have
  discovered numerical relation governing the harmonic series (Vol. 22,
  p. 699); ALYPIUS, 3rd century B.C. (Vol. 1, p. 776); ARISTIDES,
  QUINTILIANUS, 3rd century A.D.; HUCBALD, c. 840–930, inventor of new
  notation (Vol. 13, p. 847); GUIDO OF AREZZO, c. 995–1050, “Beatus
  Guido, inventor musicae,” (Vol. 12, p. 687); AGRICOLA, MARTIN, c.
  1500–1556; ZARLINO, G., 1517–1590, fixed the diatonic scale; ARTUSI,
  G. M., 16th century, opposed monodist revolt; FUX, J. J., wrote the
  famous _Gradus ad Parnassum_, RAMEAU, J. P., 1683–1764, to whom the
  first systematic theory of harmony is due; ALBRECHTSBERGER, J. G.,
  1736–1809, the teacher of Beethoven; REICHA, A. J., 1770–1836;
  RICHTER, E. F. E., 1808–1879; CURWEN, J., 1817–1880, inventor of tonic
  sol-fa system; BERLIOZ HECTOR, whose text book on instrumentation is
  classic. On all these separate articles will be found in the
  Britannica.


                           (3) MUSICAL FORMS

[Sidenote: Contrapuntal Forms]

In making a detailed study of any particular form, reference should be
made to the critical sections of the biographies of those masters who
have done most towards its development. As has been seen in the
historical section of this chapter, the CONTRAPUNTAL FORMS (Vol. 7, p.
41) were the first to attain to a high standard of organization in the
hands of such masters as ORLANDO LASSO (Vol. 16, p. 237) and PALESTRINA
(Vol. 20, p. 627). The articles MASS (Vol. 17, p. 849), MOTET (Vol. 18,
p. 905), MADRIGAL (Vol. 17, p. 295), CANON (Vol. 5, p. 190), CHORALE
(Vol. 6, p. 269), cover the ground of early choral music. In tracing
their development reference should be made to the articles on BACH, J.
S. (Vol. 3, p. 127), BEETHOVEN (Vol. 3, p. 649), BRAHMS (Vol. 4, p.
390). ORATORIO (Vol. 20, p. 161) and CANTATA (Vol. 5, p. 209) had their
beginning in the work of the followers of Monteverde in the early 17th
century, and their development may be traced in the work of CAVALIERE
(Vol. 5, p. 563), CARISSIMI (Vol. 5, p. 338), PURCELL (Vol. 22, p. 658),
BACH (Vol. 3, p. 127), HANDEL (Vol. 2, p. 912), BRAHMS (Vol. 4 p. 390),
CÉSAR FRANCK (Vol. 11, p. 3), and SIR C. HUBERT PARRY (Vol. 20, p. 865).

[Sidenote: Suite and Sonata]

In instrumental music, the SUITE (Vol. 26, p. 51), of which BOCCHERINI
(Vol. 4, p. 105) was the last master, most nearly foreshadowed the
Sonata (SONATA FORMS, Vol. 25, p. 394), and together they tell the tale
of the development of absolute music up to modern experiments in the
more elastic SYMPHONIC POEM (Vol. 26, p. 289) of which LISZT (Vol. 16,
p. 780) was the first to see the possibilities. In addition to the
articles SONATA and SONATA FORMS the reader should carefully study that
part of the article BEETHOVEN beginning on page 647 of Vol. 3; also the
article HARMONY, _Key Relationships_ (Vol. 13, p. 5) which contains
analyses of several striking key systems, and further reference should
also be made to the articles VARIATIONS (Vol. 27, p. 912), SYMPHONY
(Vol. 26, p. 290).

[Sidenote: Programme Music]

To the Romantic movement of the early part of the 19th century may be
traced the attempt to escape from the apparent restrictions of the
Sonata Form, and SCHUMANN’S (Vol. 24, p. 384) many _Fantasie-Stücke_ and
CHOPIN’S lyrical compositions (Vol. 6, p. 268) are prototypes in little
of the tendencies of the time. On a larger canvas are the Ton-dramen of
Liszt and the symphonic poems and the elaborate programme music of
modern composers such as RICHARD STRAUSS (Vol. 25, p. 1003); and though
BRAHMS (Vol. 4, p. 389) showed clearly enough that the classical sonata
form was a framework sufficiently elastic to hold the most elaborate and
modern ideas, the direction in which music has tended is towards the
Symphonic Poem in which, by such devices as the transformation of themes
and the _Leitmotif_ (OPERA, Vol. 20, p. 125) a still greater elasticity
is sought in form with a greater continuity of idea in substance. See
PROGRAMME MUSIC (Vol. 22, p. 424).

[Sidenote: Opera]

Supplementing the article OPERA (Vol. 20, p. 121) are several which
should be consulted. ARIA (Vol. 2, p. 489), OVERTURE (Vol. 20, p. 384),
and especially GLUCK (Vol. 12, p. 139), MOZART (Vol. 18, p. 951), WEBER
(Vol. 28, p. 457), and WAGNER (Vol. 28, p. 237). These, with the
biographical notices of operatic composers, which include almost every
Italian composer from the days of PERI (Vol. 21, p. 144), and French
composers from LULLY (Vol. 17, p. 121), give a mass of information
bearing on the development of this popular form.

[Sidenote: Song]

SONG (Vol. 25, p. 400), the oldest of art forms, and almost the last to
be rescued from the too narrow formalism of which the classical ARIA
(Vol. 2, p. 489) is the beautiful example, is so much the most generally
popular that the article on it in the Britannica will probably be more
widely read than any other on musical subjects. Written by W. A. J.
Ford, a scholarly musician and teacher of singing at the Royal College
of Music (London), it provides a brilliant survey of the evolution of
the song from its earliest beginnings. In connection with it the reader
will find much to interest him in the biographical notices of two famous
troubadours of the 13th and 14th centuries, ADAM DE LA HALE (Vol. 1, p.
171) and MACHAUT, G. DE (Vol. 17, p. 233); of MONTEVERDE (Vol. 18, p.
778), the pioneer of the monodist revolt at the end of the 16th century,
of SCARLATTI, ALESSANDRO (Vol. 24, p. 302), 17th century, who perfected
the aria form, of PURCELL, HENRY (Vol. 22, p. 658), the great English
composer of the 17th century, of JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH (Vol. 3, p. 126)
18th century, of SCHUBERT (Vol. 24, p. 380), the creator of the modern
song, of SCHUMANN (Vol. 24, p. 384) who brought a yet greater intimacy
into the form, of HUGO WOLF (Vol. 28, p. 771), the most clairvoyant of
song writers, of SIR HUBERT PARRY (Vol. 20, p. 865), and SIR CHARLES
VILLIERS STANFORD (Vol. 25, p. 773), who have respectively done the best
modern work in the English and Irish tradition, and of the American
MACDOWELL (Vol. 17, p. 214). Reference should also be made to the
articles MELODY (Vol. 18, p. 96), ACCOMPANIMENT (Vol. 1, p. 122), RHYTHM
(Vol. 23, p. 277). Suggestive also are the articles BALLADS (Vol. 3, p.
264), POETRY (Vol. 21, p. 889). On the technique of singing the article
VOICE (Vol. 28, p. 172) by Dr. J. G. McKendrick, will be found very
helpful, especially the section on the _Physiology of Voice Production_.


                        (4) MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS

One branch of the subject yet remains, that of musical instruments. Here
the editor of the Britannica had the advantage of the assistance of Miss
Kathleen Schlesinger (author of _The Instruments of the Orchestra_, and
the greatest authority on the subject), who contributed practically all
of the articles in the book on musical instruments. A list of them is
given below, classified under their most convenient groupings. From
these articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica the reader will get a
full account of every known musical instrument whether modern or
ancient, with its compass, and scale, and of its connection with other
instruments of the same class; so that the evolution of every type is
clearly brought out. As a preliminary to a general study of the subject,
the articles ORCHESTRA (Vol. 20, p. 168), and INSTRUMENTATION (Vol. 14,
p. 651) may conveniently be read. In the former Miss Schlesinger gives a
summary of the development of the various classes of instruments and of
their concerted use. In the article INSTRUMENTATION, on the other hand,
Donald Tovey illustrates the _principles_ which govern their use. This
article closes with an interesting survey of the orchestral schemes at
different periods in the history of the art. The following classified
list of separate articles on musical instruments in the Britannica,
shows how very completely this work covers the field:

  =Stringed Instruments= (Vol. 25, p. 1038).

  _Strings Plucked by Fingers or Plectrum_: ASOR; BALALAIKA; BANJO;
  BARBITON; CHELYS; CITHARA; CITOLE; CITTERN; EPIGONION; GUITAR; HARP;
  HARP-LUTE; KINNOR; KISSAR; LUTE; LYRE; MANDOLINE; NANGA; PANDURA;
  PSALTERY; REBAB; ROTTA; SAMBUCA; THEORBO; TRIGONON; ZITHER. _Strings
  Set in Vibration by Friction of the Bow_: CROWD; DOUBLE BASS; FIDDLE;
  GEIGE; GUITAR-FIDDLE; GUSLA; NAIL VIOLIN; PHILOMEL; RAVANASTRON;
  REBAB; REBEC; TROMBA MARINA; VIELLE; VIOL; VIOLA; VIOLIN; VIOLONCELLO.
  _Strings Struck by Hammers or Tangents_: CLAVECIN; CLAVICEMBALO;
  CLAVICHORD; CLAVICYTHERIUM; DULCIMER; HARMONICHORD; HARPSICHORD;
  PIANOFORTE; SPINET; VIRGINAL. _Strings Set in Vibration by Friction of
  a Wheel_: HURDY-GURDY; ORGANISTRUM. _Strings Set in Vibration by the
  Wind_: AEOLIAN HARP. _Appliances_: BOW; MONOCHORD; MUTE; MOUTHPIECE;
  KEYBOARD; SORDINO.

  =Wind Instruments= (mouth blown) (Vol. 28, p. 709.)


_Wood Wind._

  _The Pipe Class_: EUNUCH FLUTE; FIFE; FLAGEOLET; FLUTE; NAY; PICCOLO;
  PIPE AND TABOR; RECORDER; SYRINX. _Single Reed Class_ (cylindrical
  bore): REED INSTRUMENTS; ARGHOUL; AULOS; BASS CLARINET; BASSET HORN;
  BATYPHONE; CLARINET; PEDAL CLARINET. _Double Reed Class_ (conical
  bore): REED INSTRUMENTS; AULOS; BASSOON; BOMBARD; CONTRAFAGOTTO; COR
  ANGLAIS; OBOE; POMMER; SHAWM; CLARINA; HOLZTROMPETE; CROMORNE;
  RACKETT; SAXOPHONE; SORDINO; TIBIA. To reed instruments also belong
  the _Bagpipe Class_: ASKAULES; BAGPIPE; BINIOU; CHORUS; DRONE;
  PLATERSPIEL; SYMPHONIA.


_Brass Wind._

  BOMBARDON; BUCCINA; BUGLE; CORNET; EUPHONIUM; HELICON; HORN; LITUUS;
  OPHICLEIDE; SACKBUT; SAXHORN; SERPENT; TROMBONE; TRUMPET; TUBA; to
  which may be added, though not of brass or metal: ALPENHORN; OLIPHANT;
  SHOFAR; see also MOUTHPIECE; MUTE; VALVES.

  =Wind Instruments= (mechanically blown).

  ACCORDION; BARREL-ORGAN; CONCERTINA; HARMONIUM; ORCHESTRION; ORGAN;
  PHYSHARMONICA; PORTATIVE ORGAN; POSITIVE ORGAN; REGAL; to which,
  though mouth blown, may be added CHENG. See also FREE REED VIBRATION;
  KEYBOARD.

  =Instruments of Percussion.=

  _Sounding a Sensible Note_: BELL; BUMBULUM; CARILLON; GLOCKENSPIEL;
  GONG; HARMONICA; JEWS’ HARP; MUSICAL BOX; PARSIFAL BELL-INSTRUMENT;
  XYLOPHONE. _Not Sounding a Sensible Note_: CASTANETS; CYMBALS; CHINESE
  PAVILLON; DRUM; KETTLE DRUM; NACAIRE; SISTRUM; TAMBOURINE; TIMBREL;
  TOM-TOM; TRIANGLE; TYMPANON.




                             CHAPTER XXXII
                THE FINE ARTS: GENERAL AND INTRODUCTORY


The art-student and every other reader interested in the fine arts will
find in the Britannica the material for courses of reading of very great
range and of the utmost interest and value—whether he wishes to study
theory, practice or history.

[Sidenote: Theory of Art]

Of course no adequate treatment of the arts, or of any one of them,
could logically, much less advantageously, separate theory, practice and
history. But the theory of art, though it may be inferred or deduced
from many other articles in the book, including those the most devoted
to the practical or historical, may best and most directly be studied in
three articles, AESTHETICS, ART, and FINE ARTS. Of these, the first,
AESTHETICS (Vol. 1, p. 277), equivalent to nearly 40 pages of this
Guide, is written by Professor James Sully, late of University College,
London, and author of _The Human Mind_ and other psychological studies.
It discusses the meaning of beauty and the problem of the nature of
pleasure, especially “higher” pleasure, its relation to play, etc. And
the article closes with a history of Aesthetic Theories, including those
of the following philosophers, on all of whom the student will find
separate and elaborate critical biographies in the Britannica: PLATO,
who set beauty high, but thought art a mere trick of imitation and
wished it be censored rather than encouraged in his model republic;
ARISTOTLE, who sets beauty above the useful and necessary, but whose
aesthetic seems to be applied to poetry rather than to any other art;
the German philosophers, KANT, SCHELLING, HEGEL, SCHOPENHAUER, who so
deeply impressed their theories on the literature of their times, etc.
The articles ART (Vol. 2, p. 657) and FINE ARTS are both by Sir Sidney
Colvin, formerly keeper of prints and drawings, British Museum. The
former begins with a contrast between art and nature—the contrast made
famous by Pope, by Chaucer, repeatedly by Shakespeare and by Dr. Johnson
in his definition of Art as “the power of doing something which is not
taught by Nature or by instinct.” This definition is in itself an
excellent text for a discourse on the importance in the study of the
fine arts of the best literature on the subject. But Sir Sidney Colvin
points out that the definition is incomplete, since Art

  is a name not only for the power of doing something, but for the
  exercise of the power; and not only for the exercise of the power, but
  for the rules according to which it is exercised; and not only for the
  rules, but for the result. Painting, for instance, is an art, and the
  word connotes not only the power to paint, but the act of painting;
  and not only the act, but the laws for performing the act rightly; and
  not only all these, but the material consequences of the act or the
  thing painted.

Art is then “_Every regulated_ operation or dexterity by which organized
beings pursue ends which they know beforehand, together with the rules
and the result of every such operation or dexterity.”

And a consideration of the etymology of the words “Art” and “Kunst” is
the basis of a discussion of the relation of Science and Art, which is
summed up in these words:

  Science consists in knowing, Art consists in doing. What I must do in
  order to know, is Art subservient to Science: what I must know in
  order to do, is Science subservient to Art.

After speaking of dancing, music, drawing, painting, sculpture,
architecture, poetry, the author says:

  Of all these arts, the end is not use, but pleasure, or pleasure
  before use, or at least pleasure and use conjointly. In modern
  language, there has grown up a usage which has put them into a class
  by themselves under the name of the Fine Arts, as distinguished from
  the Useful or Mechanical Arts. (See AESTHETICS and FINE ARTS.) Nay,
  more, to them alone is often appropriated the use of the generic word
  Art.... And further yet, custom has reduced the number which the
  class-word is meant to include. When Art and the works of Art are now
  currently spoken of in this sense, not even music or poetry is
  frequently denoted, but only architecture, sculpture and painting by
  themselves, or with their subordinate and decorative branches.

[Sidenote: Fine Arts]

The article FINE ARTS (Vol. 10, p. 355; equivalent to 70 pages of
this Guide) is divided into the following parts: _General
Definition_, with particular attention to the theory that makes the
arts a form of play and to the definitions of Plato and Schiller;
_Classification_—architecture, sculpture, painting, music and poetry
classified as “shaping” and “speaking” or as imitative and
“non-imitative,” with definitions from the aesthetic or philosophic
point of view of sculpture and of painting; and _Historical
Development_, with a criticism of Spencer’s theory of the evolution
and gradual separation of the arts and of Taine’s natural history,
as well as a critical and illuminating outline history of the arts.

Whether we include under the fine arts music and poetry, or with the
more popular usage make the fine arts not five but three, architecture,
painting and sculpture, the arts may be studied in the Britannica and
there is the basis for this study in this Guide.

Music is the subject of a separate chapter.

Poetry is treated in the chapters on Literature, but it will be well to
remind the student of the philosophy of art of the remarkable article
POETRY (Vol. 21, p. 877; equivalent to 45 pages in this Guide) by
Theodore Watts-Dunton, and of the articles on the different poetic
forms, mostly by Edmund Gosse.

Architecture in the Britannica is outlined in this Guide in the chapter
_For Architects_.

The two chapters immediately following this are devoted respectively to
Painting, Engraving and Drawing and to Sculpture and the Subsidiary
Arts. Of practical value to the art student as an introduction to these
two chapters are the articles ART SOCIETIES, by A. C. Robinson Carter,
editor of _The Year’s Art_, and ART TEACHING, by Walter Crane, the
English illustrator, who also contributed the article ARTS AND CRAFTS.

For an alphabetical list of articles on the fine arts see the end of the
chapter on _Sculpture_.




                             CHAPTER XXXIII
                        PAINTING, DRAWING, ETC.


The article PAINTING (Vol. 20, p. 459; equivalent to 190 pages of this
Guide) is an elaborate “key” article which may well be the starting
point for more definite study. The art student who actually wishes to
paint or draw—as distinct from the student of the history of art—will do
well to read first in this great article its third section, _The
Technique of Painting_ (pp. 482–497), by Gerard Baldwin Brown, professor
of fine art, Edinburgh, and author of _The Fine Arts_. The main topics
in this part of the article are:

  The Materials of Painting; The Surfaces Covered by the Painter;
  Binding Materials or Media; The Processes of Painting, and their
  Historical Uses; Painting with Coloured Vitreous Pastes (with
  bibliography)—on this method and on similar processes see the separate
  articles CERAMICS, with remarkably valuable and beautiful coloured
  illustrations; MOSAIC; ENAMEL; GLASS, STAINED. The following sections
  are Fresco Painting (with bibliography)—see Fig. 34, Plate X (facing
  p. 477); Fresco-Secco (with bibliography); Stereochromy or Water-Glass
  Painting (with bibliography); Spirit Fresco or the “Gambier Parry”
  Process, as improved by Professor Church (with bibliography); Oil
  Processes of Wall Painting; Tempera Painting on Walls; Encaustic
  Painting on Walls (with bibliography); Encaustic Painting in General
  (with bibliography); Tempera Painting (with bibliography); Water
  Colour Painting (with bibliography).

[Sidenote: Drawing and Engraving]

In connection with this part of the article—theoretically before it,
perhaps,—the student should read the articles DRAWING and ENGRAVING.

DRAWING (Vol. 8, p. 552), by John R. Fothergill, editor of _The Slade_,
is a peculiarly interesting article in its denial of the possibility of
conveying colour by drawing or monochrome, in its tracing the
development of drawing from the “papery” and flat first attempts on
early Greek vases to the depth, length and breadth of the later Greeks
or of a Michelangelo, for its criticism of the definition of artistic
drawing as a process of selection and elimination from the forms of
nature, and for its discussion of style or personality in drawing. See
also the articles CARICATURE, CARTOON, ILLUSTRATION, POSTER, PLUMBAGO
DRAWINGS.

ENGRAVING (Vol. 9, p. 645) is a short outline article to be supplemented
by: LINE-ENGRAVING (Vol. 16, p. 721), by Philip Gilbert Hamerton, author
of _Drawing and Engraving_, and more popularly known as the author of
_The Intellectual Life_, _Human Intercourse_ and other essays, and by M.
H. Spielmann, formerly editor of the _Magazine of Art_; WOOD ENGRAVING,
by the same authors; MEZZOTINT, by Gerald Philip Robinson, president of
the Society of Mezzotint Engravers; and Etching.

Supplementing the section in the article PAINTING on _The Technique of
Painting_ are the separate articles: CRAYON, PASTEL, PALETTE; AQUATINT,
AQUARELLE, ENCAUSTIC PAINTING, FRESCO, GOUACHE, ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPTS
(with 5 plates), by Sir E. Maunde Thompson, late director British Museum
and author of _English Illuminated Manuscripts_; MINIATURE (with 19
illustrations in halftone), by the same author, and by G. C. Williamson,
author of _History of Portrait Miniatures_, whose articles on the
miniature painters the CLOUETS, COSWAY, the HILLIARDS, GEORGE MORLAND,
PETER OLIVER, the PETITOTS, PIERRE PRIEUR, JOHN SMART, etc., should also
be read; PANORAMA, PASTEL, by M. H. Spielmann, PORTRAITURE, by Sir
George Reid, the Scotch artist and late president of the Royal Scottish
Academy, PREDELLA, TEMPERA and TRIPTYCH.

[Sidenote: History of Painting]

Although the articles enumerated in the last paragraph have primarily to
do with technique, there is in them—especially in such articles as
MINIATURE and PORTRAITURE—much historical and critical information. And
from them the student may well turn back to the article PAINTING to
pursue there those topics which he has not yet covered. These are: _Part
I.—A Sketch of the Development of the Art_ (pp. 460–478); _Part
II.—Schools of Painting_, a tabular scheme (pp. 479–481), and _Recent
Schools of Painting_ (pp. 497–518), by M. H. Spielmann, for British;
Léonce Bénédite, keeper of the Luxembourg Museum, for French; Fernand
Khnopff, painter and etcher, for Belgian; Prof. J. C. Van Dyck, Rutgers
College, author of _History of American Art_, for the United States; and
Prof. Richard Muther, Breslau University, author of _The History of
Modern Painting_, on Dutch, German, Austrian, Italian, Spanish, Danish,
Swedish, Norwegian, Russian and Balkan States.

These parts of the article are illustrated with ten plates containing 36
figures, including four prehistoric incised drawings of animals found in
French caves and remarkable for their technical accuracy and life; two
paintings, a boar and a bison, reproduced in colours, from the
palaeolithic cave of Altamira—see also Plates II and III in the article
ARCHAEOLOGY (between pp. 348 and 349, Vol. 2), Figs. 6, 7 and 8 in Plate
accompanying ANTHROPOLOGY (opposite p. 118, Vol. 2), and the plates of
American antiques in the article AMERICA (Vol. 1, pp. 808–816); an
excellent Egyptian drawing of birds; the François vase (Greek); a
Pompeian wall painting—see also the reproduction in colours of a
wall-painting from a Roman villa in the article MURAL DECORATION (Vol.
20, p. 22); a wall painting from Brunswick cathedral; and typical
examples of the work of Hubert van Eyck, Giotto, Lorenzetti, Masaccio,
Uccello, Pollaiuolo, Piero della Francesca, Ghirlandajo, Mantegna,
Bellini, Giorgione, Michelangelo, Botticelli, Titian, Holbein, Watteau,
Gainsborough, Rembrandt, Quintin Matsys, Brouwer, Ruysdael, Turner,
Chardin.

“A rough division of the whole history of art into four main periods”
gives “first ... the efforts of the older Oriental peoples, best
represented by the painting of the Egyptians; the second includes the
classical and medieval epochs up to the beginning of the 15th century;
the third the 15th and 16th centuries, and the fourth the time from the
beginning of the 17th century onward. In the first period the endeavour
is after truth of contour, in the second and third after truth of form,
in the fourth after truth of space.”

  The Egyptian artist was satisfied if he could render with accuracy,
  and with proper emphasis on what is characteristic, the silhouettes of
  things in nature regarded as little more than flat objects cut out
  against a light background. The Greek and the medieval artist realized
  that objects had three dimensions, and that it was possible on a flat
  surface to give an indication of the thickness of anything, that is,
  of its depth away from the spectator, as well as its length and
  breadth, but they cannot be said to have fully succeeded in the
  difficult task they set themselves. For this there was needful an
  efficient knowledge of perspective, and this the 15th century brought
  with it. During the 15th century the painter fully succeeds in
  mastering the representation of the third dimension, and during the
  next he exercises the power thus acquired in perfect freedom,
  producing some of the most convincing and masterly presentments of
  solid forms upon a flat surface that the art has to show. During this
  period, however, and to a more partial extent even in the earlier
  classical epoch, efforts were being made to widen the horizon of the
  art and to embrace within the scope of its representations not only
  solid objects in themselves, but such objects as a whole in space, in
  due relation to each other and to the universe at large. It was
  reserved, however, for the masters of the 17th century perfectly to
  realize this ideal of the art, and in their hands painting as an art
  of representation is widened out to its fullest possible limits, and
  the whole of nature in all its aspects becomes for the first time the
  subject of the picture.

[Sidenote: Early Painting]

Following this classification, the article PAINTING, after commenting on
primitive art among bushmen, Eskimo and Australians and on the
remarkable cave drawings and paintings of Altamira, Gourdan and
Lortet,—even the paintings are thought to be 50,000 years old,—discusses
the painting of contour in Egypt and Babylonia, in prehistoric Greece,
in ancient Greece and Italy, and in the early Christian and early
medieval periods. Of particular interest is the criticism of Greek
drawing.

  It may be admitted that in many artistic qualities it was beyond
  praise. In beauty, in grace of line, in composition, we can imagine
  works of Apelles, of Zeuxis, of Protogenes, excelling even the efforts
  of the Italian painters, or only matched by the finest designs of a
  Raphael or a Leonardo.... The facts, however, remain, first, that the
  Greek pictures about which we chiefly read were of single figures, or
  subjects of a very limited and compact order, with little variety of
  planes; and second, that the existing remains of ancient painting are
  so full of mistakes in perspective that the representation of distance
  cannot have been a matter to which the artists had really set
  themselves.... The problem of representing correctly the third
  dimension of space ... had certainly not been solved.... It is an
  additional confirmation of this view to find early Christian and early
  medieval painting confined to the representation of the few near
  objects which the older Oriental artists had all along envisaged.

For more detailed treatment of this period see the articles: EGYPT, _Art
and Archaeology_ (Vol. 9, pp. 65–77), with many illustrations both of
painting and sculpture, by Dr. W. M. Flinders Petrie, the eminent
Egyptologist; BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA, particularly the two plates of
illustrations (opposite pp. 104 and 105, Vol. 3); AEGEAN CIVILIZATION,
especially the illustrations (Vol. 1, pp. 246–251); GREEK ART (Vol. 12,
pp. 470–492), by Percy Gardner, author of _Grammar of Greek Art_,—and,
mostly by the same author, the articles AGATHARCHUS, PANAENUS, MICON,
POLYGNOTUS, PROTOGENES, APELLES, ARISTIDES OF THEBES, PAUSIAS, THEON,
ZEUXIS; ROMAN ART (Vol. 23, pp. 474–486), especially Plates V (p. 481)
and VI (p. 484); and for the early Christian and early medieval periods
such articles as ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPTS, with illustrations, by Sir E.
Maunde Thompson, late director British Museum, and MINIATURE. The reader
should also consult the articles CHINA and JAPAN for the section on the
art of each of these countries (Vol. 6, pp. 213–216, with two plates, 17
figures; and Vol. 15, pp. 172–190, with eight plates, 30
figures—especially Plates I-IV, pp. 172–177), as Oriental art in general
may be said to belong to this phase of effort after truth of contour and
of form. See also the separate articles on Japanese artists, mostly by
E. F. Strange, author of _Japanese Illustration_, _Hokusai_,
etc.,—particularly KORIN, UTAMARO, HOKUSAI, HIROSHIGE, and YOSAI.

The first important individual names after those of the Greek painters
mentioned above are those of the Proto-Renaissance of the 13th and 14th
century.

For Italy see PIETRO CAVALLINI; in Florence, CIMABUE, by W. M. Rossetti,
author of _Fine Art, Chiefly Contemporary_; GIOTTO, by Sir Sidney
Colvin, late keeper prints and drawings, British Museum; GADDI, by W. M.
Rossetti; ORCAGNA, by the late John Henry Middleton, Slade professor of
fine arts, Cambridge, art director South Kensington Museum; SPINELLO
ARETINO (Vol. 25, p. 685), and ANGELICO, by W. M. Rossetti; in Siena,
SIMONE MARTINI; and for Flanders, the VAN EYCKS (Vol. 10, p. 90), by Sir
Joseph Archer Crowe, author with G. B. Cavalcaselle, of _Early Flemish
Painters_, etc.

[Sidenote: 15th Century: Florence]

With the 15th century, and particularly at Florence, begins the third of
the four periods in the evolution of painting. “The father of modern
painting is the Florentine Masaccio”: see the article on him (Vol. 17,
p. 833), by W. M. Rossetti, who says “he led the way in representing the
objects of nature correctly, with action, liveliness and relief.... All
the greatest artists of Italy, through studying the Brancacci chapel,
became his champions and disciples.” For the other great Florentine
names of the century see the articles: MASOLINO DA PANICALE, by
Rossetti; BRUNELLESCHI, architect, student of perspective, and, with
Masolino, master of Masaccio; the two earlier LIPPI, by Rossetti;
BOTTICELLI, by Sir Sidney Colvin; GOZZOLI, by Rossetti; ROSSELLI; PIERO
DI COSIMO (Vol. 21, p. 950); CASTAGNO; BALDOVINETTI, by Sir Sidney
Colvin; POLLAIUOLO; GHIRLANDAJO, father and son, by W. M. Rossetti; and,
marking the perfection of art on the formal side, BARTOLOMMEO, and
Rossetti’s article, ANDREA DEL SARTO (Vol. 1, p. 969).

[Sidenote: 15th Century: Other Parts of Italy]

As for the remainder of Italy, Sienese art declines in this century, but
there is an advance in Northern Italy and in Umbria. See the articles:
FRANCESCHI, by Rossetti, MELOZZO, “the first who practised
foreshortening with much success,” and SIGNORELLI; Raphael’s master,
PERUGINO, by Rossetti; MANTEGNA, by the same author; LORENZO COSTA;
FRANCIA, by Rossetti; and at Venice, GENTILE, the VIVARINI, ANTONELLO DA
MESSINA, CARPACCIO, the BELLINI (Vol. 3, p. 700), by Sir Sidney Colvin.

[Sidenote: 15th and 16th Centuries: Northern Europe]

In Germany and the Low Countries the art of the 15th and 16th centuries
may be traced in the articles: for Germany—SCHONGAUER; DÜRER, by Sir
Sidney Colvin; GRÜN; the HOLBEINS and CRANACH, by Sir Joseph Archer
Crowe; BURGKMAIR; GRÜNEWALD; and for the Low Countries—ROGER VAN DER
WEYDEN; his greater pupil MEMLINC, by Sir J. A. Crowe and P. G. Konody,
art critic of the _Observer_ and _Daily Mail_; GOES; GERARD DAVID, by P.
G. Konody; LUCAS VAN LEYDEN (Vol. 17, p. 93); HEEMSKERK; MATSYS;
BREUGHEL; MABUSE, by Sir J. A. Crowe; FLORIS; MORO; and BRIL.

[Sidenote: 16th Century: Italian Masters]

Roughly contemporary with Dürer and Holbein the younger were the even
greater masters of Italian painting. See the articles: for
Florence—LEONARDO DA VINCI (Vol. 16, p. 444, equivalent to 35 pages of
this Guide), and MICHELANGELO (Vol. 18, p. 362), both by Sir Sidney
Colvin, and VASARI, painter and biographer of painters; for Rome—RAPHAEL
SANZIO (Vol. 22, p. 900, with 7 cuts), by the late Prof. John Henry
Middleton, and GIULIO ROMANO, by W. M. Rossetti; for North Italy—LUINI,
CORREGGIO, PARMIGIANO, and MORONI, all by Rossetti, and MORETTO; and for
Venice—GIORGIONE, by Sir Sidney Colvin; LOTTO and PALMA, TITIAN,
TINTORETTO, and PAUL VERONESE (Vol. 20, p. 965), all by W. M. Rossetti.

We have now come to modern times so far as painting is concerned. The
article PAINTING says:

[Sidenote: The Fourth Period: 17th Century and After]

  By the 17th century the development of painting had passed through all
  its stages, and the picture was no longer a mere silhouette or a
  transcript of objects against a flat background, but rather an
  enchanted mirror of the world, in which might be reflected space
  beyond space in infinite recession. With this transformation of the
  picture there was connected a complete change in the relation of the
  artist to nature. Throughout all the earlier epochs of the art the
  painter had concerned himself not with nature as a whole, but with
  certain selected aspects of nature that furnished him with his
  recognized subjects. These subjects were selected on account of their
  intrinsic beauty or importance, and as representing intrinsic worth
  they claimed to be delineated in the clearest and most substantial
  fashion. In the 17th century, not only was the world as a whole
  brought within the artist’s view, but it presented itself as worthy in
  every part of his most reverent attention. In other words, the art of
  the 17th century, and of the modern epoch in general, is democratic,
  and refuses to acknowledge that difference in artistic value among the
  aspects of nature which was at the basis of the essentially
  aristocratic art of the Greeks and Italians.... The artist who was the
  first to demonstrate convincingly this principle of modern painting
  was Rembrandt.... Rembrandt in his later work attended to the
  pictorial effect alone, and practically annulled the objects by
  reducing them to pure tone and color. Things are not there at all, but
  only the semblance or effect, or “impression” of things. Breadth is in
  this way combined with the most delicate variety, and a new form of
  painting, now called “impressionism,” has come into being.

See: RUBENS, by Henri Hymans, author of _Rubens: sa vie et son œuvre_,
and P. G. Konody; REMBRANDT, by John Forbes White and P. G. Konody; and
FRANS HALS, by P. G. Konody. These were the leaders of the great 17th
century school—the Dutch. For the more immediate followers of Rembrandt
see the articles: DOUW, EECKHOUT, FLINCK, MAES, HOOCH, MEER. For Rubens’
great pupil and rival and his successors, the articles VAN DYCK and
TENIERS, both by Henri Hymans and P. G. Konody, SNYDERS and the great
animal painter FYT. See BROUWER for Hals’ pupil and assistant. For the
genre painters, the articles: TER BORCH, METSU, STEEN, WOUWERMANN, and
the OSTADE family, by Sir J. A. Crowe and P. G. Konody. On the
landscapists see the articles: KONINCK, GOYEN, NEER, by Sir J. A. Crowe
and P. G. Konody; RUYSDAEL, HOBBEMA, by Sir J. A. Crowe, and BERCHEM;
and, for animal and landscape, A. VANDEVELDE, CUYP, by Sir J. A. Crowe,
and POTTER, by P. G. Konody. The other important articles for the Dutch
school of the 17th century are: HEEM, HEDA, HONDECOETER, WEENIX and
HUYSUM, painters of still life, etc.; W. VANDEVELDE and BACKHUYSEN,
marine painters; and at the close of the period, or marking its decline,
MIERIS and NETSCHER.

In the article on PAINTING this summary follows the outline of the
general development of painting through the 17th century:

[Sidenote: Kinds of Painting]

  The fact that the Dutch painters have left us masterpieces in so many
  different walks of painting, makes it convenient that we should add
  here some brief notes on characteristic modern phases of the art on
  which they stamped the impress of their genius. The normal subject for
  the artist, as we have seen, up to the 17th century, was the
  figure-subject, generally in some connexion with religion. The
  Egyptian portrayed the men and women of his time, but the pictures,
  through their connexion with the sepulchre, had a quasi-religious
  significance.

  _Portraiture_ is differentiated from this kind of subject-picture
  through stages which it would be interesting to trace, but the
  portrait, though secular, is always treated in such a way as to exalt
  or dignify the sitter. Another kind of figure-piece, also
  differentiated by degrees from the subject-picture of the loftier
  kind, is the so-called _Genre Painting_, in which the human actors and
  their goings-on are in themselves indifferent, trivial, or mean, and
  even repellent; and in which, accordingly, intrinsic interest of
  subject has disappeared to be replaced by an artistic interest of a
  different kind. _Landscape_, in modern times so important a branch of
  painting, is also an outcome of the traditional figure-piece, for at
  first it is nothing but a background to a scene in which human figures
  are prominent. _Marine Painting_ is a branch of landscape art
  differentiated from this, but supplied at first in the same way with
  figure-interest. The origin of _Animal Painting_ is to be sought
  partly in figure-pieces, where, as in Egypt and Assyria, animals play
  a part in scenes of human life, and partly in landscapes, in which
  cattle, &c., are introduced to enliven the foreground. The _Hunting
  Picture_, combining a treatment of figures and animals in action with
  landscape of a picturesque character, gives an artist like Rubens a
  welcome opportunity, and the picture of _Dead Game_ may be regarded as
  its offshoot. This brings us to the important class of _Still-life
  Painting_, the relation of which to the figure-piece can be traced
  through the genre picture and the portrait.

The article then proceeds to sketch the history and development of
different kinds of painting:

  _Portraiture_:

  It is Gentile and Giovanni Bellini ... who may be regarded as the
  fathers of modern portrait painting. Venetian art was always more
  secular in spirit than that of the rest of Italy, and Venetian
  portraits were abundant.... Some of the finest portraits in the world
  are the work of the great Venetians of the 16th century, for they
  combine pictorial quality with an air of easy greatness which later
  painters find it hard to impart to their creations. Though greatly
  damaged, Titian’s equestrian portrait of Charles V. at Madrid (fig.
  26, Plate VIII.) is one of the very finest of existing works of the
  kind. It is somewhat remarkable that of the other Italian painters who
  executed portraits the most successful was the idealist Raphael, whose
  papal portraits of Julius II. and Leo X. are masterpieces of firm and
  accurate delineation. Leonardo’s “Monna Lisa” is a study rather than a
  portrait proper.

  The realistic vein, which, as we have seen, runs through northern
  painting, explains to some extent the extraordinary merit in
  portraiture of Holbein, who represents the culmination of the efforts
  in this direction of masters like Jan van Eyck and Dürer.... Frans
  Hals of Haarlem, one of the most brilliant painters of the
  impressionist school that he did much to found, achieved remarkable
  success in the artistic grouping of a number of portraits.... As
  portraitists the other great 17th-century masters fall into two sets,
  Rembrandt and Velazquez contrasting with Rubens and his pupil Van
  Dyck.... In the 18th century, though France produced some good limners
  and Spain Goya, yet on the whole England was the home of the best
  portraiture. Van Dyck had been in the service of Charles I., and
  foreign representatives of his style carried on afterwards the
  tradition of his essentially courtly art, but there existed at the
  same time a line of native British portraitists of whom the latest and
  best was Hogarth. One special form of portraiture, the _miniature_
  (_q.v._), has been characteristically English throughout....

  _Genre_:

  Probably the most excellent painters of genre are Ter Borch, Metsu and
  Brouwer, the two first painters of the life of the upper classes, the
  last of peasant existence in some of its most unlovely aspects. The
  pictures of Brouwer are among the most instructive documents of modern
  painting.... He is best represented in the Munich Pinacotek, from
  which has been selected fig. 30, Plate IX. Hardly less admirable are
  Teniers in Flanders; De Hooch, Ver Meer of Delft, Jan Steen, A. van
  Ostade, in Holland, while in more modern times Hogarth, Chardin, Sir
  David Wilkie, Meissonier, and a host of others carry the tradition of
  the work down to our own day (see Table VIII.)....

  _Landscape and Marine Painting_:

  Several of the Dutch masters, even before the time of Rembrandt,
  excelled in the truthful rendering of the scenes and objects of their
  own simple but eminently paintable country; but it was Rembrandt, with
  his pupil, de Koningk, and his rival in this department Jacob
  Ruysdael, who were the first to show how a perfectly natural and
  unconventional rendering of a stretch of country under a broad expanse
  of sky might be raised by poetry and ideal feeling to the rank of one
  of the world’s masterpieces of painting. Great as was Rembrandt in
  what Bode has called “the landscape of feeling,” the “Haarlem from the
  Dunes” of Ruysdael (fig. 31, Plate IX.) with some others of this
  artist’s acknowledged successes, surpass even his achievement....
  Among Turner’s chief titles to honour is the fact that he portrayed
  the sea in all its moods with a knowledge and sympathy that give him a
  place alone among painters of marine....

  _Animal Painting_:

  In Holland, in the 17th century, the animal nature presented itself
  under the more contemplative aspect of the ruminants in the lush
  water-meadows. True to their principle of doing everything they
  attempt in the best possible way, the Dutch paint horses (Cuyp,
  Wouwerman) and cattle (Cuyp, Adrian Vandevelde, Paul Potter) with
  canonical perfection, while Hondekoeter delineates live cocks and
  hens, and Weenix dead hares and moor-fowl, in a way that makes us feel
  that the last word on such themes has been spoken. There is a large
  white turkey by Hondekoeter in which the truth of mass and of texture
  in the full soft plumage is combined with a delicacy in the detail of
  the airy filaments, that is the despair of the most accomplished
  modern executant.

  But animals have been treated more nobly than when shown in Flemish
  agitation or in Dutch phlegmatic calm. Leonardo da Vinci was specially
  famed for his horses, which he may have treated with something of the
  majesty of Pheidias....

  _Still-Life Painting_:

  There is no finer Rembrandt for pictorial quality than the picture in
  the Louvre representing the carcase of a flayed ox in a flesher’s
  booth. As illustrating the principle of modern painting this form of
  the graphic art has a value and importance which in itself it could
  hardly claim.... The way was prepared for it as has been noticed, by
  the minute and forcible rendering of accessory objects in the
  figure-pieces and portraits of the early Flemish masters, of Dürer,
  and above all of Holbein. The painting of flower and fruit pieces
  without figure interest by Jan Breughel the younger, who was born in
  1601, represents a stage onward, and contemporary with him were
  several other Dutch and Flemish specialists in this department, among
  whom Jan David de Heem, born 1603, and the rather older Willem Klaasz
  Heda may be mentioned. Their subjects sometimes took the form of a
  luncheon table with vessels, plate, fruit and other eatables; at other
  times of groups of costly vessels of gold, silver and glass, or of
  articles used in art or science, such as musical instruments and the
  like; and it is especially to be noted that the handling stops always
  short of any illusive reproduction of the actual textures of the
  objects, while at the same time the differing surfaces of stuffs and
  metal and glass, of smooth-rinded apples and gnarled lemons, are all
  most justly rendered.... In this form of painting the French
  18th-century artist Chardin, whose impasto was fuller, whose colouring
  more juicy than those of the Dutch, has achieved imperishable fame
  (see fig. 33, Plate X.); and the modern French, who understand better
  than others the technical business of painting, have carried on the
  fine tradition which has culminated in the work of Vollon. The Germans
  have also painted still-life to good result, but the comparative
  weakness in technique of British painters has kept them in this
  department rather in the background.

[Sidenote: National Schools of Painting]

The history of painting since the 17th century may best be studied in
the Britannica in the order in which “recent schools” are treated (Vol.
20, pp. 497–518), and this plan will be followed here in a brief
outline, giving only a few out of many articles for each country.

[Sidenote: British]

British art in the 17th and 18th centuries is dependent largely on
foreign and particularly Flemish influences—Van Dyck in especial. See
Rossetti’s articles on LELY and KNELLER, who, like Holbein and Van Dyck,
were importations, but, unlike them, were pretty thoroughly Anglicized.
For the first purely English painter see Austin Dobson’s article HOGARTH
(Vol. 13, p. 566). For “the most prominent figure in the English school
of painting” whose _Discourses_ largely affected English notions of
aesthetics, see SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS; also the article on his rival
GEORGE ROMNEY. And read Rossetti’s article GAINSBOROUGH; and those on
the portrait painters RAEBURN and SIR THOMAS LAWRENCE. On the Norwich
school of landscapists see the articles CROME, COTMAN and GEORGE
VINCENT. For foreign influences on landscape painting see RICHARD WILSON
(Vol. 28, p. 695) for French influence, and JOHN CONSTABLE (Vol. 6, p.
982), by C. J. Holmes, author of _Constable and His Influence on
Landscape Painting_, for German. With the article on the greatest of
English landscapists J. M. W. TURNER (Vol. 27, p. 474), by Sir George
Reid, the student should read Frederic Harrison’s article on JOHN
RUSKIN, himself an exquisite draughtsman, although unable to compose a
picture, whose championship of Turner and general theories of art so
strongly influenced British painting. See also the articles on the
subject painter THOMAS STOTHARD and the landscapist GIRTIN; and on the
genre painters, SIR DAVID WILKIE, by J. Miller Gray, late curator of the
Scottish National Portrait Gallery, MULREADY, WILLIAM COLLINS, and
FRITH. See the article WILLIAM BLAKE, by J. W. Comyns-Carr, author of
_Essays on Art_, for an appreciation of that remarkable genius, who in
his combination of painting and poetry may be reckoned a forerunner of
the Pre-Raphaelites. On the P. R. Brotherhood see the articles: D. G.
ROSSETTI, by F. G. Stephens, former art-critic to the _Athenaeum_ and,
for Rossetti’s literary work, Theodore Watts-Dunton; SIR J. E. MILLAIS
and W. HOLMAN HUNT, by Cosmo Monkhouse, the poet and critic; and FORD
MADOX BROWN, by W. M. Rossetti, himself a member of the Brotherhood—see
the article on ROSSETTI. Of much the same school were several later men.
See, for instance, the articles: LORD LEIGHTON, by Cosmo Monkhouse;
WILLIAM MORRIS, by Arthur Waugh; BURNE-JONES, by Lawrence Binyon, poet
and author of monographs on Blake, Crome, etc.; GEORGE FREDERICK WATTS,
by Malcolm Bell, biographer of Burne-Jones; WALTER CRANE. On the
“Newlyn” school, see the article NEWLYN; on the etchers, WHISTLER, by
Frederick Wedmore, author of _Whistler’s Etchings_, and WILLIAM STRANG
and SIR F. S. HADEN, by Sir Charles Holroyd, artist and critic; on
figure painters, SIR JOHN GILBERT, ALBERT MOORE, JOHN PETTIE, G. H.
BOUGHTON, ALMA-TADEMA, SIR E. J. POYNTER and SIR W. B. RICHMOND; for
painters of sentiment, MARCUS STONE, SIR LUKE FILDES and SIR HUBERT VON
HERKOMER; among portrait painters, J. J. SHANNON, and C. W. FURSE; the
decorator FRANK BRANGWYN; the realistic landscapists, H. W. B. DAVIS,
DAVID MURRAY, SIR E. A. WATERLOW, VICAT COLE; the more imaginative and
romantic painters of landscape, ALFRED W. HUNT, CECIL GORDON LAWSON,
JOHN LINNELL, G. H. MASON, FREDERICK WALKER, SIR ALFRED EAST, J. BUXTON
KNIGHT, GEORGE CLAUSEN; the “subjective landscapist” B. W. LEADER; the
marine painters HENRY MOORE, C. NAPIER HEMY, JAMES CLARKE HOOK; the
animal-painters BRETON, RIVIERE, J. M. SWAN, and, for the earlier
period, LANDSEER; the Scottish artists ORCHARDSON, by Sir Walter
Armstrong, director of National Gallery of Ireland; JOHN PETTIE, THOMAS
FAED, DAVID MURRAY, ARTHUR MELVILLE, JOHN LAVERY, ROBERT BROUGH, SIR
JAMES GUTHRIE, and SIR GEORGE REID, of whom we have already spoken as a
contributor to the Britannica; and the water colorists SIR JOHN GILBERT,
by F. G. Stephens, former art critic of the _Athenaeum_, HENRY MOORE,
ALBERT MOORE, GEORGE CLAUSEN, E. J. GREGORY, BIRKET FOSTER, HAAG, KATE
GREENAWAY, by M. H. Spielmann, biographer of Kate Greenaway. On English
illustrators, besides those already named, Hogarth and Blake notably,
see the articles THOMAS BEWICK, BARTOLOZZI, FLAXMAN, by Sir Sidney
Colvin, CATTERMOLE, SAMUEL PROUT, JAMES WARD, GILLRAY, BUNBURY,
ROWLANDSON, CRUIKSHANK, JOHN LEECH, RICHARD DOYLE, TENNIEL, SIR JOHN
GILBERT, AUBREY BEARDSLEY, by E. F. Strange, THOMAS CRESWICK, DU
MAURIER, C. S. KEENE, FREDERICK WALKER, G. J. PINWELL, R. CALDECOTT,
HARRY FURNISS, SIR F. C. GOULD, E. LINLEY SAMBOURNE, PHIL MAY, LEONARD
RAVEN-HILL.

[Sidenote: French]

On French painting of the 17th century read: on landscape, POUSSIN, and
CLAUDE OF LORRAINE (Vol. 6, p. 463), by W. M. Rossetti; the historical
and religious painters LE BRUN and LE SUEUR; and the portraitist
PHILIPPE DE CHAMPAIGNE. For the 18th century: the articles WATTEAU and
FRAGONARD, by P. G. Konody; FRANÇOIS BOUCHER, LANCRET, VERNET the
eldest, RIGAUD, CHARDIN, and GREUZE, by Lady Dilke, author of _French
Painters of the 18th Century_.

In the 19th century came a classical reaction: see the article on its
leader JACQUES LOUIS DAVID and his pupils and imitators J. B. REGNAULT,
GIRODET, BARON GUÉRIN, PRUD’HON; then a mediate movement, on which see
INGRES, by Lady Dilke, and GROS; and then a Romantic revolt—see
DELACROIX, GÉRICAULT, ISABEY. Other important names are ZIEM, MEISSONIER
and ROSE BONHEUR, both by Henri Frantz of the _Gazette des Beaux Arts_,
CABANEL, BAUDRY, GÉRÔME, BOUGUEREAU, BENJAMIN CONSTANT, CORMON, BONNAT
and HENNER. On the Barbizon school, see the articles BARBIZON, THEODORE
ROUSSEAU, DAUBIGNY, COROT, and DIAZ, by D. Croal Thomson, author of _The
Barbizon School_, J. F. MILLET, by Lady Dilke; DUPRÉ, FRANÇAIS and
HARPIGNIES. Ranking with Corot and Millet in influence is COURBET; see
the article on Courbet, by Henri Frantz of the Paris _Gazette des Beaux
Arts_, and on Courbet’s followers, LEGROS, FANTIN-LATOUR, RIBOT, by
Frederick Wedmore, CAROLUS-DURAN. Contrasted with these nature-lovers
are the more mystic MOREAU, RICARD, DELAUNAY, FROMENTIN and CAZIN.

The later names we may classify: the decorative painter—PUVIS DE
CHAVANNES, by Henri Frantz; the impressionists—see the article
IMPRESSIONISM (Vol. 14, pp. 343–346), by D. S. MacColl, keeper of the
Tate Gallery, and author of _Nineteenth Century Art_, and in the article
PAINTING the discussion on pp. 473–474 of Vol. 20—MANET, by Henri
Frantz, MONET, DEGAS, RENOIR; the plein-airists JULES BRETON,
BASTIEN-LEPAGE, by Henri Frantz; ROLL, GERVEX; the symbolist GUSTAVE
MOREAU; the military painters ALPHONSE DE NEUVILLE and DETAILLE; and the
“neo-evangelist” CAZIN.

[Sidenote: Belgium and Holland]

The art of Belgium and Holland in the 19th century is to be studied in
Prof. Muther’s sections on these two countries (pp. 506–509) in the
article PAINTING, and in such separate articles as LEYS, ALFRED STEVENS
(to be distinguished from the English sculptor), BRAEKELEER, WILLEMS,
CLAYS, PORTAELS, WAUTERS, CONSTANTIN MEUNIER, VERLAT, the DE VRIENDTS,
KHNOPFF, already mentioned as a critic and a contributor to the
Britannica,—all these are Belgians; and, in Holland, ISRAËLS, MARIS,
MAUVE.

[Sidenote: Germany]

Going back to the close of the 18th century for German painters
influenced by Winckelmann, the important articles are MENGS and
CARSTENS. See OVERBECK, by J. Beavington Atkinson for the German
“pre-Raphaelite” movement—and the articles, PETER VON CORNELIUS, by W.
Cave Thomas, author of _Mural or Monumental Education_; the SCHADOWS, by
J. B. Atkinson; VEIT, and SCHNORR. The other more important names before
1870 are: BETHEL, SCHWIND, ACHENBACH and PRELLER. The glorification of
the Empire and of Prussia is the theme of the new historical school: see
particularly MENZEL. The study of the old masters is to be seen in
KAULBACH and LENBACH. Among the members of a more modern school are:
LIEBERMANN, KALCKREUTH, KELLER, UHDE; of another reaction, FEUERBACH,
THOMA, and BÖCKLIN, by Henri Frantz; and of a sculptural order _Klinger_
and _Stuck_.

[Sidenote: Austria-Hungary]

As for Austria-Hungary, we may here mention only three articles: MAKART,
PETTEKOFEN, and MUNKACSY, by E. F. Strange.

[Sidenote: Italy]

In Italy since the great days of the 17th century, we may mention
TIEPOLO, CANALE and GUARDI before the 19th century, and in that era
SEGANTINI, GIOVANNI COSTA, and MUZZIOLI.

[Sidenote: Spain]

The art of Spain has not been touched heretofore in this summary. For
the 16th century see the articles COELLO, BECERRA, VINCENTE JOANES,
NAVARRETE, EL GRECO; and for the 17th, _the_ Spanish century, HERRERA,
his great pupil VELAZQUEZ, by J. Forbes White and P. G. Konody; CANO,
and ZURBARAN and MURILLO, both by W. M. Rossetti. In the 18th century
the only great Spanish artist was GOYA Y LUCIENTES, painter and etcher.
On the 19th century see: FORTUNY, by Alfred Lys Baldry, art critic of
the London _Globe_; PRADILLA; BENLLIURE Y GIL; SOROLLA Y BASTIDA;
MADRAZO Y KUNT; ZULOAGA.

[Sidenote: Other European Countries]

To the other countries of Europe, fully as their painting is treated in
the Britannica, we can devote little space here. It may suffice to
mention the Norwegian HANS DAHL and the Russians REPIN and VERESCHAGIN.

[Sidenote: The United States]

On painting in the United States, see the section in the article
PAINTING, by Prof. J. C. Van Dyke of Rutgers College (Vol. 20, pp.
518–519); and the articles J. S. COPLEY, BENJAMIN WEST, JOHN TRUMBULL,
GILBERT STUART, JOHN VANDERLYN, WASHINGTON ALLSTON, REMBRANDT PEALE, J.
W. JARVIS, THOMAS SULLY, THOMAS COLE, ASHER B. DURAND, J. F. KENSETT, F.
E. CHURCH, CHESTER HARDING, HENRY INMAN, WILLIAM PAGE, G. P. A. HEALY,
DANIEL HUNTINGTON, W. S. MOUNT, W. M. HUNT, JOHN LA FARGE, GEORGE
FULLER, EASTMAN JOHNSON, ELIHU VEDDER, LEONARD OCHTMAN, WINSLOW HOMER,
A. H. WYANT, GEORGE INNESS, HOMER D. MARTIN, SWAIN GIFFORD, the MORANS,
JERVIS MCENTEE, D. W. TRYON, ALBERT BIERSTADT, W. H. BEARD, BLASHFIELD,
J. W. ALEXANDER, W. M. CHASE, DUVENECK, CECILIA BEAUX, W. H. LOW, H. S.
MOWBRAY, H. O. TANNER, E. C. TARBELL, R. W. VONNOH,—and the Americans
who have made their home and their fame in Europe, like WHISTLER,
SARGENT, E. A. ABBEY and J. J. SHANNON, and those whose work is
Continental, or even purely Parisian in tone, like W. T. DANNAT, GEORGE
HITCHCOCK, GARI MELCHERS, C. S. PEARCE, E. L. WEEKS and WALTER GAY. On
illustrators, see the articles: HOWARD PYLE, FREDERICK REMINGTON, C. S.
REINHART, W. T. SMEDLEY, ROBERT BLUM, CHARLES DANA GIBSON, W. HAMILTON
GIBSON, the wood-engraver TIMOTHY COLE, the etcher JOSEPH PENNELL; and
for caricature the article THOMAS NAST and the section on the United
States in M. H. Spielmann’s article CARICATURE (Vol. 5, pp. 334–335).

For a fuller list of articles on painting, drawing, engraving, etc.,
with articles on sculpture, see the end of the next chapter _Sculpture_.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV
                               SCULPTURE


[Sidenote: The Main Article]

The Britannica article SCULPTURE (Vol. 24, p. 488; equivalent to 90
pages of this Guide) is a complete treatise on the technique and history
of this branch of art by J. H. Middleton, late professor of Fine Art,
Cambridge, M. H. Spielmann, former editor of the _Magazine of Art_, P.
G. Konody, art critic of the _Observer_ and _Daily Mail_, and, for
French sculpture, Léonce Bénédite, keeper of the Luxembourg Museum and
author of _Histoire des Beaux Arts_. It is illustrated with 10 full page
plates as follows: I and II. _Medieval_, etc., with examples of the work
of Jacopo della Quercia, Donatello (2), Andrea Pisano, Michelangelo,
Verrocchio and Leopardo, Luca della Robbia, Benvenuto Cellini, Peter
Vischer, Bernini, Goujon, Canova, Houdon, Coysevox; III. IV. V. _Modern
British_—Alfred Stevens, Sir George Frampton, Lord Leighton, Harry
Bates, H. H. Armstead, G. F. Watts (2), A. Gilbert, F. W. Pomeroy, E.
Onslow Ford, W. Hamo Thornycroft (2), Alfred Drury, F. Derwent Wood,
Bertram Mackennal, Albert Toft, Havard Thomas, W. Goscombe John, W. R.
Colton (2), Sir Charles Lawes-Wittewronge, Sir J. Edgar Boehm, Thomas
Brock; VI. _American_—J. Q. A. Ward, D. C. French and E. C. Potter,
Augustus St. Gaudens, Frederick MacMonnies; VII. VIII. and IX. _Modern
French_—Falguière, Barrias, Delaplanche, Idrac, Becquer, L. Gérôme,
Marqueste, Longepied, Frémiet, Guillaume, Puech, Saint-Marceaux, Mercié,
Rodin, Michel, Dalou, Aubé, Chapu, Bloche, Gardet, Bartholomé; and X.
_Other Foreign Countries_—Sinding, Begas, Ximenes, Querol, Antokolski,
Lambeaux, Meunier.

[Sidenote: Other General Articles]

This article opens with an account of technical methods of sculpture
which should be supplemented by other articles, which deal also with
history and criticism: WOOD-CARVING (Vols. 28, p. 791), by Franklyn
Arden Crallan, author of _Gothic Wood-carving_, with four plates and
with descriptions not merely of Gothic and Renaissance work in Europe,
but of Coptic, Mahommedan, Persian, Indian and Burmese, Chinese and
Japanese, and the carving done by savage races; IVORY (Vol. 15,
especially pp. 95–98, with 5 illustrations), by A. Maskell, author of
_Ivories_; CHRYSELEPHANTINE; METAL-WORK (Vol. 18, p. 205), (with 9 text
cuts and 2 full page plates), by Prof. J. H. Middleton, Cambridge, and
John Starkie Gardner, author of _Armour in England_ and _Iron Work_; GEM
(Vol. 11, p. 560; with 2 full page plates containing 76 illustrations,
mostly of antique gems, besides 10 cuts in the text) by Alexander Stuart
Murray, author of _History of Greek Sculpture_, _Terra Cotta
Sarcophagi_, etc., and Arthur Hamilton Smith, keeper of Greek and Roman
Antiquities, British Museum; CAMEO; INTAGLIO; SEALS (Vol. 24, p. 539;
with 9 illustrations), by Sir E. Maunde Thompson, late director British
Museum; NUMISMATICS (Vol. 19, p. 869; equivalent to 120 pages of this
Guide; with 6 plates—20 Greek coins, 27 Greek and Roman coins, 23 Roman
and Medieval coins, 22 Oriental coins, 8 modern coins and medals, and 4
Italian medals—and 11 cuts illustrating modern coins) by Reginald Stuart
Poole, formerly keeper department coins and medals, British Museum,
Herbert Appold Grueber, keeper of the same department in 1906–1912, and
George Francis Hill, assistant keeper of this department; MEDAL (Vol.
18, especially pp. 1 and 2, with 2 plates, showing 32 medals), by M. H.
Spielmann; TERRA COTTA (Vol. 26, p. 652, with 2 plates, 12
illustrations), by William Burton, author of _English Stoneware and
Earthenware_ and H. Beauchamp Walters, assistant keeper Greek and Roman
antiquities, British Museum; PLATE (Vol. 21, p. 789; with 31
illustrations), by H. R. H. Hall, author of _The Oldest Civilization of
Greece_, H. Stuart Jones, author of _The Roman Empire_, and E. Alfred
Jones, author of _Old English Gold Plate_, etc.; ALTO-RELIEVO;
BASSO-RELIEVO; RELIEF and REPOUSSÉ, by M. H. Spielmann; WAX FIGURES;
EFFIGIES, MONUMENTAL, by the late Charles Boutell, author of _A Manual
of British Archaeology_, and M. H. Spielmann.

[Sidenote: History of Sculpture]

Early sculpture is separately treated. For “Classical” sculpture see the
articles GREEK ART by Percy Gardner and ROMAN ART by H. Stuart Jones,
both elaborately illustrated and devoting particular attention to
statuary, plate; etc. See also the illustrations in the articles
mentioned in the last paragraph,—especially GEM, NUMISMATICS, TERRA
COTTA; and those in the article ARCHITECTURE and subsidiary articles
mentioned in the chapter of this Guide _For the Architect_. And on Greek
art see the article PERGAMUM and the sketches of the great sculptors of
Greece:

 AGASIAS
 AGESANDER
 AGORACRITUS
 ALCAMENES
 ANTENOR
 APOLLONIUS OF TRALLES ARCHERMUS
 BATHYCLES
 BOETHUS
 BRYAXIS
 BUPALUS AND ATHENIS
 BUTADES
 CALAMIS
 CALLIMACHUS
 CANACHUS
 CEPHISODOTUS
 CHARES
 CRESILAS
 CRITIUS AND NESIOTES
 DAMOPHON
 DEMETRIUS
 DIPOENUS AND SCYLLIS
 ENDOEUS
 EUTYCHIDES
 LEOCHARES
 LYSIPPUS
 LYSISTRATUS
 MYRON
 ONATAS
 PAEONIUS
 PASITELES
 PHEIDIAS
 POLYCLITUS
 PRAXIAS AND ANDROSTHENES
 PRAXITELES
 RHOECUS
 SCOPAS
 SILANION
 STRONGYLION
 THRASYMEDES
 TIMOTHEUS

See also the article BYZANTINE ART; and for sculpture elsewhere the
sections _Art_ in the articles EGYPT, CHINA, JAPAN.

[Sidenote: Medieval]

For medieval sculpture, almost entirely an adjunct to architecture and
particularly ecclesiastical architecture, see, besides the treatment in
the historical part of the article SCULPTURE (pp. 490–496), the articles
ARCHITECTURE and EFFIGIES, MONUMENTAL, comparing with the latter the
article BRASSES, MONUMENTAL (with 13 illustrations).

[Sidenote: Renaissance]

The close of the medieval period and the beginning of the more
individualistic Renaissance are marked by the occurrence of the names of
great individual artists, whose biographies are the best summary of the
sculpture of the period.

See on Italy: the articles NICCOLA PISANO (Vol. 20, p. 648); VITTORE
PISANO (Vol. 20, p. 649); ANDREA PISANO (Vol. 20, p. 647) and the
article immediately following on his son, GIOVANNI PISANO; each of these
four with an illustration; VITTORE PISANO or Pisanello; AGOSTINO and
AGNOLO DA SIENA (Vol. 1, p. 381); ORCAGNA, “the last great master of the
Gothic period,” by J. H. Middleton; DELLA QUERCIA, who “heralds ... the
boldest and most original achievements of two generations hence,” by E.
T. Strange, assistant keeper, South Kensington; GHIBERTI, “the first of
the great sculptors of the Renaissance”; DONATELLO, by P. G Konody;
MICHELOZZO; DELLA ROBBIA family (with 3 illustrations), by J. H.
Middleton and William Burton, author of _English Stoneware and
Earthenware_; LEONARDO, by Sir Sidney Colvin; VERROCCHIO, by J. H.
Middleton; LEOPARDO; POLLAIUOLO; MICHELANGELO, by Sir Sidney Colvin;
BANDINELLI; AMMANATI; and in the 16th century period of decline GIOVANNI
DA BOLOGNA, LOMBARDO family, CELLINI, by W. M. Rossetti and E. Alfred
Jones, author of _Old English Gold Plate_, etc.

On the Renaissance in France: JEAN GOUJON, SARRAZIN.

—In Germany: VEIT STOSS, ADAM KRAFFT, the VISCHERS.

—In England: the Italian TORRIGIANO.

—In Spain: ALONZO CANO, MONTAÑES, PEDRO DE MENA, ZARCILLO.

[Sidenote: 17th and 18th Century]

Some of the names just mentioned are those of 17th century artists. But
the rococo character of the period is best seen in Italy: see the
articles BERNINI, ALGARDI, and, for France, GIRARDON and PUGET. With the
18th century came a classical revival for which the great names are
CANOVA and THORWALDSEN: see the articles on these sculptors, that on
Canova being by W. M. Rossetti. See also the articles on Thorwaldsen’s
followers, SERGEL, BYSTRÖM and FOGELBERG. The more important articles on
French sculpture in this period are PIGALLE and HOUDON, the latter known
to Americans by his portraits of our Revolutionary worthies. For English
sculpture in the 17th and 18th centuries see: NICHOLAS STONE, ROUBILIAC,
by M. H. Spielmann, SCHEEMAKERS, NOLLEKENS, JOHN BACON, and, possibly
most important, JOHN FLAXMAN, by Sir Sidney Colvin. For Germany: ANDREAS
SCHLÜTER.

[Sidenote: 19th Century and Modern Schools]

On the 19th century in Germany see the articles: SCHADOW, RAUCH,
RIETSCHEL, DANNECKER, SCHWANTHALER, and marking a sharp reaction,
REINHOLD BEGAS, and the younger men, known also as painters, FRANZ STUCK
and MAX KLINGER.

On modern British sculpture see the articles: JOHN GIBSON, E. H. BAILY,
THOMAS BANKS, SIR RICHARD WESTMACOTT, and ALFRED STEVENS; and, for the
last thirty years, JULES DALOU, LORD LEIGHTON, better known as a
painter, E. ONSLOW FORD and ALFRED GILBERT, the most influential and
important factors in the awakening, and THOMAS WOOLNER, MAROCHETTI, SIR
EDWIN LANDSEER, SIR J. E. BOEHM, J. H. FOLEY, H. H. ARMSTEAD, THOMAS
BROCK, W. HAMO THORNYCROFT, JOHN M. SWAN, HARRY BATES, G. F. WATTS.
Scores of others are criticized and their work summarized on pp. 501–508
in the article SCULPTURE.

[Sidenote: France]

The 19th century in France opened with a pseudo-Roman school, and among
the names of this period are PRADIER, RUDE, P. J. DAVID, ETEX, and
CARPEAUX and BARYE, by Henri Frantz, who mark a transition. For the more
modern period see GUILLAUME, DUBOIS, FALGUIÈRE, MERCIÉ, FRÉMIET, GUSTAVE
CRAUCK, DALOU, RODIN.

[Sidenote: Other European Countries]

In addition to the discussion of modern Belgian sculptors in the section
on Belgium of the article SCULPTURE there are separate articles on PAUL
DE VIGNE, VAN DER STAPPEN, JEF LAMBEAUX, JULIEN DILLENS, and CONSTANTIN
MEUNIER. For Italian sculpture in the 19th century see BARTOLINI, and
the summary in the article SCULPTURE (Vol. 24, p. 513). Separate
articles on Spanish sculptors are JOSE ALVAREZ and MANUEL ALVAREZ.

[Sidenote: American Sculpture]

In the United States there was little sculpture of native origin, and
virtually none of the slightest merit, before the 19th century. The
following list of articles in rough chronological order will supplement
the outline in the article SCULPTURE (Vol. 24, p. 516): HORATIO
GREENOUGH, HIRAM POWERS, THOMAS CRAWFORD, HENRY KIRKE BROWN, WILLIAM
RIMMER, E. D. PALMER, THOMAS BALL, L. W. VOLK, HARRIET G. HOSMER, J. Q.
A. WARD, LAUNT THOMPSON, LARKIN G. MEAD, G. E. BISSELL, OLIN L. WARNER,
W. R. O’DONOVAN, JONATHAN S. HARTLEY, AUGUSTUS SAINT-GAUDENS, D. C.
FRENCH, J. J. BOYLE, C. H. NIEHAUS, LORADO TAFT, W. O. PARTRIDGE, CYRUS
E. DALLIN, A. P. PROCTOR, CHARLES GRAFLY, F. W. MACMONNIES, GEORGE GRAY
BARNARD, P. W. BARTLETT, HERMON A. MACNEIL, KARL BITTER, BORGLUM.

[Sidenote: Summary]

This chapter, and the one before, outline courses on these arts in the
Britannica, but there are many articles on these topics to which no
reference has been made in these pages. It may, therefore, be
interesting to the student of these forms of art to have before him a
list, fairly complete, of articles in the Britannica dealing with
painting and sculpture. The following is such a list in alphabetical
arrangement. The student should remember that the absence from the
list—or from any similar list in the Guide—of a topic on which he wishes
information does not mean that there is no information on the subject in
the Britannica, but merely that there may be no separate article on the
subject. In such cases let him turn to the general index (Vol. 29).


       LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL ARTICLES DEALING WITH THE FINE ARTS

 Abati, N.
 Abbey, E. A.
 Abildgaard, N. A.
 Achenbach, Andreas
 Acroliths
 Adam, L. S.
 Adams, Herbert
 Aertszen, Pieter
 Aetion
 Agasias
 Agatharchus
 Ageladas
 Agesander
 Agoracritus
 Agostino and Agnolo da Siena
 Agricola, C. L.
 Aikman, William
 Albani, Francesco
 Albertinelli Mariotto
 Alcamenes
 Aldegrever, Heinrich
 Alexander, Francis
 Alexander, John White
 Alfani, Domenico
 Algardi, Alessandro
 Allan, David
 Allan, Sir William
 Allori, Alessandro
 Allston, Washington
 Alma-Tadema, Sir L.
 Altdorfer, Albrecht
 Alto-Relievo
 Alvarez, Don José
 Alvarez, Don Manuel
 Amalteo, Pomponio
 Amman, Jost
 Ammanati, Bartolomeo
 Amsler, Samuel
 Andrea del Sarto
 Andreani, Andrea
 Andrieu, Bertrand
 Angelico, Fra
 Anguier, François and Michel
 Angussola, Sophonisba
 Anichini, Luigi
 Anna, Baldasarre
 Ansdell, Richard
 Antenor
 Antiphilus
 Antonello da Messina
 Apelles
 Apollodorus
 Apollonius of Tralles
 Appiani, Andrea
 Aquarelle
 Aquatint
 Archermus
 Aristides of Thebes
 Armstead, H. H.
 Asper, Hans
 Asselyn, Hans
 Audran (family)
 Bacon, John
 Backhuysen, Ludolf
 Badalocchio, Sisto
 Baer, William Jacob
 Bagnacavallo, B.
 Baily, E. H.
 Baldinucci, Filippo
 Baldovinetti, Alessio
 Ball, Thomas
 Bandinelli, B.
 Banks, Thomas
 Barbieri, G. F.
 Barbizon
 Barnard, G. G.
 Barocci, Federigo
 Barry, James
 Bartels, Hans von
 Bartlett, P. W.
 Bartolini, Lorenzo
 Bartolommeo di Pagholo, Fra
 Bartolozzi, Francesco
 Barye, A. L.
 Bassano, Jacopo da Ponte
 Basso-Relievo
 Bastien-Lepage, Jules
 Bates, Harry
 Bathycles
 Batoni, P. G.
 Baudry, P. J. A.
 Beard, William H.
 Beardsley, Aubrey V.
 Beaux, Cecilia
 Beccafumi, Domenico di Pace
 Becerra, Gaspar
 Beck, David
 Beckwith, J. C.
 Beechey, Sir William
 Begas, Karl
 Begas, Reinhold
 Bellini (family)
 Bellows, Albert F.
 Benlliure y Gil, José
 Benson, F. W.
 Berchem, Nicolaas
 Bernini, G. L.
 Besnard, P. A.
 Beverley, W. R.
 Bewick, Thomas
 Bierstadt, Albert
 Bissell, G. E.
 Bitter, K. T. F.
 Blackburn, Jonathan
 Blake, William
 Blakelock, R. A.
 Blanche, J. E.
 Blashfield, E. H.
 Bloemaert, Abraham
 Bloemen, J. F. van
 Blum, R. F.
 Böcklin, Arnold
 Boehm, Sir J. E.
 Boethus
 Bologna, Giovanni
 Bone, Henry
 Bonfigli, Benedetto
 Bonheur, Rosa
 Bonnat, L. J. F.
 Bordone, Paris
 Borglum, S. H.
 Borgognone, Ambrogio
 Bosch, Jerom
 Bossi, Giuseppe
 Botticelli, Sandro
 Bouchardon, Edme
 Boudin, François
 Boudin, Eugène
 Boughton, G. H.
 Bouguereau, A. W.
 Boulanger (family)
 Boulogne
 Boursse, Esaias
 Boyle, John J.
 Bracquemond, Felix
 Bradford, William
 Braekeleer, H. J. A. de
 Brangwyn, Frank
 Brascassat, J. R.
 Bredael, J. F. van
 Breton, Jules A. A. L.
 Breughel, Pieter
 Bridgman, F. A.
 Brierly, Sir O. W.
 Bril, Paul
 Briosco, Andrea
 Brock, Thomas
 Bronzino, Il
 Brough, Robert
 Brouwer, Adrian
 Brown, Ford Madox
 Brown, Henry Kirke
 Brown, John George
 Browne, Hablôt Knight
 Brush, G. de Forest
 Bry, T. (Dirk) de
 Bryaxis
 Bunbury, H. W.
 Bupalus and Athenis
 Burckhardt, Jakob
 Burgkmair, Hans
 Burne-Jones, Sir E. B.
 Burton, Sir F. W.
 Busch, Wilhelm
 Butadeo
 Byström, Johan Niklas
 Cabanel, Alexandre
 Calamis
 Calcar (Kalcker), de
 Caldecott, Randolph
 Callcott, Sir A. W.
 Callimachus
 Callot, Jacques
 Calvart, Denis
 Calvert (3 artists)
 Cambiasi, Luca
 Camphausen, Wilhelm
 Camphuysen, D. R.
 Campi, Guilio
 Camuccini, Vincenzo
 Canachus
 Canale, A. (Canaletto)
 Canini, G. A.
 Cano, Alonzo
 Canova, Antonio
 Cantarini, Simone
 Caracci, Lodovico, Agostino and Annibale
 Caran d’Ache
 Caravaggio, M. A. da
 Caravaggio, P. C. da
 Carducci, Bartolommeo
 Caricature
 Carolus-Duran
 Carpaccio, Vittorio
 Carpeaux, J. B.
 Carpi, Girolamo da
 Carpi, Ugo da
 Carstens, A. J.
 Cartoon
 Carving
 Cassana, Niccolo
 Castagno, Andrea del
 Castello, Bernardo
 Castello, G. B.
 Castello, Valerio
 Castiglione, G. B.
 Cattermole, George
 Cavallini, Pietro
 Cavedone, Jacopo
 Cazin, J. C.
 Cephisodotus
 Cesari, Giuseppe
 Cespedes, Pablo de
 Chalmers, G. P.
 Chambers, George
 Champaigne, Philippe de
 Chantrey, Sir F. L.
 Chardin, J. S.
 Chares
 Charlet, N. T.
 Chase, W. M.
 Chassériau, Theodore
 Chiaroscuro
 Chodowiecki, D. N.
 Chryselephantine
 Church, F. E.
 Cibber, C. G.
 Cicognara, Count Leopoldo
 Cignani, Carlo
 Cigoli, L. C. da
 Cimabue, Giovanni
 Cimon of Cleonae
 Cipriani, G. B.
 Civerchio, Vincenzo
 Clarke, T. S.
 Claude of Lorraine
 Clausen, George
 Clays, Paul Jean
 Clouet, François
 Clouet, Jean
 Clovio, G. G.
 Cockx, Hieronymus
 Coello, A. S.
 Cole, Thomas
 Cole, Timothy
 Cole, Vicat
 Colin, Alexandre
 Collaert, Hans
 Collins, William
 Colman, Samuel
 Colman, Sidney
 Conca, Sebastiano
 Conder, Charles
 Constable, John
 Constant, Benjamin
 Conway, Sir W. Martin
 Cooper, Abraham
 Cooper, Alexander
 Cooper, Samuel
 Cooper, Thomas Sidney
 Copley, John Singleton
 Coques (Cocx), Gonzales
 Corenzio, Belisario
 Cormon, Fernand
 Cornelius, P. von
 Corot, J. B. C.
 Correggio
 Cort, Cornelius
 Costa, Giovanni
 Costa, Lorenzo
 Cosway, Richard
 Cotman, J. S.
 Cottet, Charles
 Courbet, Gustave
 Courtois, Jacques and Guillaume
 Cousin, Jean
 Cousins, Samuel
 Coustou (family)
 Couture, Thomas
 Cox, David
 Cox, Kenyon
 Coxcie, Michael
 Coypel
 Coysevox, C. A.
 Cranach, Lucas
 Crane, Walter
 Crauck, Gustave
 Crawford, Thomas
 Crayer, Gaspard de
 Crayon
 Credi, Lorenzo di
 Cresilas
 Crespi, Daniele
 Crespi, Giovanni B.
 Crespi, Giuseppe M.
 Creswick, Thomas
 Critius and Nesiotes
 Crivelli, Carlo
 Crome, John
 Cropsey, J. F.
 Crowe, Sir J. A.
 Cruikshank, George
 Cuyp
 Dahl, Hans
 Dahl, J. C.
 Dahl, Michael
 Dallin, Cyrus E.
 Dalou, Jules
 Damophon
 Danby, Francis
 Daniell, Thomas
 Dannat, William T.
 Dannecker, J. H. von
 Daubigny, C. F.
 Daumier, Honoré
 David, Gerard
 David, J. L.
 David, Pierre Jean
 Davis, C. H.
 Davis, H. W. B.
 De Camp, Joseph
 Decamps, A. G.
 Degas, H. G. E.
 De Haas, M. F. H.
 De Keyser, Thomas
 Delacroix, F. V. E.
 Delaroche, H. (Paul)
 Delaunay, Elie
 Della Bella, Stefano
 Della Colle, Raffaellino
 Della Quercia, Jacopo
 Della Robbia
 De Loutherbourg, P. J.
 Demetrius
 Desiderio da Settignano
 Detaille, J. B. E.
 Dewing, T. W.
 De Wint, Peter
 Diamante, Fra
 Diaz, N. V.
 Dielmann, Frederick
 Diepenbeck, A. van
 Dies, C. A.
 Dietrich, C. W. E.
 Dillens, Julien
 Dipoenus and Scyllis
 Dobson, William
 Dolci, Carlo
 Domenichino, Zampieri
 Donatello
 Doré, L. A. Gustave
 Douw, Gerhard
 Downman, John
 Doyen, G. F.
 Doyle, Richard
 Drawing
 Drouais, J. G.
 Dubois, Paul
 Du Maurier, G. L. P. B.
 Dumont (family)
 Dumont, François
 Duncan, Thomas
 Dupré, Jules
 Durand, Asher Brown
 Dürer, Albrecht
 Duveneck, Frank
 Dyce, William
 Eakins, Thomas
 Earle, Ralph
 Earlom, Richard
 East, Alfred
 Eastlake, Sir C. L.
 Eaton, Wyatt
 Eckersberg, Kristoffer
 Edelinck, Gerard
 Eeckhout, G. van den
 Effigies, Monumental
 Egg, A. L.
 Encaustic Painting
 Endoeus
 Engleheart, George
 Engraving
 Enneking, J. J.
 Etching
 Etex, Antoine
 Etty, William
 Euphranor
 Euphronius
 Eupompus
 Eutychides
 Everdingen, Allart van
 Eyck, Van
 Faed, Thomas
 Faithorne, William
 Falcone, Aniello
 Falconet, E. M.
 Falguière, J. A. J.
 Fantin-Latour, I. H. T.
 Farinato, Paolo
 Feltre, Morto da
 Fernow, K. L.
 Ferrari, Gaudenzio
 Ferri, Ciro
 Feuerbach, Anselm
 Fielding, A. V. Copley
 Fildes, Sir Luke
 Finden, William
 Fiorenzo di Lorenzo
 Fiorillo, J. D.
 Fisher, Alvan
 Flandrin, J. Hippolyte
 Flaxman, John
 Flinck, Govert
 Floris, Frans
 Fontana, Lavinia
 Fontana, Prospero
 Fogelberg, B. E.
 Foley, J. H.
 Foppa, Vincenzo
 Forain, J. L.
 Ford, E. Onslow
 Forster, François
 Fortuny, M. J. M. B.
 Foster, M. Birket
 Foucquet, Jean
 Fragonard, J. H.
 Français, F. L.
 Franceschi, Piero de’
 Franceschini, Baldassare
 Francia
 Franciabigio
 Franck
 Francken (family)
 Frèmiet, Emmanuel
 French, Daniel C.
 Frère, P. E.
 Fresco
 Fresnoy, C. A. du
 Frith, W. P.
 Fromentin, Eugène
 Frost, W. E.
 Fruytiers, Philip
 Führich, Joseph von
 Fuller, George
 Furniss, Harry
 Furse, C. W.
 Fuseli, Henry
 Fyt, Johannes
 Gaddi (family)
 Gainsborough, Thomas
 Gallait, Louis
 Gauermann, Friedrich
 Gaul, G. W.
 Gavarni
 Gay, Walter
 Geddes, Andrew
 Geikie, Walter
 Genelli, G. B.
 Genga, Girolamo
 Gentile da Fabriano
 Gentileschi, Artemisia and Orazio de’
 Gérard, Baron F.
 Gérard, J. I. I.
 Géricault, J. L. A. T.
 Gérôme, Jean Léon
 Gervex, Henri
 Ghiberti, Lorenzo
 Ghirlandajo, Domenico
 Ghirlandajo, Ridolfo
 Gibson, C. Dana
 Gibson, John
 Gibson, W. H.
 Gifford, R. S.
 Gifford, S. R.
 Gilbert, Alfred
 Gilbert, Sir John
 Gillot, Claude
 Gillray, James
 Giordano, Luca
 Giorgione
 Giottino
 Giotto
 Girardon, François
 Girodet de Roussy, A. L.
 Girtin, Thomas
 Giulio Romano
 Giunta Pisano
 Giusto da Guanto
 Gleyre, M. C. G.
 Goes, Hugo van der
 Goldschmidt, Hermann
 Goltzius, Hendrik
 Gordon, Sir J. W.
 Gouache
 Goujon, Jean
 Gould, Sir F. C.
 Goya y Lucientes, F.
 Goyen, J. J. Van
 Gozzoli, Benozzo
 Grafly, Charles
 Granet, F. M.
 Grant, Sir Francis
 Gray, Henry Peters
 Greco, El
 Green, Valentine
 Greenaway, Kate
 Greenough, Horatio
 Gregory, Edward John
 Greuze, J. B.
 Grimaldi, G. F.
 Grisaille
 Gros, Antoine Jean
 Grün, Hans Baldung
 Grünewald, Mathias
 Guardi, Francesco
 Guariento (Guerriero)
 Guérin, J. B. P.
 Guérin, P. N.
 Guido of Siena
 Guido Reni
 Guillaume, J. B. C. E.
 Guthrie, Sir James
 Haag, Carl
 Haden, Sir F. Seymour
 Hals, Frans
 Hamerton, P. G.
 Hamon, Jean Louis
 Harding, Chester
 Harding, J. D.
 Harpignies, Henri
 Harrison, T. A.
 Hart, William
 Hartley, Jonathan S.
 Harvey, Sir George
 Hassam, Childe
 Haydon, B. R.
 Hayter, Sir George
 Head, Sir E. W.
 Healy, G. P. A.
 Heda, Willem Claasz
 Heem, Jan Davidsz van
 Heemskerk, M. J.
 Heim, F. J.
 Helst, B. van der
 Hemy, C. Napier
 Hennequin, P. A.
 Henner, J. J.
 Henry, E. L.
 Herkomer, Sir H. von
 Herlen, Fritz
 Herrera, Francisco
 Hersent, Louis
 Hess (family)
 Heusch, Willem
 Heyden, Jan van der
 Hildebrandt, Eduard
 Hildebrandt, Theodor
 Hilliard, Lawrence
 Hilliard, Nicholas
 Hilton, William
 Hiroshige
 Hitchcock, George
 Hobbema, Meyndert
 Hoefnagel, Joris
 Hogarth, William
 Hokusai
 Holbein, Hans (elder)
 Holbein, Hans (younger)
 Holl, Frank
 Hollar, Wenzel
 Holroyd, Sir Charles
 Homer, Winslow
 Hondecoeter, M. d’
 Hone, Nathaniel
 Honthorst, Gerard van
 Hooch, Pieter de
 Hoogstraten, S. D. van
 Hook, James Clarke
 Hoppner, John
 Horsley, J. C.
 Hoskins, John
 Hosmer, Harriet G.
 Hotho, Heinrich G.
 Houbraken, Jacobus
 Houdon, J. A.
 Hovenden, Thomas
 Huchtenburg (family)
 Humphry, Ozias
 Hunt, Alfred William
 Hunt, William Henry
 Hunt, William Holman
 Hunt, William Morris
 Huntington, Daniel
 Hurlstone, F. Y.
 Huysmans (family)
 Huysum, Jan van
 Illuminated MSS.
 Illustration
 Impressionism
 Ingham, C. C.
 Ingres, J. A. D.
 Inman, Henry
 Inness, George
 Isabey, Jean Baptiste
 Israëls, Josef
 Ivory
 Jackson, Mason
 Jameson, George
 Janssen, Cornelius
 Janssens, V. H.
 Janssens van Nuyssen, Abraham
 Jarvis, J. W.
 Joanes, Vicente
 Johnson, Eastman
 Jordaens, Jacob
 Jouvenet, Jean
 Kalckreuth, Leopold von
 Kauffmann, Angelica
 Kaulbach, Wilhelm von
 Kay, John
 Keene, C. S.
 Keller, Albert
 Kensett, J. F.
 Khnopff, F. E. J. M.
 Klinger, Max
 Kneller, Sir Godfrey
 Knight, D. R.
 Knight, John Buxton
 Koninck, Philip de
 Korin, Ogata
 Krafft, Adam
 Kyosai, Sho-fu
 Laer, Pieter van
 La Farge, John
 Lafosse, Charles de
 Lagrenée, L. J. F.
 Lahire, Laurent de
 Lambeaux, Jef
 Lancret, Nicolas
 Landon, C. P.
 Landseer, Sir E. H.
 Lantara, S. M.
 Lanzi, Luigi
 Largillière, Nicolas
 Lathrop, Francis
 La Tour, Quentin de
 Lavery, John
 Lawrence, Sir Thomas
 Lawson, Cecil Gordon
 Leader, B. W.
 Léandre, C. L.
 Lear, Edward
 LeBrun, Charles
 Leech, John
 Legros, Alphonse
 Leighton, Baron Frederick
 Lejeune, Baron L. F.
 Lely, Sir Peter
 Lemoyne, J. B.
 Le Nain
 Lenbach, Franz von
 Leochares
 Leonardo da Vinci
 Leopardo, Alessandro
 Leslie, C. R.
 Le Sueur, Eustache
 Leutze, Emanuel
 Lewis, J. F.
 Leys, Hendrik
 Liebermann, Max
 Limousin, Léonard
 Line Engraving
 Linnell, John
 Linton, W. J.
 Liotard, J. E.
 Lippi
 Lockwood, Wilton
 Lombardo (family)
 Longhi, Pietro
 Lotto, Lorenzo
 Low, Will Hicok
 Lucas, J. Seymour
 Leyden, Lucas van
 Luini, Bernardino
 Lysippus
 Lysistratus
 Mabuse, Jan
 MacCulloch, Horatio
 Macdonald, Lawrence
 McEntee, Jervis
 Maclise, Daniel
 MacMonnies, F. W.
 Macnee, Sir Daniel
 MacNeil, Hermon A.
 Madou, J. B.
 Madrazo y Kunt, Don F. de
 Maes, Nicolas
 Makart, Hans
 Mander, Carel van
 Manet, Edouard
 Manson, George
 Mantegna, Andrea
 Marcantonio
 Maris, Jacob
 Marochetti, Baron Carlo
 Marr, Carl
 Martin, Homer Dodge
 Martin, John
 Martini, Simone
 Masaccio
 Masolino da Panicale
 Mason, G. H.
 Matsys, Quintin
 Mauve, Anton
 May, Phil
 Mead, Larkin G.
 Meer, Jan van der
 Meissonier, J. L. E.
 Melanthius
 Melchers, Gari
 Melozzo da Forli
 Melville, Arthur
 Memling, Hans
 Mena, Pedro de
 Mengs, Anthony Raphael
 Menzel, A. F. E. von
 Mercié, M. J. A.
 Merian, Matthew
 Méryon, Charles
 Metcalf, W. L.
 Metsu, Gabriel
 Meulen, A. F. van der
 Meunier, Constantin
 Mezzotint
 Michel, Claude
 Michelangelo
 Michelozzo di Bartolommeo
 Micon
 Mierevelt, M. J. van
 Mieris (family)
 Mignard, Pierre
 Mignon, Abraham
 Milanesi, Gaetano
 Millais, Sir J. E.
 Miller, William
 Millet, Francis Davis
 Millet (Milé), Jean François
 Millet, Jean François
 Miniature
 Mino di Giovanni (da Fiesole)
 Minor, Robert C.
 Models, Artists’
 Monet, Claude
 Montañes, J. M.
 Moore, Albert J.
 Moore, Henry
 Mora, José
 Moran, Edward
 Moran, Thomas
 Moreau, Gustave
 Morelli, Giovanni
 Moretto, Il
 Morghen, R. S.
 Morland, George
 Moro, Antonio
 Moroni, Giambattista
 Mosler, Henry
 Mount, W. S.
 Mowbray, H. S.
 Müller, W. J.
 Mulready, William
 Munkacsy, Michael von
 Murillo, B. E.
 Murphy, John Francis
 Murray, David
 Muziano, Girolamo
 Muzzioli, Giovanni
 Myron
 Nanteuil, Robert
 Nasmyth, Alexander
 Nast, Thomas
 Nattier, J. M.
 Navarrete, J. F.
 Neal, D. D.
 Neer, van der
 Netscher, Gaspar
 Neuville, Alphonse M. de
 Newlyn
 Niehaus, C. H.
 Nicholson, William
 Nicias
 Nicomachus
 Nollekens, Joseph
 Northcote, James
 Oberlander, A. A.
 Ochtman, Leonard
 O’Donovan, W. R.
 Oliver, Isaac
 Oliver, Peter
 Onatas
 Opie, John
 Orcagna
 Orchardson, Sir W. Q.
 Orley, Bernard von
 Ostade
 Oudiné, E. A.
 Overbeck, J. F.
 Pacchia, Girolamo del, and Pacchiarotto, Jacopo
 Pacheco, Francisco
 Paeonius
 Page, William
 Painting
 Pajou, Augustin
 Palette
 Palma, Jacopo
 Palmer, E. D.
 Palmer, Samuel
 Palomino, de Castro y Velasco
 Pamphilus
 Panaenus
 Panorama
 Pareja, Juan de
 Parmigiano
 Parrhasius
 Partridge, J. Bernard
 Partridge, W. O.
 Pasiteles
 Pastel
 Paton, Sir J. Noel
 Paul Veronese
 Pausias
 Peale, C. W.
 Peale, Rembrandt
 Pearce, C. S.
 Pennell, Joseph
 Penni, Gianfrancesco
 Perino del Vaga
 Perkins, C. C.
 Perugino, Pietro
 Peruzzi, Baldassare
 Petitot, Jean
 Petitot, Jean Louis
 Pettenkofen, A. von
 Pettie, John
 Pheidias
 Phillip, John
 Phillips, Thomas
 Picknell, W. L.
 Piero di Cosimo
 Pigalle, J. B.
 Piloty, Karl von
 Pinturicchio
 Pinwell, G. J.
 Piranesi, G. B.
 Pisano, Andrea
 Pisano, Giovanni
 Pisano, Niccola
 Pisano, Vittore
 Pissarro, Camille
 Plimer, Andrew
 Plimer, Nathaniel
 Plumbago Drawings
 Pollaiuolo (family)
 Polyclitus
 Polygnotus
 Pontormo, Jacopo da
 Poole, Paul Falconer
 Pordenone, Il
 Portaels, J. F.
 Porter, B. C.
 Portraiture
 Poster
 Potter, Paul
 Poussin, Nicolas
 Powers, Hiram
 Poynter, Sir E. J.
 Pradier, James
 Pradilla, Francisco
 Praxias and Androsthenes
 Praxiteles
 Predella
 Preller, Friedrich
 Prieur, Pierre
 Prinsep, V. C.
 Proctor, A. P.
 Protogenes
 Prout, Samuel
 Prud’hon, Pierre
 Puget, Pierre
 Puvis de Chavannes
 Pythagoras
 Pyle, Howard
 Raeburn, Sir Henry
 Raffaellino del Garbo
 Raffet, D. A. M.
 Raimbach, Abraham
 Ramsay, Allan
 Ranger, H. W.
 Raoux, Jean
 Raphael Sanzio
 Raven-Hill, Leonard
 Rauch, C. D.
 Redgrave, Richard
 Regnault, Henri
 Regnault, J. B.
 Reid, Sir George
 Reid, Robert
 Reinhart, C. S.
 Reinhart, J. C.
 Relief
 Rembrandt
 Remington, Frederick
 Renoir, F. A.
 Repin, I. J.
 Restout, Jean
 Rethel, Alfred
 Reynolds, Sir Joshua
 Rhoecus
 Ribera, Giuseppe
 Ribot, Théodule
 Ricard, L. G.
 Ricciarelli, Daniele
 Richards, W. T.
 Richmond, Sir W. B.
 Richter, A. L.
 Rietschel, E. F. A.
 Rigaud, Hyacinthe
 Rimmer, William
 Riviere, Briton
 Robert, Hubert
 Robert, L. L.
 Robert-Fleury, J. N.
 Roberts, David
 Robinson, Theodore
 Rodin, Auguste
 Rogers, John
 Roll, A. P.
 Romney, George
 Rops, Félicien
 Rosa, Salvator
 Rosenthal, T. E.
 Rosselli, Cosimo
 Rossellino, Antonio
 Rossetti, D. G.
 Roubiliac, L. F.
 Rousseau, Jacques
 Rousseau, P. E. T.
 Rowlandson, Thomas
 Rubens, Peter Paul
 Rude, François
 Runciman, Alexander
 Russell, John
 Ruysdael, Jacob van
 Ryder, A. P.
 Ryland, W. W.
 Sacchi, Andrea
 Saint-Gaudens, Augustus
 Sambourne, E. Linley
 Sandby, Paul
 Sandrart, Joachim von
 Sandys, Frederick
 Sansovino, Andrea C. del Monte
 Sansovino, Jacopo
 Santerre, J. B.
 Sargent, J. S.
 Sarrazin, Jacques
 Sartain, John
 Satterlee, Walter
 Sayer, James
 Schadow
 Schadow, J. G. and R.
 Schalcken, Godfried
 Scharf, Sir George
 Scheemakers, Peter
 Scheffer, Ary
 Schetky, J. C.
 Schiavonetti, Luigi
 Schirmer, Friedrich W.
 Schirmer, Johann W.
 Schlüter, Andreas
 Schnorr von Karolsfeld
 Schongauer, Martin
 Schreyer, Adolf
 Schwanthaler, L. M.
 Schwartze, Teresa
 Schwind, Moritz von
 Scopas
 Scott, David
 Scott, William Bell
 Sculpture
 Sebastiano del Piombo
 Seddon, Thomas
 Segantini, Giovanni
 Sequeira, D. A. de
 Sergel, Johan Tobias
 Severn, Joseph
 Shannon, C. H.
 Shannon, J. J.
 Sharp, William
 Shee, Sir M. A.
 Sherwin, J. K.
 Short, F. J.
 Sigalon, Xavier
 Signorelli, Luca
 Silanion
 Simon, Abraham
 Simon, Thomas
 Simmons, E. E.
 Simson, William
 Sisley, Alfred
 Slodtz, René Michel
 Smart, John
 Smedley, W. T.
 Smillie, J. D.
 Smirke, Robert
 Smith, Colvin
 Smith, John Raphael
 Smybert, John
 Snyders, Franz
 Sodoma, Il
 Solario, Antonio
 Sorolla y Bastida, J.
 Spagna, Lo
 Spinello, Aretino
 Stanfield, W. C.
 Stannard, Joseph
 Stark, James
 Steen, Jan Havicksz
 Steer, P. Wilson
 Stevens, Alfred
 Stevens, Alfred
 Stewart, Julius L.
 Stillman, W. J.
 Stone, Frank
 Stone, Marcus
 Stone, Nicholas
 Stoss, Veit
 Stothard, C. A.
 Stothard, Thomas
 Strang, William
 Strange, Sir Robert
 Strongylion
 Stuart, Gilbert
 Stuck, Franz
 Subleyras, Pierre
 Sully, Thomas
 Swan, J. M.
 Taft, Lorado
 Tait, A. F.
 Tanner, H. O.
 Tarbell, Edmund C.
 Tempera
 Teniers (family)
 Tenniel, Sir John
 Ter Borch, Gerard
 Terra Cotta
 Thayer, Abbott H.
 Theon of Samos
 Thoma, Hans
 Thompson, Launt
 Thomson, John
 Thornhill, Sir James
 Thornycroft, W. Hamo
 Thorwaldsen, Bertel
 Thrasymedes
 Tiepolo, G. B.
 Tiffany, L. C.
 Timanthes
 Timomachus
 Timotheus
 Tintoretto
 Tisio, Benvenuto
 Tissot, J. J. J.
 Titian
 Torrigiano, Pietre
 Triptych
 Troy, J. F. de
 Troyon, Constant
 Trumbull, John
 Tryon, D. W.
 Turner, Charles
 Turner, J. M. W.
 Uhde, F. K. H. Von
 Utamaro
 Vanderlyn, John
 Van der Stappen, C.
 Van der Weyden, R.
 Vandevelde, Adrian
 Vandevelde, William
 Van Dyck, Sir Anthony
 Vanloo, C. A.
 Vanloo, J. B.
 Varley, Cornelius
 Varley, John
 Vasari, Giorgio
 Vedder, Elihu
 Veit, Philipp
 Velazquez, D. R. de Silva y
 Verboeckhoven, E. J.
 Vereshchagin, V. V.
 Verlat, M. M. C.
 Vernet (family)
 Verrocchio, Andrea del
 Vertue, George
 Vien, J. M.
 Vierge, Daniel
 Vigée-Lebrun, M. A. E.
 Vigne, Paul de
 Vincent, George
 Vinton, F. P.
 Vischer (family)
 Vischer, F. T.
 Vivarini (family)
 Volk, L. W.
 Vonnoh, R. W.
 Vouet, Simon
 Vrancx, Sebastian
 Vriendt, J. J. de and A. F. L. de
 Waagen, G. F.
 Waldo, S. L.
 Walker, Frederick
 Walker, H. O.
 Walker, Horatio
 Walker, Robert
 Wappers, E. C. G.
 Ward, James
 Ward, E. M.
 Ward, J. Q. A.
 Ward, William
 Warner, Olin Levi
 Waterhouse, J. W.
 Waterlow, Sir E. A.
 Watteau, Antoine
 Watts, G. F.
 Wauters, Emile
 Wax Figures
 Webster, Thomas
 Weeks, E. L.
 Weenix, J. B.
 Weir, R. W.
 Werner, A. A. von
 West, Benjamin
 Westall, Richard
 Westmacott, Sir R.
 Wheatley, Francis
 Whistler, J. A. McN.
 White, Robert
 Wiles, I. R.
 Wilkie, Sir David
 Willems, F. J. M.
 Willette, L. A.
 Willmore, J. T.
 Wilson, Richard
 Wohlgemuth, Michael
 Wolf, Joseph
 Woodbury, C. H.
 Wood Carving
 Wood Engraving
 Woollett, William
 Woolner, Thomas
 Wouwerman, Philip
 Wright, Joseph
 Wyant, A. H.
 Wylie, Robert
 Yosai
 Zarcillo y Alcaraz, F.
 Zeuxis
 Ziem, F. F. G. P.
 Zoffany, Johann
 Zuccarelli, Francesco
 Zuccaro, Taddeo
 Zuccaro, Federigo
 Zuloaga, Ignacio
 Zurbaran, Francisco




                              CHAPTER XXXV
                          LANGUAGE AND WRITING


[Sidenote: Evolution]

One of the most interesting subjects of scientific study developed
during the last century is that of primitive culture and the gradual
advancement of primitive man from a state of savagery to comparative
civilization. For this study there are no historical documents in the
ordinary use of the words “historical” and “document.” The story must be
arrived at by analysis, deduction, even by guess-work, supplementing the
studies of travelers among tribes which now are in the lowest stages of
development and farthest from civilization, and therefore most resemble
our remotest human ancestors. Almost the very earliest of writers on
evolution, the Roman poet LUCRETIUS (Vol. 17, p. 107), who died in 55
B.C., sketched general outlines of the development of this primitive
civilization in much the same way as do modern ethnologists. But his
description was imaginary and was fashioned to fit his and Epicurus’s
evolutionary theories.

The article CIVILIZATION (Vol. 6, p. 403) in the Britannica makes the
development of speech the mark of the first period when mankind was in
the lower stages of savagery. “Our ancestors of this epoch inhabited a
necessarily restricted tropical territory and subsisted upon raw nuts
and fruit.” The next higher period in the progress of civilization began
with the knowledge of the use of fire (p. 404).

  This wonderful discovery enabled the developing race to extend its
  habitat almost indefinitely, and to include flesh, and in particular
  fish, in its regular dietary. Man could now leave the forests and
  wander along the shores and rivers, migrating to climates less
  enervating than those to which he had previously been confined.
  Doubtless he became an expert fisher, but he was as yet poorly
  equipped for hunting.... Primitive races of Australia and Polynesia
  had not advanced beyond this middle status of savagery when they were
  discovered a few generations ago.

The next great ethnical discovery was that of the bow and arrow, a truly
wonderful instrument.

  The possessor of this device could bring down the fleetest animal and
  could defend himself against the most predatory. He could provide
  himself not only with food, but with materials for clothing and for
  tent-making, and thus could migrate at will back from the seas and
  large rivers.... The meat diet, now for the first time freely
  available, probably contributed, along with the stimulating climate,
  to increase the physical vigour and courage of this highest savage,
  thus urging him along the paths of progress. Nevertheless, many tribes
  came thus far, and no further, as witness the Athapascans of the
  Hudson’s Bay Territory and the Indians of the valley of the Columbia.

After the use of fire and the discovery of the bow and arrow came the
invention of pottery, the domestication of animals, and the smelting of
iron, all successive stages in man’s history which “in their relation to
the sum of human progress, transcend in relative importance all his
subsequent works,”—and this is even truer if there is included in this
period the development of a system of writing, which may be reckoned
either the end of the primitive period or the beginning of the period of
_civilization proper_. These two great steps in the story of
civilization, language and writing, are closely connected in our minds,
though so far separated in time of origin; and their story as told in
the Britannica by the world’s greatest authorities, English, American,
German, French, Italian, Danish, etc., is an interesting one for the
general reader, while the articles are invaluable to the specialist in
linguistic study.

[Sidenote: Philology]

The starting point for a course of reading is the article PHILOLOGY
(Vol. 21, p. 414; equivalent to 80 pages in this Guide), of which the
first part, a general treatment, is by the greatest of American
philologists, William Dwight Whitney, editor-in-chief of _The Century
Dictionary_, and author of _Life and Growth of Language_, one of the
most important scientific contributions to the subject. The second part,
on the comparative philology of the Indo-European languages, is by Prof.
Eduard Sievers of Leipzig and Prof. Peter Giles of Cambridge. Both these
names are well known to students of the subject, the former as that of
the author of numerous valuable works on Germanic phonetics and metric,
and the latter as a writer on Greek language and as the author of _A
Short Manual of Comparative Philology_.

The article begins with a definition of “philology,” the science of
language, and of “comparative philology,” the comparison of one language
with another, in order to bring out their relationships, their
structures, and their histories. Prof. Whitney shows how much the recent
development of linguistic science owes to the general scientific
movement of the age. “No one,” he says, “however ingenious and
entertaining his speculations, will cast any real light on the earliest
history of speech.” But he notes the obvious analogy between speech and
writing, and he puts stress on the “sociality” of man as the prime
factor in his development of speech. Other topics in this part of the
article are:

  Instrumentalities of expression—gesture, grimace, and voice;
  “language” means “tonguiness”—a mute would call it “handiness”;
  advantages of voice over gesture.

  Imitation as a factor in development of language and of writing;
  onomatopoetic origin of words.

  Development of sign-making: “Among the animals of highest intelligence
  that associate with man and learn something of his ways, a certain
  amount of sign-making expressly for communication is not to be denied;
  the dog that barks at a door because he knows that somebody will come
  and let him in is an instance of it; perhaps, in wild life, the
  throwing out of sentinel birds from a flock, whose warning cry shall
  advertise their fellows of the threat of danger, is as near an
  approach to it as is anywhere made.”

  Brute speech and human speech: “Those who put forward language as the
  distinction between man and the lower animals, and those who look upon
  our language as the same in kind with the means of communication of
  the lower animals, only much more complete and perfect, fail alike to
  comprehend the true nature of language, and are alike wrong in their
  arguments and conclusions. No addition to or multiplication of brute
  speech would make anything like human speech; the two are separated by
  a step which no animal below man has ever taken; and, on the other
  hand, language is only the most conspicuous among those institutions
  the development of which has constituted human progress.”

  Language and culture: “Differences of language, down to the possession
  of language at all, are differences only in respect to education and
  culture.”

  Development of language signs: the beginning slow, acceleration
  cumulative.

  The root-stage: first signs must have been “integral, significant in
  their entirety, not divisible into parts.”

  Earliest phonetic forms: the simplest syllabic combination a single
  consonant with a following vowel. See the article HAWAII (Vol. 13, p.
  88) for a similar language even now in existence: “Every syllable is
  open, ending in a vowel sound, and short sentences may be constructed
  wholly of vocalic sounds.”

  Character of early speech: “first language-signs must have denoted
  those physical acts and qualities which are directly apprehensible by
  the senses.... We are still all the time drawing figurative
  comparisons between material and moral things and processes, and
  calling the latter by the names of the former.”

  Development of language as illustrated in Indo-European speech.

  Laws of growth and change: internal growth by multiplication of
  meanings; phonetic change—the principle of economy (euphony);
  borrowing and mixing of vocabularies.

  Classification of languages by structural types: isolating (Chinese);
  agglutinative (Turkish, etc.); inflective (Indo-European); or—a more
  elaborate classification:

[Sidenote: Indo-European Languages]

Indo-European: on which see part II of the article PHILOLOGY and the
article INDO-EUROPEAN LANGUAGES (Vol. 14, p. 495; equivalent to 20 pages
of this Guide), by Prof. Peter Giles,—especially interesting for the
attempt on a linguistic basis to reconstruct the original civilization
and to discover the home of the ancestors of this language-stock which
now occupies nearly all of Europe and is so intimately connected with
the civilization of the last 2500 years. See:

GREEK LANGUAGE (Vol. 12, p. 496), by Professor Giles, and articles HOMER
(Vol. 13, p. 626); DORIANS (Vol. 8, p. 423), etc.; but the main
treatment of different Greek dialects is in the article GREEK LANGUAGE
(Vol. 12, p. 496), to which the student should refer for Arcadian and
Cyprian, Aeolic, Ionic-Attic, and Doric dialects.

LATIN LANGUAGE (Vol. 16, p. 244), by Dr. A. S. Wilkins, late professor
of Latin, Owens College, Manchester, and Dr. Robert S. Conway, professor
of Latin, University of Manchester, with a peculiarly valuable summary
of _The Language as Recorded_, which is a linguistic critique of the
style and vocabulary of the great Roman authors and a comparison (p.
253) of Latin and Greek prose. And see the articles on the dialects of
ancient Italy: ITALY, _Ancient Languages and People_; ETRURIA,
_Language_; LIGURIA, _Philology_; SICULI; POMPEII, _Oscan Inscriptions_;
SABINI; FALISCI; VOLSCI; OSCA LINGUA; IGUVIUM; BRUTII; UMBRIA; PICENUM;
SAMNITES, etc., by Prof. Conway, which will serve the student as a
foundation for this subject, with more recent revision of all that is
known than there is in Prof. Conway’s books, in the works of C. D. Buck,
or in other authorities.

[Sidenote: Romance Languages]

For the descendants of Latin, the article ROMANCE LANGUAGES (Vol. 23, p.
504), by Dr. Wilhelm Meyer-Lübke, Professor of romance philology in the
University of Vienna; and the following separate articles:

ITALIAN LANGUAGE (Vol. 14, p. 888), by Graziadio I. Ascoli, professor of
comparative grammar at the University of Milan, and Carlo Salvioni,
professor of Romance languages in the same university, with a valuable
summary of the dialects of modern Italy.

FRENCH LANGUAGE (Vol. 11, p. 103), by Henry Nicol and Paul Meyer,
professor at the Collège de France; particularly interesting because
treated comparatively with constant reference to English and French
influence on English.

PROVENÇAL LANGUAGES (Vol. 22, p. 491), by Prof. Paul Meyer.

SPAIN: _Language_ (Vol. 25, p. 573), by Alfred Morel-Fatio, professor of
Romance languages at the Collège de France, and James Fitzmaurice-Kelly,
professor of Spanish, Liverpool University; describing the Catalan as
well as the Castilian and the Portuguese.

RUMANIA: _Language_ (Vol. 23, p. 843).

[Sidenote: Teutonic Languages]

The general articles SCANDINAVIAN LANGUAGES (Vol. 24, p. 291), by Dr.
Adolf Noreen, professor in the University of Upsala, with sections on
Icelandic, Norwegian or Norse, Swedish, and Danish, and the Scandinavian
dialects; and TEUTONIC LANGUAGES (Vol. 26, p. 673), by Hector Munro
Chadwick, Librarian of Clare College, Cambridge.

More in detail on the Teutonic languages are the articles:

ENGLISH LANGUAGE (Vol. 9, pp. 587–600; equivalent to 45 pages of this
Guide), by Sir James A. H. Murray, editor-in-chief of the (Oxford) _New
English Dictionary_, and Miss Hilda Mary R. Murray, lecturer on English
at the Royal Holloway College.

DUTCH LANGUAGE (Vol. 8, p. 717), by Prof. Johann Hendrik Gallée of the
University of Utrecht.

GERMAN LANGUAGE (Vol. 11, p. 777), Dr. Robert Priebsch, professor of
German philology, University of London, which deals with modern and
ancient, new, middle, and old, high and low German.

For Indo-Iranian languages, see:

[Sidenote: Persia and India]

PERSIA: _Language and Literature_ (Vol. 21, p. 246), by Dr. Hermann
Ethé, professor of Oriental languages, University College, Wales,
dealing with Zend, and Old, Middle and New Persian and modern dialects
of Persian.

INDO-ARYAN LANGUAGES (Vol. 14, p. 487), by George Abraham Grierson,
formerly in charge of the Linguistic survey of India, who treats in this
article the relations of Pisaca, Prakrit and Sanskrit, and contributes
the separate articles PISACA LANGUAGES, PRAKRIT, BENGALI, BIHARI,
GUJARATI AND RAJASTHANI, HINDOSTANI, KASHMIRI, and MARATHI. More
important than these minor dialects are SANSKRIT LANGUAGE (Vol. 24, p.
156), by Dr. Julius Eggeling, professor of Sanskrit, Edinburgh
University,—an article equivalent in length to 90 pages of this Guide;
and PALI (Vol. 20, p. 630), by Prof. T. W. Rhys Davids of Manchester
University, president of the Pali Text Society.

ARMENIAN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE (Vol. 2, p. 571), by Dr. F. C.
Conybeare, author of _The Ancient Armenian Texts of Aristotle_, etc.

LITHUANIANS AND LETTS, _Language and Literature_ (Vol. 16, p. 790);
SLAVS: _Language_ (Vol. 25, p. 233), by Ellis Hovell Minns, Lecturer in
palaeography, Cambridge, with a table of alphabets; and supplementary
information in the articles RUSSIA, BULGARIA, SERVIA, POLAND, BOHEMIA,
CROATIA-SLAVONIA, SLOVAKS, SLOVENES, SORBS, KASHUBES, POLABS.

ALBANIA, LANGUAGE (Vol. 1, p. 485), by J. D. Bourchier, correspondent of
_The Times_ (London) in South-eastern Europe.

[Sidenote: Semitic]

The material on the Semitic group is principally in the article SEMITIC
LANGUAGES (Vol. 24, p. 617), by Theodor Nöldeke, late professor of
Oriental languages at Strassburg. This article deals with:

Assyrian—see also CUNEIFORM (Vol. 7, p. 629);

Hebrew—see also HEBREW LANGUAGE (Vol. 13, p. 167), by Arthur Ernest
Cowley, sub-librarian of the Bodleian, Oxford;

Phoenician—see also PHOENICIA (Vol. 21, p. 449), by the Rev. Dr. George
Albert Cook, author of _Text Book of North-Semitic Inscriptions_, etc.;

Aramaic—and see the separate article ARAMAIC LANGUAGES (Vol. 2, p. 317);

Arabic, Sabaean, Mahri and Socotri, Ethiopic, Tigre and Tigrina,
Amharic, Harari and Gurague.

And see the article SYRIAC LANGUAGE (Vol. 26, p. 309), by Norman McLean,
lecturer in Aramaic, Cambridge.

[Sidenote: Hamitic]

The article HAMITIC LANGUAGES (Vol. 12, p. 893) is by Dr. W. Max Müller,
professor in the Reformed Episcopal Seminary, Philadelphia. See also the
article EGYPT, _Language and Writing_ (Vol. 9, p. 57), by Dr. Francis
Llewelyn Griffith, reader in Egyptology, Oxford; and the articles:
ETHIOPIA (Vol. 9, p. 845), by Dr. D. S. Margoliouth, professor of
Arabic, Oxford; BERBER, _Language_ (Vol. 3, p. 766) and KABYLES (Vol.
15, p. 625) for the Libyan group of the Hamitic languages.

[Sidenote: Other Tongues]

On the mono-syllabic languages see CHINA, _Language_ (Vol. 6, p. 216),
by Dr. H. A. Giles, professor of Chinese, Cambridge, and Lionel Giles,
assistant Oriental Department, British Museum;

JAPAN, _Language_ (Vol. 15, p. 167), by Captain Frank Brinkley, late
editor of the Japan _Mail_; and

TIBETO-BURMAN LANGUAGES (Vol. 26, p. 928), by Dr. Sten Konow, professor
in the University of Christiania.

The article URAL-ALTAIC (Vol. 27, p. 784), by Dr. Augustus Henry Keane,
late professor of Hindustani, University College, London, gives a
general account of the relationship of Turkish, Finno-Ugrian, Mongol and
Manchu; and is supplemented by the articles TURKS, _Language_ (Vol. 27,
p. 472), by Sir Charles Eliot, vice-chancellor of Sheffield University;
FINNO-UGRIAN (Vol. 10, p. 388), on language of Finns, Lapps and
Samoyedes, HUNGARY _Language_ (Vol. 13, p. 924), on Magyar, both by Sir
Charles Eliot; and MONGOLS, _Language_ (Vol. 18, p. 719), by Dr.
Bernhard Jülg, late professor at Innsbruck.

On the non-Aryan languages of Southern Africa see the article TAMILS
(Vol. 26, p. 388), by Dr. Reinhold Rost, late secretary of the Royal
Asiatic Society.

For languages of Malay-Polynesia and other Oceanic peoples see MALAYS,
_Language_ (Vol. 17, p. 477), by Sir Hugh Charles Clifford, colonial
secretary of Ceylon, and joint-author of _A Dictionary of the Malay
Language_; and the articles POLYNESIA, SAMOA, JAVA, HAWAII, etc.

On the Caucasian language see GEORGIA (Vol. 11, p. 758) and CAUCASIA
(Vol. 5, p. 546).

On other European languages see BASQUES (Vol. 3, p. 485), by the late
Rev. Wentworth Webster, author of _Basque Legends_, and Julien Vinson,
author of LE BASQUE ET LES LANGUES MEXICAINES; and for the Etruscan
language ETRURIA (Vol. 9, p. 854), by Professor R. S. Conway.

On African languages see BANTU LANGUAGES (Vol. 3, p. 356), by Sir H. H.
Johnston; BUSHMEN (Vol. 41, p. 871) and HOTTENTOTS (Vol. 13, p. 805);
and, for the intermediate group, the article HAUSA (Vol. 13, p. 69).

On the languages of the North American Indians see the article INDIANS,
NORTH AMERICAN (especially p. 457 of Vol. 14), by Dr. A. F. Chamberlain,
professor of anthropology, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts.

[Sidenote: Alphabet]

This list of articles will serve the student as a guide for the purely
linguistic articles. Besides the general treatment in the article
PHILOLOGY from which we started, he should read articles on such general
subjects as PHONETICS (Vol. 21, p. 458), by Dr. Henry Sweet, author of
_A Primer of Phonetics_, _A History of English Sounds since the Earliest
Period_, etc. This leads to a study of the article ALPHABET (Vol. 1, p.
723), equivalent to 30 pages of this Guide, written by Professor Peter
Giles of Cambridge and illustrated with a plate and various fac-similes
of early alphabets. This article is supplemented by Professor Giles’s
articles on all the letters of the alphabet, which deal with the history
and form of the symbol, the character of the sound it stands for and,
particularly, the development and change of the sound in English and its
dialects. For instance the article on the letter _N_ describes four
different sounds, of which there are two in English—usually
distinguished as _n_ and _ng_; explains that in the early Indo-European
language some _n’s_ and _m’s_ could sometimes be pronounced _as vowels_;
describes the opposite process, the nasalization of vowels, especially
in French; and closes by saying: “It is possible to nasalize some
consonants as well as vowels; nasalized spirants play an important part
in the so-called Yankee pronunciation of Americans.”

[Sidenote: Artificial Languages]

From alphabets the student may well turn to ideal languages in the
article UNIVERSAL LANGUAGES (Vol. 27, p. 746), by Professor Henry Sweet,
which criticizes Volapük and Esperanto and the Idiom Neutral as being
unscientific, not really international—even from a European point of
view, and still less when one considers the growing importance of Japan
and China in world-trade and world-history. Their being based on
national languages Dr. Sweet thinks is a disadvantage. But in their
comparative success he sees proof that a universal language is possible.
See also Prof. Sweet’s separate articles VOLAPÜK (Vol. 28, p. 178) and
ESPERANTO (Vol. 9, p. 773).

[Sidenote: Writing]

The article WRITING (Vol. 28, p. 852) deals, chiefly from the
anthropological standpoint, with primitive attempts to record ideas in
an intelligible form, for example with “knot-signs,” “message-sticks,”
picture-writing and the like. The needs, which led to the invention of
these primitive forms of writing, were: mnemonic, recalling that
something is to be done at a certain time—the primitive “tickler” was a
knotted string or thong, like our knotted handkerchief as a reminder,
and these knot-strings were finally used for elementary accountings,
commercial or chronological, like the use of the abacus in little shops,
or of the similar system in scoring games of pool; to communicate with
some one at a distance, for which marked or notched sticks, engraved or
coloured pebbles, wampum belts, etc., were used; and, third, to
distinguish one’s own property or handicraft whence cattle-brands,
trade-marks, etc. In Assyria, Egypt and China picture-writing developed
into conventional signs: on these see EGYPT (Vol. 9, p. 60), and CHINA
(Vol. 6, p. 218). All of these are of great interest to the general
reader, but the article CUNEIFORM (Vol. 7, p. 629) by Dr. R. W. Rogers,
professor of Hebrew and Old Testament exegesis, Drew Theological
Seminary, Madison, New Jersey, has the sort of entertainment in it that
there is in a good detective story, since it tells how the meaning of
the mysterious wedge-shaped inscriptions on the rocks at Mount Rachmet
in Persia was discovered.

The subject of writing is treated, also, in the articles:

INSCRIPTIONS (Vol. 14, p. 618); _Semitic_, aside from the Cuneiform, by
Arthur Ernest Cowley, sub-librarian of the Bodleian, Oxford; _Indian
inscriptions_, by John Faithfull Fleet, author of _Inscriptions of the
Early Gupta Kings_, etc.; _Greek_, by Edward Lee Hicks, Bishop of
Lincoln, author of _Manual of Greek Historical Inscriptions_, etc., and
George Francis Hill, author of _Sources for Greek History_, etc.; and
_Latin_, by Emil Hübner, late professor of classical philology at
Berlin, author of _Romische Epigraphik_, etc., and Dr. W. M. Lindsay, of
the University of St. Andrews, author of _The Latin Language_, etc.

PALAEOGRAPHY (Vol. 20, p. 556), equivalent to 75 pages of this Guide, by
Sir Edward Maunde Thompson, late librarian of the British Museum and
author of _Handbook of Greek and Latin Palaeography_, etc. The article
is illustrated with 50 fac-similes of typical handwritings.

MANUSCRIPT (Vol. 17, p. 618), equivalent to 20 pages of this Guide, by
the same author, with a description of the various forms of manuscripts,
of the mechanical arrangement of writing in MSS., and of writing
implements and inks. See, also, ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPTS, PAPYRUS, PAPER
and other articles mentioned in the chapter in this Guide _For
Printers_.

[Sidenote: Text Criticism]

The student of language and literature and of writing will also find
much valuable information in the article TEXTUAL CRITICISM (Vol. 26, p.
708), equivalent to 25 pages of this Guide, by Professor J. P. Postgate
of the University of Liverpool, well-known to Latinists as the brilliant
editor of Tibullus and Propertius. The article gives examples of the
classes of errors occurring in texts and the methods of restoring true
readings—largely of course by conjecture—and illustrates such errors and
their correction by the very poorly printed first editions of the
English poet Shelley.

In the study of language and writing as in courses on other sciences and
arts, the reader will find an additional interest in supplementing
general and abstract articles by biographical sketches of the great men
in the science.

The following is a partial list of the articles in the Britannica on
great philologists:

 Aasen, Ivar
 Adelung, J. C.
 Ahrens, F. H. L.
 Ascoli, G. I.
 Baehr, J. C. F.
 Baiter, J. G.
 Bake, Jan
 Barth, Kaspar von
 Benfey, Theodor
 Bennett, Charles E.
 Bentley, Richard
 Bernhardy, Gottfried
 Bhau Daji
 Blass, Friedrich
 Bleek, W. H. I.
 Bloomfield, Maurice
 Böhtlingk, Otto von
 Bopp, Franz
 Bosworth, Joseph
 Bréal, M. J. A.
 Brown, Francis
 Bücheler, Franz
 Buck, C. D.
 Bugge, Sophus
 Burmann
 Burnell, A. C.
 Burnouf, Eugène
 Buttmann, Philipp Karl
 Carey, William
 Casaubon
 Caspari, K. P.
 Castell, Edmund
 Castiglione, Count
 Castrén, M. A.
 Childers, R. C.
 Cleynaerts, Nicolas
 Cobet, C. G.
 Conington, John
 Cook, A. S.
 Corssen, W. P.
 Cotgrave, Randle
 Creuzer, G. F.
 Csoma de Körös, A.
 Darmesteter, J.
 Delius, N.
 Diez, F. C.
 Döbrowsky, J.
 Döderlein, J. C. W. L.
 Donaldson, J. W.
 Drisler, Henry
 Dunash
 Ebel, H. W.
 Egger, Emile
 Elias, Levita
 Ellis, A. J.
 Ellis, Robinson
 Erasmus
 Erpenius, Thomas
 Ettmüller, E. M. L.
 Facciolati, J.
 Fairuzabadi
 Fleckeisen, C. F. W. A.
 Fleischer, Heinrich L.
 Flügel, G. L.
 Flügel, J. G.
 Forcellini, Egidio
 Freund, Wilhelm
 Freytag, G. W. F.
 Furnivall, F. J.
 Fürst, Julius
 Gabelentz, H. C. von der
 Gaisford, Thomas
 Gayangos y Arce, P. de
 Gildersleeve, B. L.
 Goeje, M. J. de
 Goldstücker, T.
 Goldziher, Ignaz
 Golius, Jacobus
 Goodwin, W. W.
 Greenough, J. B.
 Grimm, J. L. C.
 Grimm, W. C.
 Gudeman, Alfred
 Gutschmid, Baron von
 Hadley, James
 Hagen, F. H. von der
 Haldeman, S. S.
 Hale, W. G.
 Halhed, N. B.
 Hall, Fitzedward
 Hall, Isaac Hollister
 Hasden, B. P.
 Haug, Martin
 Haupt, Moritz
 Henry, Victor
 Herbelot de Molainville, B. d’
 Hervás y Panduro, L.
 Hoffmann, J. J.
 Hopkins, E. W.
 Hottinger, J. H.
 Hübner, Emil
 Humboldt, K. W. von
 Ingram, James
 Jauhari
 Jawaliqi
 Jirecek, Josef
 Jonah, Rabbi
 Jones, Sir William
 Karajich, V. S.
 Kern, J. H.
 Khalil ibn Ahmad,
 Kimbi (family)
 Klaproth, H. J.
 Kuhn, F. F. A.
 Lachmann, Karl
 Lanman, C. R.
 Lassen, Christian
 Legge, James
 Leitner, G. W.
 Liddell, H. G.
 Littré, M. P. E.
 Ludolf, Hiob
 Madvig, J. N.
 Malan, S. C.
 March, F. A.
 Max Müller, F.
 Mayor, J. E. B.
 Ménant, Joachim
 Meyer, P. H.
 Mezzofanti, Giuseppe C.
 Miklosich, Franz von
 Mohl, Julius von
 Monier-Williams, Sir M.
 Morris, Richard
 Munro, D. B.
 Murray, Sir James
 Nettleship, Henry
 Nöldeke, Theodor
 Oppert, Julius
 Paley, F. A.
 Paris, B. P. G.
 Peerlkamp, P. H.
 Peile, John
 Petrarch
 Poggio
 Politian
 Porson, Richard
 Pott, A. F.
 Quatremère, E. M.
 Rask, R. C.
 Reiske, J. J.
 Reland, Adrian
 Rémusat, J. P. A.
 Ribbeck, Otto
 Rieu, C. P. H.
 Ritsche, F. W.
 Rutherford, W. G.
 Sale, George
 Salesbury, William
 Sanders, Daniel
 Sayce, A. H.
 Schafarik, P. J.
 Scheler, J. A. W.
 Schiefner, F. A.
 Schleicher, August
 Schultens (family)
 Scott, Robert
 Sellar, W. Y.
 Skeat, W. W.
 Taylor, Isaac
 Ten Brink, B. E. K.
 Teuffel, W. S.
 Thorpe, Benjamin
 Wailly, N. F. de
 Walker, John
 Warren, Minton
 Webster, Noah
 Whitney, W. D.
 Wilkins, Sir Charles
 Wordsworth, Christopher
 Zarncke, F. K. T.




                             CHAPTER XXXVI
                  LITERATURE, INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL


[Sidenote: Contributors]

The student of literature, like the student of painting, finds it as
necessary to examine the great examples of the art as to study the laws
which guide the artist, for the history of their development, and he
will find that the articles which discuss literature in the Britannica
are _themselves literature_, models of the form of artistic expression
which they describe. A list of these contributors who deal with literary
topics might, indeed, easily be mistaken for a list of such articles on
the great contemporary writers as the student would most desire to read.
Among these contributors are, for example: Edmund Gosse, Theodore
Watts-Dunton, Swinburne, A. C. Benson, John Morley, Austin Dobson,
Arthur Symons, J. Addington Symonds, Frederic Harrison, Walter Besant,
William Sharp (“Fiona Macleod”), Professor George Saintsbury, Sir Arthur
T. Quiller-Couch (“Q”), William Archer, Israel Gollancz, Robert Louis
Stevenson, Andrew Lang, Sir Leslie Stephen, E. V. Lucas, Arthur Waugh,
Mrs. Craigie (“John Oliver Hobbes”), Alice Meynell, Mrs. Humphry Ward,
and—among American names,—George E. Woodberry, Henry Van Dyke, Edward
Everett Hale, T. W. Higginson, Brander Matthews, W. P. Trent, Charles
Eliot Norton, Charles William Eliot, George W. Cable, Lyman Abbott,
Edmund Clarence Stedman, John Burroughs, Thomas Davidson, Horace E.
Scudder, and Charles F. Richardson.

Before discussing the articles in which these and many other
distinguished contributors deal with various aspects of literature,
attention may be directed to the treatment of religious literature in
the Britannica. The Bible is the subject of a separate chapter in this
Guide on _Bible Study_, to which the reader is also referred for the
whole literature of Biblical criticism. Religious literature based upon
the Bible is discussed in the articles LITURGY (Vol. 16, p. 795), by the
Rev. F. E. Warren; SERMON (Vol. 24, p. 673), by Edmund Gosse, and HYMNS
(Vol. 14, p. 181), by Lord Selborne, equivalent to 35 pages of this
Guide. The medieval miracle plays and mysteries, presenting incidents
from Scripture, are described in the section on the _Medieval Drama_
(Vol. 8, p. 497) of the article DRAMA. On the literature of other
religions, see the chapter _For Ministers_.

[Sidenote: General Articles]

The student of literature in general may begin his course of reading
with the article LITERATURE (Vol. 16, p. 783), a concise critical
summary by Dr. James Fitzmaurice-Kelly, professor of Spanish language
and literature, Liverpool University, best known as the editor of
Cervantes. Read, after the article LITERATURE, the same contributor’s
article TRANSLATION (Vol. 27, p. 183). The student who does not wish to
approach literature from the philosophic side need not read the articles
AESTHETICS and FINE ARTS; but even such a one should read the article
STYLE (Vol. 25, p. 1055), by Edmund Gosse, essayist, poet, biographer
and librarian of the House of Lords, and the article PROSE (Vol. 22, p.
450), by the same contributor.

There is a well-known and perfectly authentic anecdote of Edmund Gosse’s
predecessor as librarian of the House of Lords, who was once asked in
the course of a newspaper symposium on education, “What were the
principal factors in your education?” He replied by putting second only
to his university training “the articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica
and in the _Athenaeum_ by Theodore Watts-Dunton.” Certainly the student
will be well repaid by repeated study and analysis of Watts-Dunton’s
article POETRY (Vol. 21, p. 877; equivalent to 45 pages of this Guide).
The same author’s articles SONNET (Vol. 25, p. 414), MATTHEW ARNOLD
(Vol. 2, p. 635), and WYCHERLEY (Vol. 28, p. 863) should be studied with
the article POETRY as supplementing his literary philosophy.

The greatest of literary forms is amply represented by the space and the
authority given to it in the Britannica. The article DRAMA (Vol. 8, p.
475; equivalent to 225 pages of this Guide) is mainly the work of Prof.
A. W. Ward, master of Peterhouse, Cambridge, editor of the _Cambridge
History of English Literature_ and of the _Cambridge Modern History_;
but some parts of the article are by William Archer, the dramatic
critic, and by Auguste Filon (“Pierre Sandrié”). This elaborate article
should be supplemented by the short article COMEDY (Vol. 6, p. 759) and
by the biographical and critical sketches of the great dramatists.

Among the many other articles in the Britannica on the forms of
literature are: SATIRE (Vol. 24, p. 228), by Richard Garnett, late
librarian British Museum, with which the student may well combine the
articles HUMOUR and IRONY, the articles BALLADE, BALLADS (Lang),
BUCOLICS, PASTORAL, CENTO, CHANT ROYAL (with Gosse’s first English chant
royal, “The Praise of Dionysus,” transcribed in full), DESCRIPTIVE
POETRY, ELEGY, EPIC POETRY, EPITHALAMIUM, HEROIC VERSE, IDYL, LIMERICK,
LYRICAL POETRY, MACARONICS, NATIONAL ANTHEMS, ODE, OTTAVA RIMA, PANTUN,
RIME ROYAL, RONDEAU, RONDEL, SESTETT, SESTINA, SONG, TRIOLET, VERS DE
SOCIÉTÉ, VILANELLE, VIRELAY, and—a few of the prose forms, BIOGRAPHY,
CONTE, CRITICISM, EPISTLE, ESSAY, EUPHUISM, NOVEL, PAMPHLET, PICARESQUE
NOVEL, ROMANCE, TALE, TRACT,—nearly all these being by Edmund Gosse. Two
articles of the utmost importance are DICTIONARY and ENCYCLOPAEDIA. Read
the general article RHETORIC.

[Sidenote: Periodical Publications]

Periodical publications, especially those in the English and French
languages, have contained a great part of the best literary criticism of
miscellaneous essays published since the first French review appeared in
1665 and since the first English review, consisting wholly of original
matter, was established in London in 1710. The latter was indebted to
France not only for its model, but for its editor, who was a French
Protestant refugee. Benjamin Franklin founded the first American
monthly, the Philadelphian _General Magazine_ in 1741. The article
PERIODICALS (Vol. 21, p. 151), by H. R. Tedder, librarian of the
Athenaeum Club, London, contains separate sections on the reviews and
magazines of _England_, the _United States_, _Canada_, _South Africa_,
_West India and the British Crown Colonies_, _India and Ceylon_,
_France_, _Germany_, _Austria_, _Switzerland_, _Italy_, _Belgium_,
_Holland_, _Denmark_, _Norway_, _Sweden_, _Spain_, _Portugal_, _Greece_,
_Russia_, _Bohemia_, _Hungary_ and _Japan_.

NEWSPAPERS (Vol. 19, p. 544), equivalent to 140 pages of this Guide, is
an article in which the student will find a full account of the most
fertile, if not the most studied, form of modern literature in all parts
of the world. See also the chapter in this Guide _For Journalists and
Authors_.

The reader should note that of the many articles on literary forms and
rhetorical figures, only a few are given above, but they are listed more
fully in the Index Volume, p. 929, where there are more than 350 such
titles. He must remember also that there are more than 3,000
biographical and critical articles on authors in different languages and
different periods. The following are “key” articles on national
literatures:

[Sidenote: National Literatures]

ENGLISH LITERATURE, by Henry Bradley, joint-editor of the _New English
Dictionary_; Prof. J. M. Manly, University of Chicago; Prof. Oliver
Elton, University of Liverpool; Thomas Seccombe, author of _The Age of
Johnson_.

AMERICAN LITERATURE, by G. E. Woodberry, formerly professor in Columbia
University.

GERMAN LITERATURE, by Prof. J. G. Robertson, University of London,
author of _History of German Literature_.

 DUTCH LITERATURE                   │by Edmund Gosse.
 FLEMISH LITERATURE                 │                 „
 WALLOONS, _Literature_             │                 „
 BELGIUM, _Literature_              │                 „
 DENMARK, _Literature_              │                 „
 SWEDEN, _Literature_               │                 „
 NORWAY, _Literature_               │                 „

ICELAND, _Literature, Classic_, by Prof. Frederick York Powell of
Oxford; _Recent_, by Sigfús Blöndal, librarian of Copenhagen University.

FRENCH LITERATURE, by George Saintsbury.

PROVENÇAL LITERATURE, by Paul Meyer, Director of the École des Chartes,
Paris, and Prof. Hermann Oelsner, Oxford, author of a _History of
Provençal Literature_.

ANGLO-NORMAN LITERATURE, by Prof. Louis Brandin of the University of
London.

SPAIN, _Literature_, by Prof. J. Fitzmaurice-Kelly of the University of
Liverpool, and A. Morel-Fatio, author of _L’Espagne au XVIe et au XVIIe
siècles_.

PORTUGAL, _Literature_, by Edgar Prestage, editor of _Letters of a
Portuguese Nun_, etc.

ITALIAN LITERATURE, by Prof. Hermann Oelsner, Oxford, and Prof. Adolfo
Bartoli of the University of Florence, author of _Storia della
letteratura Italiana_.

SWITZERLAND, _Literature_, by Prof. W. A. B. Coolidge.

HUNGARY, _Literature_, by Emil Reich, author of _Hungarian Literature_,
and E. Dundas Butler, author of _Hungarian Poems and Fables for English
Readers_, etc.

POLAND, _Literature_, by W. R. Morfill, late professor of Slavonic
Languages, Oxford, author of _Slavonic Literature_, etc.

RUSSIA, _Literature_, also by Prof. Morfill.

ARABIA, _Literature_, by the late Prof. M. J. de Goeje, University of
Leiden, and the Rev. G. W. Thatcher, warden of Camden College, Sydney,
N. S. W.

PERSIA, _Literature_, by Prof. Karl Geldner, Marburg University, and
Prof. Hermann Ethé, University College, Wales.

CHINA, _Literature_, by H. A. Giles, professor of Chinese, Oxford.

JAPAN, _Literature_, by Capt. Brinkley.

HEBREW LITERATURE, by Arthur Cowley, sub-librarian of the Bodleian,
Oxford.

ARMENIAN LITERATURE, by F. C. Conybeare, author of _The Ancient Armenian
Texts of Aristotle_.

SYRIAC LITERATURE, by Norman McLean, lecturer in Aramaic, Cambridge.

HINDOSTANI LITERATURE, by Sir Charles James Lyall.

SANSKRIT, _Literature_, by Prof. Julius Eggeling, Edinburgh.

CLASSICS, by Dr. J. E. Sandys, Cambridge, author of _History of
Classical Scholarship_.

GREEK LITERATURE: _Ancient_, by Sir R. C. Jebb, author of _Companion to
Greek Studies_; _Byzantine_, by Prof. Karl Krumbacher, editor of
_Byzantinische Zeitschrift_ and _Byzantinisches Archiv_; and _Modern_,
by J. D. Bourchier, correspondent of _The Times_ (London) in
South-Eastern Europe.

LATIN LITERATURE, by Prof. A. S. Wilkins, of Owens College, Manchester,
and Prof. R. S. Conway, of the University of Manchester.

CELT, _Literature_, to which W. J. Gruffydd, lecturer in Celtic,
University College, Cardiff, contributes the section on _Welsh_
literature; and E. C. Quiggin, lecturer in Celtic, Cambridge,
contributes the sections on _Irish_, _Manx_, _Breton_ and _Cornish_
literatures.

[Sidenote: Bibliography]

This list of the literatures of many tongues, from each of which
translations have added to the common stock accessible even to those who
can read with ease only one language, indicates the existence of a
bewildering mass of printed matter, and just as each language has its
literature—using the word to signify output, so each subject upon which
men write has its literature—using the word to signify material for any
one branch of study. Bibliographies are the charts by which students are
enabled to navigate these vast seas of knowledge. The articles
BIBLIOGRAPHY (Vol. 3, p. 908), by A. W. Pollard, assistant librarian of
the British Museum, and INDEX (Vol. 14, p. 373) describe the
technicalities of cataloguing and classifying books and their contents.

The Britannica is itself the most complete index to the subjects treated
by books and the most complete bibliographical manual for the student
that could be imagined. The Index of 500,000 entries (Vol. 29) shows to
what class any one of half a million facts belongs, by referring to the
article in which that fact is treated. At the end of the article a list
of the best books on the subject shows the student who desires to
specialize just where to go for further details. No less than 203,000
books are included in these lists appended to Britannica articles and
many of them are, in themselves, substantial contributions to
literature. The Shakespeare bibliography would, for example, fill 30
pages of the size and type of this Guide; the bibliography of English
history, by A. F. Pollard, of the University of London, 13 pages, and
the bibliography of French history, by Prof. Bémont of the École des
Hautes Études, Paris, 8 pages.

A group of articles of great interest to every student of literature
deals with the methods and appliances by which writings are preserved
and circulated. MANUSCRIPT (Vol. 17, p. 618) is by Sir E. Maunde
Thompson, of the British Museum Library; BOOK (Vol. 4, p. 214);
BOOK-COLLECTING (Vol. 4, p. 221) and INCUNABULA (Vol. 14, p. 369) are by
A. W. Pollard, also of the British Museum Library. LIBRARIES (Vol. 16,
p. 545), equivalent to 100 pages of this Guide, is by H. R. Tedder,
librarian of the Athenaeum Club, London. The articles on printing,
binding, publishing and similar subjects are described in the chapter of
this Guide _For Printers_.

With this chapter to help him the student will have little difficulty in
devising his own course of reading in any one literature—starting with
the general treatment, going from this to the separate biographies of
the great authors mentioned in the general article, and, when there is
in the national literature that he is studying some special development
of a literary _genre_, as of the sermon in the 17th or the satire in the
18th century, turning to the article in the Britannica dealing with this
form of literature, SATIRE, SERMON, or whatever it may be. For example,
what could be more illuminating to the student of 19th century
literature than the following passages-disconnected here—from the
article SATIRE?

  Goethe and Schiller, Scott and Wadsworth, are now at hand, and as
  imagination gains ground satire declines. Byron, who in the 18th
  century would have been the greatest of satirists, is hurried by the
  spirit of his age into passion and description, bequeathing, however,
  a splendid proof of the possibility of allying satire with sublimity
  in his _Vision of Judgment_.... Miss Edgeworth skirts the confines of
  satire, and Miss Austen seasons her novels with the most exquisite
  satiric traits. Washington Irving revives the manner of _The
  Spectator_, and Tieck brings irony and persiflage to the discussion of
  critical problems.... In all the characteristics of his genius
  Thackeray is thoroughly English, and the faults and follies he
  chastises are those especially characteristic of British society. Good
  sense and the perception of the ridiculous are amalgamated in him; his
  satire is a thoroughly British article, a little over-solid, a little
  wanting in finish, but honest, weighty and durable. Posterity must go
  to him for the humours of the age of Victoria, as they go to Addison
  for those of Anne’s.... In Heine the satiric spirit, long confined to
  established literary forms, seems to obtain unrestrained freedom to
  wander where it will, nor have the ancient models been followed since
  by any considerable satirist except the Italian Giusti. The machinery
  employed by Moore was indeed transplanted to America by James Russell
  Lowell, whose _Biglow Papers_ represent perhaps the highest moral
  level yet attained by satire.

  In no age was the spirit of satire so generally diffused as in the
  19th century, but many of its eminent writers, while bordering on the
  domains of satire, escape the definition of satirist. The term cannot
  be properly applied to Dickens, the keen observer of the oddities of
  human life; or to George Eliot, the critic of its emptiness when not
  inspired by a worthy purpose; or to Balzac, the painter of French
  society; or to Trollope, the mirror of the middle classes of England.
  If _Sartor Resartus_ could be regarded as a satire, Carlyle would rank
  among the first of satirists; but the satire, though very obvious,
  rather accompanies than inspires the composition.




                             CHAPTER XXXVII
                          AMERICAN LITERATURE


The list in the preceding chapter of the key articles dealing with
national literatures shows that the Britannica separately treats the
literary products of some 30 countries. To outline 30 courses of
reading, mentioning the 3,000 critical and biographical articles, would
make this Guide unwieldy. On pp. 929–937 of Vol. 29 the reader will find
classified lists of these articles, and only four groups are selected
here for detailed treatment: those on American, English, German and
Greek literature. The main article in the literature of each of the
other countries indicates the characteristic forms, the typical works of
the leading writers discussed in special articles, so that courses of
reading as systematic as these four can easily be planned for other
countries by the reader.

          _Topic of Study_                _Article and Contributor_

 General Summary of the subject,     AMERICAN LITERATURE (Vol. 1, p.
   with critical appreciation of       831), by George E. Woodberry,
   main tendencies and great           formerly professor in Columbia
   authors.                            University, biographer of Poe and
                                       Hawthorne, author of _America in
                                       Literature_, etc.

 _Colonial Period._

 English writers, especially         JOHN SMITH (Vol. 25, p. 264), by
   historical.                         Prof. Edward Arber, editor of
                                       _English Garner_, etc.

 Colonial writers, especially of     MASSACHUSETTS, _History_ (Vol. 17,
   Puritan New England.                p. 858); CONNECTICUT, _History_
                                       (Vol. 6, p. 954).

 Massachusetts governors and         WILLIAM BRADFORD (Vol. 4, p. 370);
   historical writing.                 JOHN WINTHROP (Vol. 28, p. 736).

 The Clergy as writers of History,   JOHN COTTON (Vol. 7, p. 255), by
   and of Theology of the Puritan      Prof. Williston Walker, Yale,
   School.                             author of _History_ _of the
                                       Congregational Churches in_ _the
                                       United States_; THOMAS HOOKER
                                       (Vol. 13, p. 674).

 The Mathers.                        COTTON, INCREASE, and RICHARD
                                       MATHER (Vol. 17, p. 883).

 Apostle to the Indians.             JOHN ELIOT (Vol. 9, p. 278), by
                                       Prof. Walker.

 Revolt against Puritanism.

 Ethical.                            THOMAS MORTON (Vol. 18, p. 882).

 Theological.                        ROGER WILLIAMS (Vol. 28, p. 682).

 New England Verse.                  MICHAEL WIGGLESWORTH (Vol. 28, p.
                                       626).

 The New England Diarist.            SAMUEL SEWALL (Vol. 24, p. 733).

 The great New England Philosopher   JONATHAN EDWARDS (Vol. 9, pp. 3–6),
   and Theologian; the first           by Prof. Harry Norman Gardiner,
   American author with a lasting      editor of _Jonathan Edwards—a
   and European reputation.            Retrospect_, and Riehard Webster.

 Edwards’s contemporaries.           CHARLES CHAUNCY (Vol. 6, p. 18).

                                     JONATHAN MAYHEW (Vol. 17, p. 935).

 Edwards’s followers,—the New        JOSEPH BELLAMY (Vol. 3, p. 694).
   England theology.

                                     SAMUEL HOPKINS (Vol. 13, p. 685).

 The first newspaper in New York.    WILLIAM BRADFORD (Vol. 4, p. 370).

 A Virginia educator.                JAMES BLAIR (Vol. 4, p. 34).

 The American Quaker preacher.       JOHN WOOLMAN (Vol. 28, p. 817).

 A royal governor and historian.     THOMAS HUTCHINSON (Vol. 14, p. 13).

 A New York statesman and            CADWALLADER COLDEN (Vol. 6, p.
   philosopher.                        663).

 The first great American figure in  BENJAMIN FRANKLIN (Vol. 11, p. 24),
   secular literature,—essayist,       by Richard Webster, late fellow
   pamphleteer, politician,            Princeton University, editorial
   autobiographer.                     staff, Encyclopaedia Britannica.

 _Revolutionary Period._

 The patriotic orators and           JAMES OTIS (Vol. 20, p. 366).
   Pamphleteers.

                                     PATRICK HENRY (Vol. 13, p. 300).

                                     JOHN ADAMS (Vol. 1, p. 176).

                                     JOSIAH QUINCY (Vol. 22, p. 753).

                                     JAMES WILSON (Vol. 28, p. 693).

 “Common Sense.”                     THOMAS PAINE (Vol. 20, p. 456).

 James Otis’s Sister.                MERCY WARREN (Vol. 28, p. 330).

 The Declaration of Independence and INDEPENDENCE, DECLARATION OF (Vol.
   its author.                         14, p. 372), and THOMAS JEFFERSON
                                       (Vol. 15, p. 301), both by Dr. F.
                                       S. Philbrick.

 Prominent Patriots in New Jersey.   WILLIAM LIVINGSTON (Vol. 16, p.
                                       813).

                                     JOHN WITHERSPOON (Vol. 28, p. 759).

 A Connecticut Educator and Patriot. EZRA STILES (Vol. 25, p. 919).

 Opponents of Independence.          JOSEPH GALLOWAY (Vol. 11, p. 421).

 “A Westchester Farmer.”             SAMUEL SEABURY (Vol. 24, p. 531).

 In Massachusetts.                   MATHER BYLES (Vol. 4, p. 896).

 In Maryland.                        JONATHAN BOUCHER (Vol. 4, p. 312).

 Patriotic Poetry.                   JOHN TRUMBULL (Vol. 27, p. 324).

 The “Hartford Wits.”                TIMOTHY DWIGHT (Vol. 8, p. 741).

 Satire and Epic.                    JOEL BARLOW (Vol. 3, p. 406).

 “Battle of the Kegs.”               FRANCIS HOPKINSON (Vol. 13, p.
                                       685).

 A Western Traveler.                 JONATHAN CARVER (Vol. 5, p. 437).

 _The National Period._

 The Constitution and its            JAMES MADISON (Vol. 17, p. 284).
   Pamphleteers—“The Federalist,”
   the greatest application of
   elementary principles of
   government to practical
   administration.

                                     ALEXANDER HAMILTON (Vol. 12, p.
                                       880), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick and
                                       Hugh Chisholm.

                                     JOHN JAY (Vol. 15, pp. 294–296).

 Importance of the early national    UNITED STATES, _History_, §106
   period on the development of        (Vol. 27, p. 688), by the late
   American literature.                Prof. Alexander Johnson,
                                       Princeton, and C. C. Whinery,
                                       assistant editor, Encyclopaedia
                                       Britannica.

 The first professional “man of      CHARLES BROCKDEN BROWN (Vol. 4, p.
   letters.”                           657).

 First foreign vogue.

 Essay and History: “The American    WASHINGTON IRVING (Vol. 14, p.
   Goldsmith.”                         856), by Richard Garnett, late
                                       librarian British Museum.

 Fiction: “The American Scott.”      JAMES FENIMORE COOPER (Vol. 7, p.
                                       79), by W. E. Henley, poet,
                                       critic and essayist.

 Poetry.                             WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT (Vol. 4, p.
                                       698), by G. W. Cable.

 The Knickerbocker School.           NEW YORK CITY, _Literature_ (Vol.
                                       19, p. 615).

 New York as a literary centre.      JAMES KIRKE PAULDING (Vol. 20, p.
                                       958).

                                     FITZ-GREENE HALLECK (Vol. 12, p.
                                       854).

 A Southern novelist and poet.       W. G. SIMMS (Vol. 25, p. 123).

 Cooper’s successor as novelist of   HERMAN MELVILLE (Vol. 18, p. 102).
   the sea.

 Poetesses of the early 19th         LYDIA HUNTLEY SIGOURNEY (Vol. 25,
   century.                            p. 82).

                                     ALICE AND PHOEBE CARY (Vol. 5, p.
                                       438).

 The “Literati.”                     N. P. WILLIS (Vol. 28, p. 686).

                                     RUFUS WILMOT GRISWOLD (Vol. 12, p.
                                       610).

 The short story.                    EDGAR ALLAN POE (Vol. 21, p. 875),
                                       by David Hannay.

 Traveler, Translator, Poet.         BAYARD TAYLOR (Vol. 26, p. 467).

 _New England in the 19th century._

 Boston and Cambridge.               BOSTON (Vol. 4, p. 293).

                                     HARVARD UNIVERSITY (Vol. 13, p.
                                       38).

                                     GEORGE TICKNOR (Vol. 26, p. 936).

 History and Scholarship as affected GEORGE BANCROFT (Vol. 3, p. 307),
     by European contacts.             by Prof. W. M. Sloane, Columbia.

                                     EDWARD EVERETT (Vol. 10, p. 8), by
                                       Edward Everett Hale.

                                     JARED SPARKS (Vol. 25, p. 608), by
                                       Prof. W. L. Corbin, Wells
                                       College.

                                     J. G. PALFREY (Vol. 20, p. 629).

                                     W. H. PRESCOTT (Vol. 22, p. 294).

                                     J. L. MOTLEY (Vol. 18, p. 909).

 Unitarianism and its Literary       HOSEA BALLOU (Vol. 3, p. 282).
   Leaders, Influencing and
   Influenced by Transcendentalism.

                                     WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING (Vol. 5, p.
                                       843), by Richard Webster.

                                     JAMES FREEMAN CLARKE (Vol. 6, p.
                                       444), by E. E. Hale.

                                     THEODORE PARKER (Vol. 20, p. 829).

 Transcendentalism and the Concord   AMOS BRONSON ALCOTT (Vol. 1, p.
   School—central figures.             528), by Prof. C. F. Richardson,
                                       Dartmouth College.

                                     RALPH WALDO EMERSON (Vol. 9, p.
                                       332), by Prof. Henry Van Dyke,
                                       Princeton.

                                     HENRY DAVID THOREAU (Vol. 26, p.
                                       877), by William Sharp (“Fiona
                                       Macleod”).

 The Dial.                           MARGARET FULLER (Vol. 11, p. 295).

                                     GEORGE RIPLEY (Vol. 23, p. 363), by
                                       Edward Livermore Burlingame,
                                       editor of _Scribner’s_.

 Brook Farm.                         BROOK FARM (Vol. 4, p. 645), by E.
                                       L. Burlingame.

 The author of “Margaret.”           SYLVESTER JUDD (Vol. 15, p. 536).

 The great New England Novelist.     NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE (Vol. 13, p.
                                       102), by Richard Henry Stoddard,
                                       poet and essayist.

 The great New England Poet.         HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW (Vol.
                                       16, p. 977), by Thomas Davidson,
                                       author of _The Philosophical
                                       System of Rosmini_.

 Earlier Romanticism.                WASHINGTON ALLSTON (Vol. 1, p.
                                       709).

                                     RICHARD HENRY DANA (Vol. 7, p.
                                       792).

 _Oratory._

 In the North.                       DANIEL WEBSTER (Vol. 28, p. 459),
                                       by Everett P. Wheeler, author of
                                       _Daniel Webster_, etc.

                                     RUFUS CHOATE (Vol. 6, p. 258).

                                     WENDELL PHILLIPS (Vol. 21, p. 407),
                                       by Col. T. W. Higginson.

                                     CHARLES SUMNER (Vol. 26, p. 81).

                                     ROBERT CHARLES WINTHROP (Vol. 28,
                                       p. 736).

 In the South.                       HENRY CLAY (Vol. 6, p. 470), by
                                       Carl Schurz, biographer of Clay.

 Other Southern Orators.             JOHN C. CALHOUN (Vol. 5, p. 1), by
                                       Judge H. A. M. Smith, South
                                       Carolina.

                                     ROBERT YOUNG HAYNE (Vol. 13, p.
                                       114).

 The Pulpit Orator of the North.     HENRY WARD BEECHER (Vol. 3, p.
                                       639), by Dr. Lyman Abbott, editor
                                       _The Outlook_.

 The Abolition Novelist, author of   HARRIET ELIZABETH BEECHER STOWE
   _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_.                (Vol. 25, p. 972), by Horace E.
                                       Scudder, late editor of the
                                       _Atlantic Monthly._

 Another anti-slavery authoress.     LYDIA MARIA CHILD (Vol. 6, p. 135).

 The New England Poets prominent in  JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER (Vol. 28,
   the Anti-Slavery Movement.          p. 613), by Edmund Clarence
                                       Stedman, poet and critic.

                                     JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL (Vol. 17, p.
                                       74), by Horace E. Scudder,
                                       biographer of Lowell.

 Their Contemporary, the “Autocrat.” OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES (Vol. 13, p.
                                       616), by J. T. Morse, biographer
                                       of Holmes.

 _The_ American Poet—by the          Walt Whitman (Vol. 28, p. 610), by
   criterion of foreign standards.     John Burroughs, author of
                                       _Whitman, A Study_.

 Scholarship and criticism in this   FRANCIS JAMES CHILD (Vol. 6, p.
   Period and the Next: the            135).
   particularly Important Work done
   by Americans in Grammar,
   Language, Text Criticism, etc.

                                     CORNELIUS C. FELTON (Vol. 10, p.
                                       246).

                                     GEORGE PERKINS MARSH (Vol. 17, p.
                                       768).

                                     WILLIAM DWIGHT WHITNEY (Vol. 28, p.
                                       611), by Benjamin E. Smith,
                                       editor _Century Dictionary_.

                                     RICHARD GRANT WHITE (Vol. 28, p.
                                       601).

                                     HORACE HOWARD FURNESS (Vol. 11, p.
                                       362).

                                     FRANCIS ANDREW MARCH (Vol. 17, p.
                                       688).

                                     BASIL LANNEAU GILDERSLEEVE (Vol.
                                       12, p. 12).

                                     CHARLES ELIOT NORTON (Vol. 19, p.
                                       797).

 _The later Poets._

 New England.                        THOMAS BAILEY ALDRICH (Vol. 1, p.
                                       536).

                                     JULIA WARD HOWE (Vol. 13, p. 836).

                                     WILLIAM WETMORE STORY (Vol. 25, p.
                                       970).

 New York.                           EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN (Vol. 25,
                                       p. 861).

                                     RICHARD HENRY STODDARD (Vol. 25, p.
                                       939).

                                     RICHARD WATSON GILDER (Vol. 12, p.
                                       12).

 Pennsylvania.                       CHARLES GODFREY LELAND (Vol. 16, p.
                                       405).

                                     SILAS WEIR MITCHELL (Vol. 18, p.
                                       618).

 The South.                          SIDNEY LANIER (Vol. 16, p. 181), by
                                       Prof. W. P. Trent, Columbia.

 The Middle West (especially         JOHN HAY (Vol. 13, p. 105).
   humorous, light and character
   verse).

                                     EUGENE FIELD (Vol. 10, p. 321).

                                     JAMES WHITCOMB RILEY (Vol. 23, p.
                                       343).

 The Far West.                       FRANCIS BRET HARTE (Vol. 13, p.
                                       31).

                                     JOAQUIN MILLER (Vol. 18, p. 464).

                                     EDWARD ROWLAND SILL (Vol. 25, p.
                                       107).

 _Later Fiction._

 The American Realist.               W. D. HOWELLS (Vol. 13, p. 839).

 The American Cosmopolite.           HENRY JAMES (Vol. 15, p. 143).

 Stories of Italy.                   F. MARION CRAWFORD (Vol. 7, p.
                                       386).

 Historical Romance.                 LEWIS WALLACE (Vol. 28, p. 276).

 Humorous Short Story.               FRANCIS R. STOCKTON (Vol. 25, p.
                                       938).

 Pietistic Novel.                    E. P. ROE (Vol. 23, p. 449).

                                     J. G. HOLLAND (Vol. 13, p. 587).

 The Provincial Types—

 Maine.                              SARAH ORNE JEWETT (Vol. 15, p.
                                       371).

 New England.                        MARY E. WILKINS (Vol. 28, p. 646).

 West.                               EDWARD EGGLESTON (Vol. 9, p. 17).

                                     MARY HALLOCK FOOTE (Vol. 10, p.
                                       625).

                                     FRANCIS BRET HARTE (Vol. 13, p.
                                       31).

 South: Tennessee.                   “CHARLES EGBERT CRADDOCK” (Vol. 7,
                                       p. 360).

 Kentucky.                           JAMES LANE ALLEN (Vol. 1, p. 691).

 Virginia.                           THOMAS NELSON PAGE (Vol. 20, p.
                                       450).

 New Orleans.                        GEORGE W. CABLE (Vol. 4, p. 920).

 _Essayists._                        THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON (Vol.
                                       13, p. 455).

                                     EDWARD EVERETT HALE (Vol. 12, p.
                                       832).

                                     CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER (Vol. 28, p.
                                       326).

                                     GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS (Vol. 7, p.
                                       652), by Charles Eliot Norton.

 _Humor._

                                     HENRY WHEELER SHAW, “Josh Billings”
                                       (Vol. 24, p. 813).

 The American “Hood.”                JOHN GODFREY SAXE (Vol. 24, p.
                                       258).

 “Bill Nye.”                         EDGAR WILSON NYE (Vol. 19, p. 929).

 America’s Great Humorist.           MARK TWAIN (Vol. 27, p. 490), by
                                       Prof. Brander Matthews, Columbia.

 “Uncle Remus.”                      JOEL CHANDLER HARRIS (Vol. 13, p.
                                       20).

 Puck.                               H. C. BUNNER (Vol. 4, p. 799).

 “Mr. Dooley.”                       FINLEY PETER DUNNE (Vol. 8, p.
                                       682).

 _History._                          FRANCIS PARKMAN (Vol. 20, p. 832),
                                       by John Fiske.

                                     HERMANN EDUARD VON HOLST (Vol. 28,
                                       p. 210).

                                     FRANCIS LIEBER (Vol. 16, p. 590).

                                     C. E. A. GAYARRÉ (Vol. 11, p. 542).

                                     HENRY CHARLES LEA (Vol. 16, p.
                                       314).

 Historians.                         HENRY MARTYN BAIRD (Vol. 3, p.
                                       224).

                                     JOHN FISKE (Vol. 10, p. 437), by
                                       Prof. C. F. Richardson,
                                       Dartmouth.

                                     JAMES FORD RHODES (Vol. 23, p.
                                       257).

                                     HENRY CABOT LODGE (Vol. 16, p.
                                       860).

                                     JAMES B. MCMASTER (Vol. 17, p.
                                       264).

                                     JAMES SCHOULER (Vol. 24, p. 377).

                                     THEODORE A. DODGE (Vol. 8, p. 369).

                                     JOHN CODMAN ROPES (Vol. 23, p.
                                       718).

                                     ALFRED T. MAHAN (Vol. 17, p. 394).

                                     ALBERT BUSHNELL HART (Vol. 13, p.
                                       30).

                                     HUBERT H. BANCROFT (Vol. 3, p.
                                       309).

                                     THEODORE ROOSEVELT (Vol. 23, p.
                                       711), by Lawrence F. Abbott, New
                                       York _Outlook_.

 Newspaper Men.                      NEWSPAPERS, _American_ (Vol. 19,
                                       pp. 566–572).

                                     PERIODICALS, _United States_ (Vol.
                                       21, pp. 154–155).

 _New York Tribune._                 HORACE GREELEY (Vol. 12, p. 531),
                                       by Whitelaw Reid.

                                     WHITELAW REID (Vol. 23, p. 52).

 _New York Herald._                  JAMES GORDON BENNETT (Vol. 3, p.
                                       740).

 _Springfield Republican._           SAMUEL BOWLES (Vol. 4, p. 344).

 _New York Times._                   H. J. RAYMOND (Vol. 22, p. 933).

 _New York Sun._                     C. A. DANA (Vol. 7, p. 791).

 _New York Evening Post._            EDWIN LAWRENCE GODKIN (Vol. 12, p.
                                       174).

 _Louisville Courier-Journal._       HENRY WATTERSON (Vol. 28, p. 418).




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII
                           ENGLISH LITERATURE


On English literature, with its vastly longer history and greater
volume, there is much more matter in the Britannica than on American
literature—or of course any other national literature. The key article
is ENGLISH LITERATURE (Vol. 9, p. 607; equivalent to 120 pages of this
Guide), and an excellent outline for the study of this subject may be
based on this article which should be supplemented by the sections on
_Literature_ in the articles SCOTLAND, CANADA, etc. A combination of
these with special articles may be arranged as follows:

[Sidenote: Anglo-Saxon]

On the period before Chaucer—the first part of the article ENGLISH
LITERATURE (Vol. 9, p. 607), by Henry Bradley, joint-editor of _The New
English Dictionary_, etc.; the same author’s BEOWULF (Vol. 3, p. 758),
CÆDMON (Vol. 4, p. 934) and CYNEWULF (Vol. 7, p. 690), ANGLO-SAXON
CHRONICLE (Vol. 2, p. 34), and ALFRED THE GREAT (Vol. 1, p. 582), both
by the Rev. Charles Plummer, author of _Life and Times of Alfred the
Great_, etc.; DAN MICHEL OF NORTHGATE (Vol. 18, p. 371); ANGLO-NORMAN
LITERATURE (Vol. 2, p. 31), by Prof. L. M. Brandin, University of
London; ANCREN RIWLE (Vol. 1, p. 952); ORM (Vol. 20, p. 293), by Henry
Bradley; LAYAMON (Vol. 16, p. 311), by the late Prof. W. W. Skeat of
Cambridge; HAVELOK THE DANE (Vol. 13, p. 80); ROMANCE, ARTHURIAN
ROMANCE, etc.

[Sidenote: Chaucer]

On the period from Chaucer to the Renaissance, see the second part of
the article ENGLISH LITERATURE (Vol. 9, p. 611), by Prof. J. M. Manly,
University of Chicago, author of _The Language of Chaucer’s Legend of
Good Women_; THE PEARL (Vol. 21, p. 27), by Prof. Israel Gollancz,
King’s College, London, editor of the Temple _Shakespeare_, etc.;
LANGLAND (Vol. 16, p. 174); JOHN GOWER (Vol. 12, p. 298), by G. C.
Macaulay, editor of Gower’s works; GEOFFREY CHAUCER (Vol. 6, p. 13), by
A. W. Pollard, chief-editor of the “Globe” _Chaucer_; JOHN LYDGATE,
(Vol. 17, p. 156), by Frederick J. Snell, author of _The Age of
Chaucer_; THOMAS OCCLEVE (Vol. 19, p. 966), by W. S. McCormick, formerly
professor of English, University College, Dundee; STEPHEN HAWES (Vol.
13, p. 93); JOHN SKELTON (Vol. 25, p. 184); JULIANA BERNERS (Vol. 3, p.
801); THOMAS OF ERCELDOUNE (Vol. 26, p. 865); JOHN BARBOUR (Vol. 3, p.
389), by Professor George Gregory Smith, Queen’s University, Belfast;
ANDREW OF WYNTOUN (Vol. 28, p. 873); HARRY THE MINSTREL (Vol. 13, p.
29); JOHN WYCLIFFE (Vol. 28, p. 866), by Reginald Lane Poole, author of
_Wycliffe and Movements for Reform_, and W. Alison Phillips; REGINALD
PECOCK (Vol. 21, p. 33); SIR JOHN FORTESCUE (Vol. 10, p. 678), by P. C.
Yorke; WILLIAM CAXTON (Vol. 5, p. 587).

The English versions of the Bible are dealt with in the chapter of this
Guide on _Bible Study_; but the article BIBLE, ENGLISH (Vol. 3, p. 894),
by Canon Henson of Westminster Abbey and Anna C. Paues, lecturer in
Germanic philology at Newnham College, should be read in connection with
the study of this and earlier periods of English literature.

[Sidenote: Elizabethan Literature]

[Sidenote: Spenser]

On English literature in the Elizabethan age read part 3 of the article
ENGLISH LITERATURE (Vol. 9, p. 616), by Prof. Oliver Elton, University
of Liverpool; also SIR THOMAS MORE (Vol. 18, p. 822), by Mark Pattison,
the essayist and student of the Renaissance; WILLIAM TYNDALE (Vol. 27,
p. 498); ROGER ASCHAM (Vol. 2, p. 720), by A. F. Leach, author of
_English Schools at the Reformation_, etc.; WILLIAM DUNBAR (Vol. 8, p.
668), by Prof. G. Gregory Smith; SIR THOMAS HOBY (Vol. 13, p. 553);
RAPHAEL HOLINSHED (Vol. 13, p. 584); JOHN FOXE (Vol. 10, p. 770); SIR
THOMAS NORTH (Vol. 19, p. 759); SIR THOMAS WYAT (Vol. 28, p. 861); EARL
OF SURREY (Vol. 26, p. 138); GEORGE GASCOIGNE (Vol. 11, p. 493);
NICHOLAS UDAL (Vol. 27, p. 554), by A. F. Leach; EDMUND SPENSER (Vol.
25, p. 639,) by the late Professor William Minto of Aberdeen, and F. J.
Snell, author of _The Age of Chaucer_, etc.; SIR PHILIP SIDNEY (Vol. 25,
p. 43); JOHN LYLY (Vol. 17, p. 159), by Mrs. Humphry Ward; EUPHUISM
(Vol. 9, p. 898); MICHAEL DRAYTON (Vol. 8, p. 557), and SAMUEL DANIEL
(Vol. 7, p. 808), all by Edmund Gosse; WILLIAM WARNER (Vol. 28, p. 327);
EDWARD FAIRFAX (Vol. 10, p. 130); SIR JOHN HARINGTON (Vol. 12, p. 952);
GILES and PHINEAS FLETCHER (Vol. 10, p. 498); THOMAS WATSON (Vol. 28, p.
413), by E. Gosse; THOMAS LODGE (Vol. 16, p. 860), by Prof. A. W. Ward,
Cambridge; THOMAS CAMPION (Vol. 5, p. 137), by P. Vivian, editor of
Campion; NICHOLAS BRETON (Vol. 4, p. 501); ROBERT SOUTHWELL (Vol. 25, p.
517); the metaphysical poets, JOHN DONNE (Vol. 8, p. 417), GEORGE
HERBERT (Vol. 13, p. 339), RICHARD CRASHAW (Vol. 7, p. 379), ABRAHAM
COWLEY (Vol. 7, p. 347), THOMAS TRAHERNE (Vol. 27, p. 155), and HENRY
VAUGHAN (Vol. 27, p. 955); WILLIAM BROWNE (Vol. 4, p. 667); GEORGE
WITHER (Vol. 28, p. 758); WILLIAM DRUMMOND of Hawthornden (Vol. 8, p.
600); ROBERT HERRICK (Vol. 13, p. 389), by E. Gosse; RICHARD LOVELACE
(Vol. 17, p. 71); SIR JOHN SUCKLING (Vol. 26, p. 7); ANDREW MARVELL
(Vol. 17, p. 805); EDMUND WALLER (Vol. 28, p. 282), by E. Gosse; and
JOHN MILTON (Vol. 18, p. 480), in great part by David Masson, late
professor at Edinburgh University.

[Sidenote: The Drama]

[Sidenote: Shakespeare]

Elizabethan drama—particularly Shakespeare—deserves a separate
paragraph, especially as its treatment in the Britannica is so full.
Read in the article ENGLISH LITERATURE, pp. 622–626; in the article
DRAMA, by Prof. A. W. Ward, Cambridge, pp. 520–524 of Volume 8; and the
articles: JOHN LYLY (Vol. 17, p. 159), by Mrs. Humphry Ward; THOMAS KYD
(Vol. 15, p. 958), by E. Gosse; GEORGE PEELE (Vol. 21, p. 44); ROBERT
GREENE (Vol. 12, p. 539), by A. W. Ward; CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE (Vol. 17,
p. 741), by A. C. Swinburne and Thomas Seccombe, author of _The Age of
Johnson_, etc.; and above all SHAKESPEARE (Vol. 24, p. 772; equivalent
to 80 pages of this Guide), containing a biography and sketches of the
different works by E. K. Chambers, editor of the “Red Letter
Shakespeare” and author of _The Medieval Stage_, with a discussion of
the portraits of Shakespeare (20 of which are reproduced), by M. H.
Spielmann, formerly editor of the _Magazine of Art_, and of the
Shakespeare-Bacon controversy by Hugh Chisholm, editor-in chief of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, and an elaborate, classified bibliography by
H. R. Tedder, librarian of the Athenaeum Club, London. In his discussion
of the Baconian theory of the authorship of the plays Mr. Chisholm says:

“No such idea seems to have occurred to anybody till the middle of the
19th century.... The most competent special students of Shakespeare,
however they may differ as to details, and also the most authoritative
special students of Bacon, are unanimous in upholding the traditional
view.” And he adds that as regards the effort to account for the
positive contemporary evidence in favour of the identification of the
man Shakespeare with the author of Shakespeare’s works, “it is highly
significant that it was not attempted or thought of for centuries.” See
also: HAMLET (Vol. 12, p. 894) for earlier treatment of the legend, and
MACBETH (Vol. 17, p. 197) for the historical basis of the play.

For the other dramatists of the time see the articles BEN JONSON (Vol.
15, p. 502), by A. W. Ward; GEORGE CHAPMAN (Vol. 5, p. 852), JOHN
WEBSTER (Vol. 28, p. 462), CYRIL TOURNEUR (Vol. 27, p. 106), and
BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER (Vol. 3, p. 592), all by A. C. Swinburne; THOMAS
DEKKER (Vol. 7, p. 939), by William Minto and R. B. McKerrow; THOMAS
HEYWOOD (Vol. 13, p. 439); THOMAS MIDDLETON (Vol. 18, p. 416); JOHN
MARSTON (Vol. 17, p. 776); PHILIP MASSINGER (Vol. 17, p. 868); JOHN FORD
(Vol. 10, p. 641), by A. W. Ward; JAMES SHIRLEY (Vol. 24, p. 990).

[Sidenote: 16th and 17th Century Prose]

For Elizabethan prose writers not already mentioned, see: the
translators, JOHN BOURCHIER, LORD BARON BERNERS (Vol. 3, p. 800),
PHILEMON HOLLAND (Vol. 13, p. 587) and GIOVANNI FLORIO (Vol. 10, p.
546); and the philosophers and essayists, RICHARD HOOKER (Vol. 13, p.
672), by T. F. Henderson, FRANCIS BACON, (Vol. 3, p. 135; equivalent to
55 pages of this Guide), by Robert Adamson and J. M. Mitchell, THOMAS
HOBBES (Vol. 13, p. 545), by G. Croom Robertson, biographer of Hobbes,
SIR THOMAS BROWNE (Vol. 4, p. 666), IZAAK WALTON (Vol. 28, p. 300),
ROBERT BURTON (Vol. 4, p. 865), JEREMY TAYLOR (Vol. 26, p. 469), THOMAS
FULLER (Vol. 11, p. 296), WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH (Vol. 6, p. 162), JOHN
HALES (Vol. 12, p. 834), RALPH CUDWORTH (Vol. 7, p. 612), by Henry
Sturt, author of _Personal Idealism_, etc.; the historian CLARENDON
(Vol. 6, p. 428), by P. C. Yorke; and the letter-writer JAMES HOWELL
(Vol. 13, p. 838).

[Sidenote: Dryden]

[Sidenote: Pepys]

On the Restoration period—from 1660 to 1700—see Professor Elton’s
chapter (Vol. 9, pp. 628–631) in the article ENGLISH LITERATURE; and the
articles: JOHN DRYDEN (Vol. 8, p. 609), by William Minto and Margaret
Bryant; SAMUEL BUTLER (Vol. 4, p. 885), SIR ISAAC NEWTON (Vol. 19, p.
583), by H. M. Taylor, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge; ISAAC
BARROW (Vol. 3, p. 440), JOHN RAY (Vol. 22, p. 931), by Prof. D.
Wentworth Thompson, University College, Dundee; JOSEPH GLANVILL (Vol.
12, p. 77), THOMAS BURNET (Vol. 4, p. 853), JOHN TILLOTSON (Vol. 26, p.
976), SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE (Vol. 26, p. 602), by G. W. Prothero, editor
_The Quarterly Review_ and joint-editor _Cambridge Modern History_,
MARQUESS HALIFAX (Vol. 12, p. 839), by P. C. Yorke; ROBERT SOUTH (Vol.
25, p. 463), WILLIAM SHERLOCK (Vol. 24, p. 850), RICHARD BAXTER (Vol. 3,
p. 551), JOHN HOWE (Vol. 13, p. 835), GEORGE FOX (Vol. 10, p. 765), JOHN
BUNYAN (Vol. 4, p. 803), by Lord Macaulay; 2ND EARL OF ROCHESTER (Vol.
23, p. 427), SIR WILLIAM DAVENANT (Vol. 7, p. 851), NAHUM TATE (Vol. 26,
p. 449), THOMAS OTWAY (Vol. 20, p. 376), NATHANIEL LEE (Vol. 16, p.
361), Watts-Dunton’s article WILLIAM WYCHERLEY (Vol. 28, p. 863), and
the two great diarists JOHN EVELYN (Vol. 10, p. 5) and SAMUEL PEPYS
(Vol. 21, p. 130), by D. Hannay.

[Sidenote: Addison, Steele and Swift]

[Sidenote: Pope]

[Sidenote: Burns]

[Sidenote: The Novel]

On the 18th century literature see the chapter in the article ENGLISH
LITERATURE (Vol. 9, pp. 631–636), by Thomas Seccombe, author of _The Age
of Johnson_, etc.; and the articles: JOHN LOCKE (Vol. 16, p. 844), by
Prof. Alexander Campbell Fraser, Edinburgh; JOSEPH ADDISON (Vol. 1, p.
184), by William Spalding and Austin Dobson; SIR RICHARD STEELE (Vol.
25, p. 865), by William Minto and Austin Dobson; JONATHAN SWIFT (Vol.
26, p. 224), by Richard Garnett and Thomas Seccombe; JOHN ARBUTHNOT
(Vol. 2, p. 339), BERNARD DE MANDEVILLE (Vol. 17, p. 559), by J. M.
Mitchell; BOLINGBROKE (Vol. 4, p. 161), by P. C. Yorke; ALEXANDER POPE
(Vol. 22, p. 82), by William Minto and Margaret Bryant; MATTHEW PRIOR
(Vol. 22, p. 359), by Austin Dobson; JOHN GAY (Vol. 11, p. 540), THOMAS
PARNELL (Vol. 20, p. 859), MARK AKENSIDE (Vol. 1, p. 454), JAMES THOMSON
(Vol. 26, p. 871) and THOMAS GRAY (Vol. 12, p. 392), both by D. C.
Tovey, editor of Gray’s Letters; WILLIAM COLLINS (Vol. 6, p. 692), by
Edmund Gosse; CHRISTOPHER SMART (Vol. 25, p. 249), WILLIAM COWPER (Vol.
7, p. 349) and GEORGE CRABBE (Vol. 7, p. 358), by Clement K. Shorter,
editor of _The Sphere_, WILLIAM BLAKE (Vol. 4, p. 36), by J. W.
Comyns-Carr, author of _Essays on Art_; WILLIAM SHENSTONE (Vol. 24, p.
839), THOMAS CHATTERTON (Vol. 6, p. 10), THOMAS PERCY (Vol. 21, p. 136),
THOMAS WARTON (Vol. 28, p. 337), ROBERT BURNS (Vol. 4, p. 856), by John
Nichol, the biographer of Burns, Byron and Carlyle; among the prose
writers, forerunners of the novel, DANIEL DEFOE (Vol. 7, p. 927), SAMUEL
RICHARDSON (Vol. 23, p. 300) and HENRY FIELDING (Vol. 10, p. 324), both
by Austin Dobson, TOBIAS SMOLLETT (Vol. 25, p. 278), by Thomas Seccombe,
and LAURENCE STERNE (Vol. 25, p. 901), by William Minto and Austin
Dobson; the other great prose writers of the age, [Sidenote: Johnson]
SAMUEL JOHNSON (Vol. 15, p. 463), by Lord Macaulay and Thomas Seccombe,
[Sidenote: Goldsmith] OLIVER GOLDSMITH (Vol. 12, p. 214), by Lord
Macaulay and Austin Dobson, LORD CHESTERFIELD (Vol. 6, p. 109), by
Austin Dobson, and HORATIO WALPOLE (Vol. 28, p. 288), by W. P. Courtney;
in a lesser group, JAMES BOSWELL (Vol. 4, p. 297), by Thomas Seccombe,
FRANCES D’ARBLAY, “Fanny Burney” (Vol. 7, p. 826), HESTER LYNCH PIOZZI
(Vol. 21, p. 632), GILBERT WHITE (Vol. 28, p. 599); [Sidenote: History]
the historians DAVID HUME (Vol. 13, p. 876), by Robert Adamson and J. M.
Mitchell, WILLIAM ROBERTSON (Vol. 23, p. 406) and EDWARD GIBBON (Vol.
11, p. 927), by Prof. J. B. Bury, editor of _The Decline and Fall_; and
the philosophers, JOSEPH BUTLER (Vol. 4, p. 882), by Robert Adamson and
A. J. Grieve, Yorkshire United Independent College, [Sidenote:
Philosophy] WILLIAM PALEY (Vol. 20, p. 628), BERKELEY (Vol. 3, p. 779),
by Robert Adamson and J. M. Mitchell, THOMAS REID (Vol. 23, p. 51), by
Prof. A. Seth Pringle-Pattison, Edinburgh, DAVID HARTLEY (Vol. 13, p.
35), ABRAHAM TUCKER (Vol. 27, p. 361), THOMAS PAINE (Vol. 20, p. 456),
JOSEPH PRIESTLY (Vol. 22, p. 322), RICHARD PRICE (Vol. 22, p. 314), by
J. M. Mitchell; WILLIAM GODWIN (Vol. 12, p. 177), [Sidenote: Politics]
SIR JAMES MACKINTOSH (Vol. 17, p. 259), EDMUND BURKE (Vol. 4, p. 824),
by John Morley, and “JUNIUS” (Vol. 15, p. 557),—see also SIR PHILIP
FRANCIS (Vol. 10, p. 941).

[Sidenote: Lake Poets]

[Sidenote: Byron]

[Sidenote: Criticism]

[Sidenote: History]

For the 19th century see the last section of the article ENGLISH
LITERATURE (Vol. 9, pp. 636–645), by Thomas Seccombe; and the articles:
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH (Vol. 28, p. 826), by William Minto and Hugh
Chisholm; S. T. COLERIDGE (Vol. 6, p. 678), by J. Mackinnon Robertson,
author of _Modern Humanists_, etc., Hugh Chisholm, and the Very Rev.
George David Boyle; CHARLES LAMB (Vol. 16, p. 104), by E. V. Lucas,
editor of Lamb; WILLIAM HAZLITT (Vol. 13, p. 119), LEIGH HUNT (Vol. 13,
p. 934); DE QUINCEY (Vol. 8, p. 61), by J. Ritchie Findlay, author of
_Personal Recollections of De Quincey_; KEATS (Vol. 15, p. 708), by A.
C. Swinburne and Margaret Bryant; THOMAS LOVELL BEDDOES (Vol. 3, p.
614), THOMAS HOOD (Vol. 13, p. 666), LANDOR (Vol. 16, p. 161), by A. C.
Swinburne; SHELLEY (Vol. 24, p. 827), by W. M. Rossetti; SOUTHEY (Vol.
25, p. 511), CAMPBELL (Vol. 5, p. 130), THOMAS MOORE (Vol. 18, p. 810),
LORD BYRON (Vol. 4, p. 897), by E. Hartley Coleridge, editor of _Byron’s
Poems_; FRANCIS JEFFREY (Vol. 15, p. 307), SYDNEY SMITH (Vol. 25, p.
268), J. G. LOCKHART (Vol. 16, p. 853), WILLIAM GIFFORD (Vol. 12, p. 5),
BENTHAM (Vol. 3, p. 747), by Dr. T. E. Holland, formerly professor of
international law, Oxford, MALTHUS (Vol. 17, p. 515), HENRY HALLAM (Vol.
12, p. 851), by Lord Lochee of Gowrie; WILLIAM ROSCOE (Vol. 23, p. 726),
by W. E. A. Axon, Manchester Libraries; LINGARD (Vol. 16, p. 728), HENRY
HART MILMAN (Vol. 18, p. 476), MACAULAY (Vol. 17, p. 193), by Mark
Pattison; THIRLWALL (Vol. 26, p. 851), WILLIAM MITFORD (Vol. 18, p.
620), GROTE (Vol. 12, p. 619), by J. M. Mitchell, edition of Grote’s
_Greece_, JAMES MILL (Vol. 18, p. 453), SIR WILLIAM NAPIER (Vol. 19, p.
175), WILLIAM COBBETT (Vol. 6, p. 606), SIR WALTER SCOTT (Vol. 24, p.
469), by William Minto; [Sidenote: Fiction] LEVER (Vol. 16, pp.
508–510), MARRYAT (Vol. 17, p. 759), BULWER LYTTON (Vol. 17, p. 185), by
Arthur Waugh; BEACONSFIELD (Vol. 3, p. 563), by Frederick Greenwood;
JANE AUSTEN (Vol. 2, p. 936), by E. V. Lucas; MARIA EDGEWORTH (Vol. 8,
p. 934), HARRIET MARTINEAU (Vol. 17, p. 796), MARY RUSSELL MITFORD (Vol.
18, p. 619), ELIZABETH CLEGHORN GASKELL (Vol. 11, p. 501) and the
BRONTËS (Vol. 4, p. 637), by C. K. Shorter; THOMAS LOVE PEACOCK (Vol.
21, p. 21), by Richard Garnett; GEORGE MEREDITH (Vol. 18, p. 160), by
Hugh Chisholm; [Sidenote: Tennyson, Browning and Carlyle] TENNYSON (Vol.
26, p. 630), by E. Gosse; ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING (Vol. 4, p. 668),
by Alice Meynell; ROBERT BROWNING (Vol. 4, p. 670) and CARLYLE (Vol. 5,
p. 349), both by Sir Leslie Stephen; CHARLES READ (Vol. 22, p. 938),
DICKENS (Vol. 8, p. 178), by Thomas Seccombe; [Sidenote: Victorian
Novelists] THACKERAY (Vol. 26, p. 716), by W. H. Pollock; GEORGE ELIOT
(Vol. 9, p. 275), by Mrs. Craigie (“John Oliver Hobbes”); ANTHONY
TROLLOPE (Vol. 27, p. 301), WILKIE COLLINS (Vol. 6, p. 693), CHARLES and
HENRY KINGSLEY (Vol. 15, p. 817); HERBERT SPENCER (Vol. 25, p. 634), by
F. C. S. Schiller, author of _Studies in Humanism_, etc.; [Sidenote:
Natural Science] JOHN STUART MILL (Vol. 18, p. 454), by William Minto
and J. M. Mitchell; CHARLES DARWIN (Vol. 7, p. 840), by Prof. E. B.
Poulton, Oxford; HUXLEY (Vol. 14, p. 17), by Sir W. T. Thiselton-Dyer;
J. R. GREEN (Vol. 12, p. 534), [Sidenote: History] WILLIAM STUBBS (Vol.
25, p. 1048), E. A. FREEMAN (Vol. 11, p. 79) and J. A. FROUDE (Vol. 11,
p. 252), all by William Hunt, formerly president Royal Historical
Society; LECKY (Vol. 16, p. 354), BUCKLE (Vol. 4, p. 732), MAINE (Vol.
17, p. 432), by Sir Frederick Pollock; GEORGE BORROW (Vol. 4, p. 275),
by Theodore Watts-Dunton; [Sidenote: Arnold] EDWARD FITZGERALD (Vol. 10,
p. 443), by E. Gosse; MATTHEW ARNOLD (Vol. 2, p. 635), by Theodore
Watts-Dunton and Sir Joshua Girling Fitch; [Sidenote: Ruskin] JOHN
RUSKIN (Vol. 23, p. 858), by Frederic Harrison; DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI
(Vol. 23, p. 747), by Theodore Watts-Dunton and F. G. Stephens, formerly
art-critic of the _Athenaeum_; SWINBURNE (Vol. 26, p. 234), by E. Gosse;
WILLIAM MORRIS (Vol. 18, p. 871), JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS (Vol. 26, p.
286) and WALTER PATER (Vol. 20, p. 910) all by Arthur Waugh; [Sidenote:
Oxford Movement] NEWMAN (Vol. 19, p. 517), by Arthur Wollaston Hutton,
biographer of Manning; JOHN KEBLE (Vol. 15, p. 710), EDWARD BOUVERIE
PUSEY (Vol. 22, p. 667), RICHARD JEFFERIES (Vol. 15, p. 300), by Sir
Walter Besant, biographer of Jeffries; THOMAS HARDY (Vol. 12, p. 946),
by Arthur Symons; ROBERT STEVENSON (Vol. 25, p. 907), by E. Gosse; and
among later names—the historians LORD ACTON (Vol. 1, p. 159), by Hugh
Chisholm, [Sidenote: History] MANDELL CREIGHTON (Vol. 7, p. 401), MORLEY
(Vol. 18, p. 841), BRYCE (Vol. 4, p. 699) and BURY (Vol. 4, p. 867); the
novelists WILLIAM BLACK (Vol. 4, p. 19), BLACKMORE (Vol. 4, p. 24), M.
E. BRADDON (Vol. 4, p. 369), MRS. HUMPHRY WARD (Vol. 28, p. 320), MARIE
CORELLI (Vol. 7, p. 143), HALL CAINE (Vol. 4, p. 949), GEORGE GISSING
(Vol. 12, p. 52), GEORGE MOORE (Vol. 18, p. 808), H. G. WELLS (Vol. 28,
p. 514), WILLIAM DE MORGAN (Vol. 8, p. 10), [Sidenote: Fiction] RUDYARD
KIPLING (Vol. 15, p. 825), by W. Price James, author of _Romantic
Professions_, etc.; the critics and essayists WALTER BAGEHOT (Vol. 3, p.
198), by Richard Garnett, STOPFORD A. BROOK (Vol. 4, p. 645), MARK
PATTISON (Vol. 20, p. 937), [Sidenote: Essays and Criticism] LESLIE
STEPHEN (Vol. 25, p. 885), by Thomas Seccombe, H. D. TRAILL (Vol. 27, p.
155), GEORGE SAINTSBURY (Vol. 24, p. 45), SIDNEY COLVIN (Vol. 6, p.
748), WATTS-DUNTON (Vol. 28, p. 422), R. C. JEBB (Vol. 15, p. 299), F.
W. H. MYERS (Vol. 19, p. 111), EDWARD DOWDEN (Vol. 8, p. 456), WILLIAM
ARCHER (Vol. 2, p. 362), RICHARD GARNETT (Vol. 11, p. 471), EDMUND GOSSE
(Vol. 12, p. 268), ANDREW LANG (Vol. 16, p. 171), G. K. CHESTERTON (Vol.
6, p. 111), ARTHUR SYMONS (Vol. 26, p. 287),—a list in which it is
interesting to note how many are contributors to the Encyclopaedia
Britannica; of poets, [Sidenote: Recent Poetry] ROBERT BRIDGES (Vol. 4,
p. 532), so recently named poet-laureate, his predecessor ALFRED AUSTIN
(Vol. 2, p. 938), WILLIAM WATSON (Vol. 28, p. 414), by W. Price James,
W. B. YEATS (Vol. 28, p. 909), WILLIAM SHARP, “Fiona Macleod” (Vol. 24,
p. 811), FRANCIS THOMPSON (Vol. 26, p. 869), JOHN DAVIDSON (Vol. 7, p.
863), SIR W. S. GILBERT (Vol. 12, p. 9), by Thomas Seccombe; OWEN SEAMAN
(Vol. 24, p. 543), LAURENCE BINYON (Vol. 3, p. 952), H. J. NEWBOLT (Vol.
19, p. 463), STEPHEN PHILLIPS (Vol. 21, p. 407), ALICE MEYNELL (Vol. 18,
p. 350); and of the younger dramatists, [Sidenote: Modern Drama] OSCAR
WILDE (Vol. 28, p. 632), by Hugh Chisholm, SIR A. W. PINERO (Vol. 21, p.
625), A. H. JONES (Vol. 15, p. 498), J. M. BARRIE (Vol. 3, p. 435), by
W. Price James; G. BERNARD SHAW (Vol. 24, p. 812),—and see also under
DRAMA (Vol. 8, especially pp. 534–538).




                             CHAPTER XXXIX
                           GERMAN LITERATURE


The article in the Britannica on German Literature (Vol. 11, p. 783;
equivalent to 55 pages of this Guide) is by Professor John George
Robertson, University of London, author of _History of German
Literature_. This article is divided into six sections, and following
this scheme the course of reading below is divided into six parts, in
connection with each of which the reader should first peruse the
correspondingly numbered section in the article GERMAN LITERATURE.

[Sidenote: Old High German]

I. _The Old High German Period, 750–1050_:—the articles ULFILAS (Vol.
27, p. 565), by Charles Anderson Scott, author of _Ulfilas, Apostle of
the Goths_; HELIAND (Vol. 13, p. 221), by Henry Bradley, author of _The
Story of the Goths_; EINHARD (Vol. 9, p. 134), by A. W. Holland; NOTKER
(Vol. 19, p. 824) and HROSVITHA (Vol. 13, p. 842), by A. W. Ward—and see
Prof. Ward on the medieval drama in the article DRAMA (Vol. 8,
especially p. 497).

[Sidenote: Middle Period]

II. _The Middle High German Period, 1050–1350_:—the articles ROMANCE
(Vol. 23, p. 500), by George Saintsbury; WALTHARIUS (Vol. 28, p. 298),
NIBELUNGENLIED (Vol. 19, pp. 637–640), GUDRUN (Vol. 12, p. 668),
DIETRICH OF BERN (Vol. 8, p. 221), ORTNIT (Vol. 20, p. 341),
WOLFDIETRICH (Vol. 28, p. 772), HELDENBUCH (Vol. 13, p. 218), LAY OF
HILDEBRAND (Vol. 13, p. 460), by J. G. Robertson; RUODLIEB (Vol. 23, p.
854), ARTHURIAN LEGEND (Vol. 2, p. 684), PERCEVAL (Vol. 21, p. 132), and
TRISTAN (Vol. 27, pp. 292–294), by J. L. Weston, author of _Legends of
the Wagner Drama_; HARTMANN VON AUE (Vol. 13, p. 37), GOTTFRIED VON
STRASSBURG (Vol. 12, p. 277), WOLFRAM VON ESCHENBACH (Vol. 28, p. 775),
by J. L. Weston; WALTHER VON DER VOGELWEIDE (Vol. 28, p. 299),
MINNESINGERS (Vol. 18, p. 547), FREIDANK (Vol. 11, p. 94), CONRAD OF
WÜRZBURG (Vol. 6, p. 968).

[Sidenote: 14th and 15th Centuries]

III. _The Transition Period, 1350–1600_:—the articles FRAUENLOB (Vol.
11, p. 42), REYNARD THE FOX (Vol. 23, p. 226), SEBASTIAN BRANT (Vol. 4,
p. 431), MAXIMILIAN I. (Vol. 17, p. 922), by A. W. Holland;
MEISTERSINGER (Vol. 18, p. 86) and EULENSPIEGEL (Vol. 9, p. 887), by J.
G. Robertson; HANS SACHS (Vol. 23, p. 972), TAULER (Vol. 26, p. 452),
GEILER VON KAISERBERG (Vol. 11, p. 553), ERASMUS (Vol. 9, p. 727), by
Mark Pattison and P. S. Allen, editor of the Oxford Erasmus; REUCHLIN
(Vol. 23, p. 204), by W. Robertson Smith; ULRICH VON HUTTEN (Vol. 14, p.
14), by the Very Rev. G. W. Kitchin, Dean of Durham; MARTIN LUTHER (Vol.
17, p. 133), by Dr. T. M. Lindsay, author of _A History of the
Reformation_; ERASMUS ALBERUS (Vol. 1, p. 504), THOMAS MURNER (Vol. 19,
p. 37), JOHANN FISCHART (Vol. 10, p. 425), PHILIPP NIKODEMUS FRISCHLIN
(Vol. 11, p. 232), JÖRG WICKRAM (Vol. 28, p. 619), AYRER (Vol. 3, p.
74), FAUST (Vol. 10, p. 210).

[Sidenote: Renaissance]

IV. _The Renaissance, 1600–1740_:—the articles PAUL GERHARDT (Vol. 11,
p. 768), JAKOB BOEHME (Vol. 4, p. 113), GEORG RUDOLF WECKHERLIN (Vol.
28, p. 464), MARTIN OPITZ (Vol. 20, p. 129), GEORG PHILIPP HARSDÖRFFER
(Vol. 13, p. 29), SIMON DACH (Vol. 7, p. 726), PAUL FLEMING (Vol. 10, p.
494), von LOGAU (Vol. 16, p. 877), ABRAHAM A SANCTA CLARA (Vol. 1, p.
72), JOHANN VON RIST (Vol. 23, p. 366), ANDREAS GRYPHIUS (Vol. 12, p.
642), MOSCHEROSCH (Vol. 18, p. 890), GRIMMELSHAUSEN (Vol. 12, p. 603),
PUFENDORF (Vol. 22, p. 634), THOMASIUS (Vol. 26, p. 868), CHRISTIAN
WOLFF (Vol. 28, p. 774), by Andrew Seth Pringle-Pattison; LEIBNITZ (Vol.
16, p. 385), by Prof. W. R. Sorley, Cambridge; SPENER (Vol. 25, p. 638),
von CANITZ (Vol. 5, p. 183), JOHANN CHRISTIAN GÜNTHER (Vol. 12, p. 730),
B. H. BROCKES (Vol. 4, p. 624), and, the dictator of the pseudo-classic
age, GOTTSCHED (Vol. 12, p. 279).

[Sidenote: Classical Period]

V. _The Classical Period of Modern German Literature, 1740–1832_:—the
articles J. J. BODMER (Vol. 4, p. 111), GELLERT (Vol. 11, p. 558),
RABENER (Vol. 22, p. 773), J. ELIAS SCHLEGEL (Vol. 24, p. 329),
KLOPSTOCK (Vol. 15, p. 848), LAVATER (Vol. 16, p. 291), GERSTENBERG
(Vol. 11, p. 907), GLEIM (Vol. 12, p. 118), GÖTZ (Vol. 12, p. 289), _Uz_
(Vol. 27, p. 828), RAMLER (Vol. 22, p. 876), HAGEDORN (Vol. 12, p. 813),
ALBRECHT VON HALLER (Vol. 12, p. 855), E. C. VON KLEIST (Vol. 15, p.
846), LESSING (Vol. 16, pp. 496–499), by James Sime, author of _A
History of Germany_, and J. G. Robertson, and Lessing’s
associates—WINCKELMANN (Vol. 28, p. 707), by James Sime and J. M.
Mitchell, MOSES MENDELSSOHN (Vol. 18, p. 120), by Israel Abrahams,
author of _A Short History of Jewish Literature_, and C. F. NICOLAI
(Vol. 19, p. 662)—; WIELAND (Vol. 28, p. 621), by J. G. Robertson; M. A.
VON THÜMMEL (Vol. 26, p. 898), A. VON KNIGGE (Vol. 15, p. 850), MUSÄUS
(Vol. 19, p. 43), BASEDOW (Vol. 3, p. 461), PESTALOZZI (Vol. 21, p.
284), HAMANN (Vol. 12, p. 869).

[Sidenote: Sturm und Drang]

On the _Sturm und Drang_ period, the articles HERDER (Vol. 13, p. 347),
the STOLBERGS (Vol. 25, p. 953), J. H. VOSS (Vol. 28, p. 215), HÖLTY
(Vol. 13, p. 620), BÜRGER (Vol. 4, p. 812), M. CLAUDIUS (Vol. 6, p.
466),—all of the Göttingen school; GOETHE (Vol. 12, p. 182), by J. G.
Robertson; his imitators and followers, J. M. R. LENZ (Vol. 16, p. 431),
KLINGER (Vol. 15, p. 846), FRIEDRICH (“Maler”) MÜLLER (Vol. 18, p. 961),
HEINSE (Vol. 13, p. 216), K. P. MORITZ (Vol. 18, p. 838); the great
dramatist of the late _Sturm und Drang_, SCHILLER (Vol. 24, p. 324), by
J. G. Robertson; A. W. IFFLAND (Vol. 14, p. 291), F. JACOBI (Vol. 15, p.
115).

On the classical period proper, the latter part of the article on Goethe
and Schiller, IMMANUEL KANT (Vol. 15, p. 662), and J. G. FICHTE (Vol.
10, p. 313), both by Robert Adamson; the historians SCHLOSSER (Vol. 24,
p. 342), MÖSER (Vol. 18, p. 895), and JOHANNES VON MÜLLER (Vol. 18, p.
962), by W. A. B. Coolidge; the scientists J. G. A. FORSTER (Vol. 10, p.
674), ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT (Vol. 13, p. 873), by Agnes Mary Clerke,
and KARL WILHELM VON HUMBOLDT (Vol. 13, p. 875), by Archibald Henry
Sayce; the dramatist KOTZEBUE (Vol. 15, p. 919); the novelist RICHTER,
“Jean Paul” (Vol. 23, p. 313); and the poet MATTHISSON (Vol. 17, p.
901).

[Sidenote: Romanticism]

On the romantic school: the articles on the founders, AUGUST WILHELM
SCHLEGEL and FRIEDRICH SCHLEGEL (Vol. 24, p. 328 and 329), TIECK (Vol.
26, p. 962), HÖLDERLIN (Vol. 13, p. 583), and NOVALIS (Vol. 19, p. 829);
in the second Romantic school, the more realistic Heidelbergers KLEMENS
BRENTANO (Vol. 4, p. 496), L. A. VON ARNIM (Vol. 2, p. 630), J. J. VON
GÖRRES (Vol. 12, p. 260), and, owing much to the interest in
folk-literature of the Heidelbergers, the brothers GRIMM (Vol. 12, pp.
600–602), by Dr. Henry Sweet of the University of Oxford, CHAMISSO (Vol.
5, p. 825); the patriot poets KÖRNER (Vol. 15, p. 913) and ARNDT (Vol.
2, p. 627); the North Germans KLEIST (Vol. 15, p. 846), ZACHARIAS WERNER
(Vol. 28, p. 523), FOUQUÉ (Vol. 10, p. 749), E. T. W. HOFFMAN (Vol. 13,
p. 561), EICHENDORFF (Vol. 9, p. 131), and RÜCKERT (Vol. 23, p. 813) and
WILHELM MÜLLER (Vol. 18, p. 963), who, like Byron, found romance, one in
the Orient and the other in Greek struggles for liberty; and, of the
Swabian school, UHLAND (Vol. 27, p. 563), KERNER (Vol. 15, p. 757),
HAUFF (Vol. 13, p. 65), and MÖRIKE (Vol. 18, p. 837); and the
philosopher SCHELLING (Vol. 24, p. 316).

[Sidenote: 1832–1870]

VI. _Literature since Goethe, 1832 onwards_:—Read G. W. F. HEGEL (Vol.
13, p. 200, by the late Prof. William Wallace of Oxford and Prof. J. H.
Muirhead, University of Birmingham), Schelling’s successor as a
philosophic force in Germany; the articles on the “Young Germans” HEINE
(Vol. 13, p. 213), by J. Walter Ferrier and J. G. Robertson; BÖRNE (Vol.
4, p. 255), GUTZKOW (Vol. 12, p. 744) and LAUBE (Vol. 16, p. 276); and
the historians and philosophers D. F. STRAUSS (Vol. 25, p. 1002),
GERVINUS (Vol. 11, p. 908), W. MENZEL (Vol. 18, p. 147) and FEUERBACH
(Vol. 10, p. 303); the dramatists—some more closely connected with the
preceding period,—GRABBE (Vol. 12, p. 306) and GRILLPARZER (Vol. 12, p.
596), IMMERMANN (Vol. 14, p. 335) and PLATEN-HALLERMUND (Vol. 21, p.
804), HOLTEI (Vol. 13, p. 619), RAUPACH (Vol. 22, p. 921) and MÜLLNER
(Vol. 18, p. 965), and, in Austria, besides Grillparzer, COLLIN (Vol. 6,
p. 690), MÜNCH-BELLINGHAUSEN, “Friedrich Halm” (Vol. 19, p. 2),
BAUERNFELD (Vol. 3, p. 538) and RAIMUND (Vol. 22, p. 861); the novelists
WILLIBALD ALEXIS (Vol. 1, p. 576), HAUFF (Vol. 13, p. 65) and ZSCHOKKE
(Vol. 28, p. 1046); and such poets of the ’30 and the ’48 as HERWEGH
(Vol. 13, p. 405), FREILIGRATH (Vol. 11, p. 94), DINGELSTEDT (Vol. 8, p.
275), HOFFMANN VON FALLERSLEBEN (Vol. 13, p. 561), and, in Austria, a
little earlier, AUERSPERG, “Anastasius Grün” (Vol. 2, p. 900); and the
possibly greater poets who were less interested in politics, GEIBEL
(Vol. 11, p. 550), LENAU (Vol. 16, p. 417), STRACHWITZ (Vol. 25, p.
976), and DROSTE-HÜLSHOFF (Vol. 8, p. 591).

On the mid-century period:—the articles on SCHOPENHAUER (Vol. 24, p.
372, by Prof. Wallace),—the philosopher of the new age; the natural
scientists VOGT (Vol. 28, p. 172), and BÜCHNER (Vol. 4, p. 719); the
fiction writers SPIELHAGEN (Vol. 25, p. 667), GUSTAV FREYTAG (Vol. 11,
p. 212), EBERS (Vol. 8, p. 841), DAHN (Vol. 7, p. 734), “CHARLES
SEALSFIELD” (Vol. 24, p. 543), GERSTÄCKER (Vol. 11, p. 906), STORM (Vol.
25, p. 968), GOTTFRIED KELLER (Vol. 15, p. 718); and, among those who
portrayed peasant and provincial life, BITZIUS, “Jeremias Gotthelf”
(Vol. 4, p. 15), AUERBACH (Vol. 2, p. 899), STIFTER (Vol. 25, p. 915),
FRITZ REUTER (Vol. 23, p. 210); the dramatists HEBBEL (Vol. 13, p. 165)
and OTTO LUDWIG (Vol. 17, p. 114); in the Munich School, BODENSTEDT
(Vol. 4, p. 109), SCHEFFEL (Vol. 24, p. 315), BAUMBACH (Vol. 3, p. 539),
HAMERLING (Vol. 12, p. 876), HEYSE (Vol. 13, p. 438); and the
Platt-Deutsch poet KLAUS GROTH (Vol. 12, p. 621).

[Sidenote: Since 1870]

On the period since 1870, see the articles LASSALLE (Vol. 16, p. 235, by
Thomas Kirkup, author of _An Inquiry into Socialism_) and MARX (Vol. 17,
p. 807, by Eduard Bernstein, Socialist deputy on the Reichstag) for new
economic views; and LOTZE (Vol. 17, p. 23), by J. T. Merz, author of
_European Thought in the XIXth Century_, and Henry Sturt, author of
_Personal Idealism_, and EDUARD VON HARTMANN (Vol. 13, p. 36) for
philosophical compromises between science and metaphysics and between
pessimism and idealism; the dramatists ANZENGRUBER (Vol. 2, p. 158),
PAUL LINDAU (Vol. 16, p. 717), and, composer and dramatist, RICHARD
WAGNER (Vol. 28, p. 236), by W. S. Rockstro, author of _A Great History
of Music_, and D. F. Tovey, author of _Essays in Musical Analysis_; the
historians SYBEL (Vol. 26, p. 275), TREITSCHKE (Vol. 27, p. 238), RANKE
(Vol. 22, p. 893), MOMMSEN (Vol. 18, p. 683) and BURCKHARDT (Vol. 4, p.
809); and Burckhardt’s friend, the early friend of Wagner and the type
of a new spirit in German letters, NIETZSCHE (Vol. 19, p. 672), by F. C.
S. Schiller, Oxford, author of _Studies in Humanism_.

The most important names of the last few years are SUDERMANN (Vol. 26,
p. 20) and HAUPTMANN (Vol. 13, p. 68). See, besides, the articles on
WILHELM JENSEN (Vol. 15, p. 321), WILHELM RAABE (Vol. 22, p. 765), W.
BUSCH (Vol. 4, p. 869), PETER ROSEGGER (Vol. 23, p. 734), FONTANE (Vol.
10, p. 608), EBNER-ESCHENBACH (Vol. 8, p. 843), FRANZOS (Vol. 11, p.
38), K. F. MEYER (Vol. 18, p. 349), RICHARD VOSS (Vol. 28, p. 215),
ERNST VON WILDENBRUCH (Vol. 28, p. 633), and for modern German drama, in
the article DRAMA (Vol. 8, especially pp. 535–536).




                               CHAPTER XL
                            GREEK LITERATURE


In the article LITERATURE in the Britannica, by Professor James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, himself a specialist in Spanish literature, are these
sentences:

  The evolution of literature is completed in Greece, and there its
  subdivisions may best be studied. Epic poetry is represented by the
  Homeric cycle, lyric poetry by Tyrtaeus, dramatic poetry by Aeschylus,
  history by Herodotus, oratory by Pericles, philosophy by Plato, and
  criticism by Zoilus, the earliest of slashing reviewers; and in each
  department there is a long succession of illustrative names. Roughly
  speaking, all subsequent literature is imitative.

[Sidenote: The Main Article]

This testimony to the importance of Greek literature is all the more
weighty as coming from one whose own field of criticism is in Romantic
literature. The authority with which such an important subject as Greek
literature is treated in the Britannica will be apparent to any
classical student who notes the names of the contributors of the
articles mentioned in the following course of reading. The key article
GREEK LITERATURE (Vol. 12, p. 507; equivalent to 65 pages of this Guide)
is divided into three sections: Ancient (p. 507), Byzantine (p. 516) and
Modern (p. 524). The second section, by Prof. Karl Krumbacher of Munich,
author of _Geschichte der byzantinischen Literatur_, and the third, by
J. D. Bourchier, correspondent of _The Times_ (London) in South-Eastern
Europe, need not be dwelt upon here. To the ordinary student, in spite
of the increasing interest shown in Byzantine and modern Hellenic
literature, “Greek literature” must mean the literature of ancient
Greece, and for him the _first_ part of the article will be the
foundation of his study of the subject. This section of the article is
by the late Sir Richard C. Jebb, professor of Greek at Glasgow and then
at Cambridge, known as the biographer of Bentley, as the author of an
excellent brief history of Greek literature, and as an authority on
subdivisions of that subject so diverse as rhetoric and oratory on the
one side and lyric and dramatic poetry on the other.

Jebb’s article divides ancient Greek literature into three periods:
_Early_, including epic, elegiac, iambic and lyric poetry and coming
down to 475 B.C.; _Attic_, 475–300 B.C., including tragic and comic
drama and historical, oratorical and philosophical prose; and
_Decadence_—Alexandrian, 300–146 B.C., and Greco-Roman, 146 B.C.–529
A.D.

[Sidenote: Epic]

In the first of these periods the student should supplement Professor
Jebb’s treatment in the article GREEK LITERATURE by the following
articles: EPIC POETRY (Vol. 9, p. 681), a general sketch of the form by
Edmund Gosse; HOMER (Vol. 13, p. 626; equivalent to 40 pages of this
Guide), by the late Prof. David Binning Monro of Oriel College, Oxford,
editor of Homer and author of _Grammar of the Homeric Dialect_,—and on
the “Homeric question” see also the articles ARISTARCHUS and F. A. WOLF;
HESIOD (Vol. 13, p. 407), by James Davies, formerly head master Ludlow
Grammar School, and John Henry Freese, formerly fellow St. John’s,
Cambridge; CYCLE (Vol. 7, p. 682; last part of the article); and the
cyclic poets, STASINUS, ARCTINUS, LESCHES, and CREOPHYLUS.

[Sidenote: Elegy]

For the elegy see Edmund Gosse’s article ELEGY; and on the Greek
elegists, the articles CALLINUS and TYRTÆUS for martial poetry,
MIMNERMUS for melancholy verse, SOLON for political and ethical poetry,
THEOGNIS and PHOCYLIDES for the gnomic elegy, and XENOPHANES for the use
of the measure in didactic philosophical verse. On iambic verse and its
Greek writers before the time of the drama see: IAMBIC, ARCHILOCHUS,
SIMONIDES OF AMORGOS, and HIPPONAX.

[Sidenote: Lyric Poetry]

The third poetic form of the period, one which unfortunately has come
down to us only in tantalizingly brief fragments—comparable to the
quotations illustrating word-usage in our dictionaries—is the lyric. On
this see the general article LYRICAL POETRY, by Edmund Gosse, on this
form in different literatures, and the sketches of the Greek lyrists the
Aeolians ALCAEUS (see also the article ALCAICS) and SAPPHO, by Prof.
John Arthur Platt, University College, London; PRAXILLA and ERINNA,
Sappho’s rivals as lyric poetesses; the Ionian ANACREON (see also the
article ANACREONTICS, by Edmund Gosse); the Dorian ALCMAN; STESICHORUS,
ARION and IBYCUS; SIMONIDES, who may be called Panhellenic; PINDAR (Vol.
21, p. 617; equivalent to 10 pages of this Guide, by Sir R. C. Jebb),
the only Greek lyrist whose work has come down to us in any considerable
quantity, and whose poems are such remarkable examples of metrical
structure; BACCHYLIDES (Vol. 3, p. 121; equivalent to 9 pages of this
Guide; also by Sir R. C. Jebb, who was one of the first editors),
Pindar’s rival, whose poems until a few years ago were known to us only
by brief quotations by grammarians, but who had the good luck to survive
in papyrus lately found in Egypt; and TIMOTHEUS of Miletus, of whose
“Persians” a valuable fragment was found in 1903 in what seems to be the
oldest papyrus in existence.

[Sidenote: Attic Literature]

[Sidenote: Comedy]

The Attic period has two important developments—the drama, tragic and
comic, and the beginnings of a Greek prose. For the drama read the part
of Prof. A. W. Ward’s article DRAMA dealing with the Greek period (Vol.
8, pp. 488–493), and the article COMEDY; and the articles on the great
dramatists:—the tragedians THESPIS, CHOERILUS, PHRYNICHUS and PRATINAS
in the earlier period; AESCHYLUS (Vol. 1, p. 272; equivalent to 12 pages
of this Guide), by Arthur Sidgwick, fellow of Corpus Christi, Oxford,
and editor of the Oxford text of Aeschylus; SOPHOCLES (Vol. 25, p. 424;
equivalent to 12 pages of this Guide), by Lewis Campbell, editor and
translator of this poet; and EURIPIDES (Vol. 9, p. 901; equivalent to 15
pages of this Guide), in the main by Sir R. C. Jebb; and the comic
poets,—the Sicilian EPICHARMUS; the representatives of the Attic Old
Comedy, CRATINUS, CRATES, PHERECRATES, EUPOLIS, PHRYNICHUS (not to be
confused with the tragic poet of that name), MAGNES, PLATO (to be
distinguished from the philosopher),—all these known to us only by
allusions and chance quotations—and ARISTOPHANES (Vol. 2, p. 499;
equivalent to 7 pages of this Guide, by Sir R. C. Jebb), the only Greek
poet of whom we have complete plays and probably the greatest of the
writers of Greek comedy; the names—they are little more—of EUBULUS,
ANTIPHANES, ALEXIS in the Middle Comedy; and in the New Comedy or third
period, PHILEMON, MENANDER (by J. H. Freese), who was so highly esteemed
and so constantly pilfered from by the Roman comic writers, and of whose
plays large fragments have been found in the last few years; DIPHILUS,
APOLLODORUS of Carystus, POSIDIPPUS, RHINTHON and SOTADES.

[Sidenote: History]

The prose of the Attic period we may divide roughly into history,
oratory and philosophy. On the historians read LOGOGRAPHI, GREECE,
_Ancient History_, “Authorities” (Vol. 12, p. 454), with criticism of
the historical accuracy of Herodotus, Thucydides, Diodorus, Plutarch,
Xenophon, etc., HECATAEUS of Miletus, HERODOTUS (Vol. 13, p. 381;
equivalent to 10 pages of this Guide), by the historian George Rawlinson
and E. M. Walker, librarian of Queen’s College, Oxford; THUCYDIDES (Vol.
26, p. 893; equivalent to 10 pages of the Guide), by Sir R. C. Jebb, and
Malcolm Mitchell, editor of Grote’s _Greece_; XENOPHON (Vol. 28, p. 885;
equivalent to 7 pages in this Guide), by E. M. Walker and J. H. Freese;
CTESIAS, PHILISTUS, THEOPOMPUS, and TIMAEUS.

[Sidenote: Oratory]

On Attic orators read ANDOCIDES, LYSIAS, ISOCRATES, ISAEUS, ANTIPHON,
DEMOSTHENES, AESCHINES, HYPEREIDES,—most of these articles being by Sir
R. C. Jebb, who was particularly versed in this branch of Greek
literature. The special student of the orators should read also the
articles GREEK LAW (Vol. 12, p. 501; equivalent to 15 pages in this
Guide), by Prof. J. E. Sandys of Cambridge, author of _A History of
Classical Scholarship_, etc.; SOPHISTS (Vol. 25, p. 418, equivalent to
20 pages of this Guide), by Prof. Henry Jackson of Cambridge, a
well-known writer on Greek philosophy, and RHETORIC (Vol. 23, p. 233),
by Sir R. C. Jebb.

On Greek philosophical writing see the articles PHERECYDES of Syros,
ANAXIMENES of Miletus, ANAXIMANDER, and the names great not only in
Greek thought and literature but in the world’s—PLATO (Vol. 21, p. 808;
equivalent to about 50 pages of this Guide), by Lewis Campbell, editor
and critic of many of the Platonic dialogues, and ARISTOTLE (Vol. 2, p.
501; equivalent to 70 pages of this Guide), by Prof. Thomas Case,
Oxford, author of _Physical Realism_, etc. For a fuller guide to Greek
philosophy see the chapter in this Guide on _Philosophy_.

[Sidenote: Decadence]

The third period of classical Greek literature was one of Greek thought
in unGreek surroundings—see the article HELLENISM, by E. R. Bevan,
author of _The House of Seleucus_, etc.,—and this came to its first and
finest flower in Alexandria, in Egypt, under the Ptolemies—see the
article ALEXANDRIAN SCHOOL, especially that part of it dealing with
_Literature_ (Vol. 1, p. 573). On the writers of the Alexandrian period
see: for poetry, PHILETAS, HERMESIANAX, ASCLEPIADES of Samos, and the
comic poets SOTADES and RHINTHON, already mentioned; HERODAS, by W. G.
Headlam, editor of Herodas; the idyllist THEOCRITUS (Vol. 26, p. 760),
by A. C. Clark, fellow of Queen’s, Oxford; Theocritus’s followers BION
and MOSCHUS; the mythologist CALLIMACHUS, who influenced Catullus as
much as Theocritus did the young Virgil; the didactic poet ARATUS, whom
Cicero translated into Latin and whom Virgil imitated in his _Georgics_;
the epic APOLLONIUS of Rhodes, and the late tragedian LYCOPHRON; and for
prose the critic ARISTARCHUS.

In the Greco-Roman period, following the Alexandrian the principal
articles for the student are: the historians POLYBIUS and DIODORUS
SICULUS, the satirist LUCIAN, the later historians DIONYSIUS
HALICARNASSENSIS, DIO CASSIUS, ARRIAN, APPIAN, HERODIAN, EUSEBIUS,
ZOSIMUS, the biographers PLUTARCH, DIOGENES LAERTIUS, PHILOSTRATUS, the
rhetoricians LONGINUS and DIO CHRYSOSTOM, and the emperor philosopher
MARCUS AURELIUS and his forerunner the “slave philosopher” EPICTETUS.

Possibly the most typical output of the later Greek age is the matchless
collection of short poems known to us as “the Greek Anthology”; on this
see the articles EPIGRAM and ANTHOLOGY.




                              CHAPTER XLI
                              BIBLE STUDY


It is impossible for the student to consider the subject of Bible Study
without being impressed by the immense labour and the profound
scholarship which have been devoted to the interpretation and discussion
of Scripture. Continued investigation has solved many difficulties, but
has also vastly increased the mass of evidences and conjectures which
must be weighed in connection with any doubtful passages. The Britannica
tells us, for example, (Vol. 3, pp. 903, 904) that the translators of
the King James’s version spent only two years and nine months over their
task, while the work on the Revised Version took eleven years for the
New Testament and fourteen for the Old Testament.

[Sidenote: The Bible as a Focus of Thought]

It is equally true that all the time which learned men have given to
translating and elucidating the text seems nothing when it is compared
with the time that mankind at large have spent in reading it. But the
Britannica mentions a report of the great English Bible Society, the
“British and Foreign,” in which the copies circulated by it are totalled
at more than 198 million, and, for the American Bible Society and its
federated associations, it gives a total of more than 84 million copies
(Vol. 3, p. 907). It has often been said that the English Bible is the
only example of a translation that became more famous than the original,
and it is as true that no other translation has been the source of so
many secondary translations, for versions in no less than 530 distinct
languages and dialects have been derived from the English text. It is
interesting to note, although in this case the English version has
certainly nothing to do with the matter, that “in Italy, by a departure
from the traditional policy of the Roman Church, the newly formed,
‘Pious Society of St. Jerome for the Dissemination of the Holy Gospels’
issued in 1901, from the Vatican press, a new Italian version of the
Four Gospels and _Acts_,” and sold 400,000 copies at 4 cents each.

As a sort of threshold-study, it will be well to consider three topics:
Hebrew Literature, Hebrew Religion and Biblical History.

[Sidenote: Preliminaries]

HEBREW LITERATURE (Vol. 13, p. 169), by Dr. Arthur Cowley, of the
Bodleian Library, Oxford, points out that the term “Hebrew Literature”
is loosely used of “all works written in Hebrew characters, whether the
language be Aramaic, Arabic, or even some vernacular not related to
Hebrew;” and that “this literature begins with, as it is almost entirely
based upon, the Old Testament.” This article on Hebrew Literature may be
supplemented by the following articles:

TARGUM, by John Frederick Stenning, lecturer in Aramaic at Oxford.

 HALAKHA                            │by Israel Abrahams, reader in
                                    │  Talmudic and Rabbinic Literature,
                                    │  Cambridge.
 QARAITES                           │                 „
 ───────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────
 TALMUD                             │by Stanley Arthur Cook, lecturer in
                                    │  Hebrew and Syriac, Cambridge.
 MIDRASH                            │                 „

SEADIAH, by Dr. Arthur Cowley.

MAIMONIDES, by Herbert Loewe, curator of Oriental Literature, Cambridge.

[Sidenote: Hebrew Religion]

Quite as important is the article HEBREW RELIGION (Vol. 13, p. 176), by
the Rev. Dr. Owen Charles Whitehouse of Christ’s and Cheshunt Colleges,
Cambridge. His treatment of the subject is comparative and historical.
There is an interesting summary of what is known and may be inferred
about pre-Mosaic religion; and it is important to notice that the author
does not consider that the plural Elohim used in certain Old Testament
passages to mean “God” is to be understood as “a comprehensive
expression for the multitude of gods embraced in the One God of Old
Testament religion,” but explains the plural as one “of majesty” like
the “we” of royalty. Blood-offerings and magic charms against demons and
jinns may be assumed as belonging to the early Hebrew religion as to the
later Arabian period before Mahomet. Dr. Whitehouse thinks that there is
little or no trace of totemism but possibly some of ancestor-worship in
the Jews’ religion.

Among the many articles supplementing this general treatment of Hebrew
religion the following are possibly the most important:

CIRCUMCISION, by Israel Abrahams.

TERAPHIM, by W. Robertson Smith and G. H. Box, formerly lecturer in
theology, Oxford.

BAAL, by W. Robertson Smith and Stanley Arthur Cook, editor for
Palestine Exploration Fund.

CALF, THE GOLDEN, by S. A. Cook.

HIGH PLACES.

FEASTS AND FESTIVALS.

PASSOVER, by Dr. Joseph Jacobs of the Jewish Theological Seminary of New
York City.

PENTECOST, by Dr. O. C. Whitehouse.

ARK, by Stanley Arthur Cook.

TABERNACLE and TEMPLE, by Dr. Archibald R. S. Kennedy, professor of
Hebrew and Semitic languages, Edinburgh.

EPHOD, by S. A. Cook.

URIM AND THUMMIM, by G. H. Box.

PROPHET, by W. Robertson Smith, Owen Charles Whitehouse, Adolf Harnack
of Berlin, and Professor A. C. McGiffert of Union Theological Seminary,
New York.

JEHOVAH, by George Foot Moore, professor of history of religion,
Harvard.

MESSIAH, by W. Robertson Smith and O. C. Whitehouse.

ESCHATOLOGY, by Dr. A. E. Garvie, principal of New College, Hampstead.

ANGEL, by William Henry Bennett, professor of Old Testament Exegesis in
New and Hackney Colleges, London.

[Sidenote: Biblical History]

The third topic is history and for this the student should read the
article JEWS (Vol. 15, p. 371), especially the part on _Old Testament
History_, by S. A. Cook; the article PALESTINE, _Physical Features_, by
R. A. S. Macalister, director of excavations for the Palestine
Exploration Fund, _Old Testament History_, by S. A. Cook, especially the
treatment of Biblical Religion (pp. 610–611 of Vol. 20); CANAAN, by Dr.
Thomas Kelly Cheyne, formerly Oriel professor of interpretation of
Scripture, Oxford; HITTITES, by D. G. Hogarth, keeper of the Ashmolean
Museum, Oxford.

[Sidenote: The Article Bible]

But of course the central article for the Bible student is the article
BIBLE (Vol. 3, p. 849), which is divided into two main parts—_Old
Testament_ and _New Testament_, each of these being divided in turn into
five parts: Canon, Texts and Versions, Textual Criticism, Higher
Criticism, and Chronology. This logical arrangement greatly enhances the
value of the article, which is in itself an excellent summary of the
subject written by the following authorities: Dr. Samuel Rolles Driver,
professor of Hebrew, Oxford, on Old Testament canon and chronology; John
Frederick Stenning, dean of Wadham College, Oxford, and lecturer in
Aramaic, on Old Testament texts and versions; Dr. George Buchanan Gray,
professor of Hebrew and Old Testament exegesis, Mansfield College,
Oxford, on Old Testament textual and higher criticism; Dr. William
Sanday, professor of Divinity and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, on New
Testament canon; the Rev. Kirsopp Lake, author of _The Text of the New
Testament_, etc., and professor of New Testament exegesis at Leiden, on
New Testament texts and versions and textual criticism; Dr. Francis
Crawford Burkitt, professor of divinity, Cambridge, and author of _The
Gospel History and its Transmission_, etc., on New Testament higher
criticism; and Cuthbert Hamilton Turner, of Magdalen College, Oxford, on
New Testament chronology.

The article BIBLE, ENGLISH (Vol. 3, p. 894), by Anna C. Paues, author of
_A Fourteenth Century Biblical Version_, and Canon Henson of Westminster
Abbey (on the Revised Version) is accompanied by a plate with
fac-similes of several early English Bibles and is besides of special
value as giving quotations from different versions in Anglo-Saxon and
later English. The article BIBLE SOCIETIES (Vol. 3, p. 905), by the Rev.
Thomas Herbert Darlow, literary superintendent of the British and
Foreign Bible Society, will also be of value to the student.

[Sidenote: Inspiration]

One other general article should be studied before the articles on
different books of the Bible are taken up. This is—INSPIRATION (Vol. 14,
p. 645), by Dr. Alfred Ernest Garvie, author of _Studies in the Inner
Life of Jesus_; it outlines the principal theories of inspiration—

(1) Mechanical dictation or verbal inspiration;

(2) Dynamic influence or degrees of inspiration;

(3) Essential inspiration, distinguishing matters of doctrine and
conduct from the remaining contents of Scripture;

(4) Vital inspiration, emphasizing religious and moral life.

[Sidenote: The Hexateuch]

A course of study in the books of the Bible may well start with the
outline in the article BIBLE, especially pages 851–854 for the Old
Testament. For the Hexateuch the student should read first the brief
article HEXATEUCH; then what there is under BIBLE on pp. 851–852 of Vol.
3; then under JEWS for the early period; and then the articles:

GENESIS, by S. A. Cook; and the subsidiary articles: COSMOGONY, EDEN,
PARADISE, ADAM, EVE, ABEL, CAIN, ENOCH, LAMECH, NOAH, DELUGE, ARARAT,
ARK, BABEL, CANAAN, GENEALOGY, NIMROD, HAM, SHEM, JAPHETH, ABRAHAM,
BEERSHEBA, MELCHIZEDEK, ISAAC, MIDIAN, ABIMELECH, ISHMAEL, ESAU, JACOB,
JACOB’S WELL, BETHEL, ISRAEL, SIMEON, SHECHEM, REUBEN, ISSACHAR,
ZEBULUN, DAN, NAPHTALI, ASHER, GAD, MANASSEH, JOSEPH, BENJAMIN, LOT,
MOAB, AMMONITES, GOSHEN, etc.

EXODUS, BOOK OF, by John Frederick Stenning, and EXODUS by S. A. Cook;
and the articles MOSES, AARON, RAMESES, PITHOM, AMALEKITES, JETHRO,
PASSOVER, SINAI, HOREB, DECALOGUE, SABBATH, CALF (GOLDEN), TABERNACLE,
ARK, URIM AND THUMMIM.

LEVITICUS, by J. F. Stenning and LEVITES, by S. A. Cook; and SACRIFICE,
ATONEMENT AND DAY OF ATONEMENT, MOLOCH, PENTECOST.

NUMBERS, by Dr. James Alexander Paterson, professor of Hebrew, New
College, Edinburgh; and the articles BALAAM, HEBRON.

DEUTERONOMY, by Dr. Paterson, and the articles EZRA, NEHEMIAH, and
JOSIAH.

JOSHUA, by S. A. Cook, and the articles AMALEKITES, GIBEONITES, HIVITES,
PHILISTINES, GEZER, JUDAH, CALEB, SHECHEM.

JUDGES, BOOK OF, by S. A. Cook, and the articles, OTHNIEL, EHUD,
DEBORAH, GIBEON, ABIMELECH, JEPHTHAH, SHIBBOLETH, SAMSON, EPHOD,
TERAPHIM, MICAH (of Ephraim).

SAMUEL, BOOKS OF, and SAMUEL, by S. A. Cook; and the articles ELI,
SHILOH, ARK, SAUL, JONATHAN, DAVID, GOLIATH, AHITHOPHEL, JASHAR,
ABSALOM, JERAHMEEL, KENITES.

KINGS, BOOKS OF, by S. A. Cook; and the articles DAVID, ADONIJAH,
SOLOMON, TEMPLE, JERUSALEM, ABIATHAR, JOAB, EPHRAIM, JEROBOAM, REHOBOAM,
ASA, OMRI, AHAB, JEHOSHAPHAT, JEHORAM, ATHALIAH, AHAZIAH, ELIJAH,
CARMEL, JORDAN, ELISHA, JEHU, RECHABITES, JOASH, AZARIAH, HOSEA, UZZIAH,
AHAZ, ISAIAH, HEZEKIAH, MANASSEH, JOSIAH, JEHOIACHIN, SAMARIA.

CHRONICLES, by W. Robertson Smith and S. A. Cook; and the articles
ABSALOM, DAVID, UZZIAH, JUBILEES, MIDRASH, LEVITES and many mentioned
above under SAMUEL and KINGS.

EZRA AND NEHEMIAH, BOOKS OF, by S. A. Cook; the article EZRA; and, as
the books are to be grouped with CHRONICLES, that article and
DEUTERONOMY, and the article SAMARITANS and those on the two
“apocryphal” books, EZRA, THIRD BOOK OF, and EZRA, FOURTH BOOK OF, by
Dr. Robert Henry Charles, lecturer in Biblical studies, Oxford. See also
SYNAGOGUE.

[Sidenote: The Prophets]

For the prophetical books the article PROPHET as an introduction, and
then:

ISAIAH, by T. K. Cheyne; and, for outline, under BIBLE, Vol. 3, p. 853;
and EMMANUEL (on chap. 7) and MESSIAH and ATONEMENT (on chap. 53).

JEREMIAH, by T. K. Cheyne; and the articles BARUCH, ZEDEKIAH,
NEBUCHADREZZAR, EDOM, AMMONITES, MOAB.

LAMENTATIONS, by the Rev. Charles James Ball, lecturer in ASSYRIOLOGY,
Oxford, with peculiarly valuable information about poetical structure
and acrostic verse, some suggested emendations of the text, and a
summary of the arguments in regard to the authorship.

EZEKIEL, by Professor C. H. Toy of Harvard University; and the articles
ZEDEKIAH, and, for certain literary forms, ALLEGORY and PARABLE.

[Sidenote: Minor Prophets]

The Minor Prophets: see Vol. 3, p. 853; Vol. 22, p. 443; Vol. 13, p.
183.

HOSEA, by W. Robertson Smith and the Rev. Henry Wheeler Robinson,
professor of church history, Rawdon College, Leeds; articles BAAL, CALF
(GOLDEN), etc.

JOEL, by W. Robertson Smith and T. K. Cheyne; and ESCHATOLOGY, etc.

AMOS, by T. K. Cheyne; JEROBOAM, etc.

OBADIAH, by W. Robertson Smith and H. W. Robinson; and EDOM,
ESCHATOLOGY, etc.

JONAH, by T. K. Cheyne; and the article NINEVEH, and, for an explanation
of the “great fish,” COSMOGONY.

MICAH, by W. Robertson Smith and H. W. Robinson; and SAMARIA, HIGH
PLACE, MESSIAH, ESCHATOLOGY.

NAHUM, by G. H. Box; NINEVEH, etc.

HABAKKUK, by H. W. Robinson; CHALDAEAN, etc.

ZEPHANIAH, by S. A. Cook; and BAAL, MOLOCH, COSTUME, _Oriental_ (Vol. 7,
p. 226 sq., for chap. 1, v. 8), etc.

HAGGAI, by W. Robertson Smith and Dr. A. J. Grieve, professor at the
United Independent College, Bradford; and the article TEMPLE.

ZECHARIAH, by Julius Wellhausen, professor at Göttingen, and H. W.
Robinson; and the articles ANGEL, TEMPLE, MESSIAH, ZION, JAPHETH and
IONIANS (for “Javan” of chap. 9, v. 13).

MALACHI, by W. Robertson Smith and H. W. Robinson.

[Sidenote: Psalms]

PSALMS is by W. Robertson Smith and Dr. Robert Hatch Kennett, Canon of
Ely and professor of Hebrew, Cambridge; read the articles HALLEL, DAVID,
SOLOMON, TEMPLE, LEVITES (for Levitical Psalms), ASAPH, CHRONICLES,
EZRA, PSALTERY, LITURGY, the section of Hebrew Hymnody in, and the whole
article HYMNS; BIBLE, ENGLISH, for the version of the Psalms in the
English Prayer Book from the Great Bible; and, for Psalms 9, 10, 25, 34,
37, 111, 112, 119 and 145, and the article ACROSTIC. See also R. H.
Charles’s article on the apocryphal book, SOLOMON, PSALMS OF.

[Sidenote: Wisdom Literature]

The student should read the article WISDOM LITERATURE, by Prof. C. H.
Toy of Harvard as an introduction to PROVERBS, JOB and ECCLESIASTES (and
to the apocryphal WISDOM, BOOK OF—see article by Professor Toy;
ECCLESIASTICUS,—see article by William Emery Barnes, Hulsean professor
of Divinity, Cambridge; TOBIT,—see article by St. George Stock, lecturer
University of Birmingham; and 4th MACCABEES—see the article MACCABEES,
by Dr. William Fairweather, editor of Maccabees in the “Cambridge Bible
for Schools.”)

PROVERBS, BOOK OF, by C. H. Toy; and the articles SOLOMON, PROVERB and,
for other famous collections, PUBLILIUS, ERASMUS, etc.

JOB, by Dr. Andrew B. Davidson, late professor of Oriental languages,
New College, Edinburgh, and author of a Commentary on Job, and Prof. C.
H. Toy; and the articles DEVIL (for the meaning of “Satan” in chap. 1,
v. 6); SABAEANS, UZ, BEHEMOTH, etc.

ECCLESIASTES, by Professor Toy; the articles PESSIMISM, ESCHATOLOGY,
SADDUCEES.

CANTICLES, by W. Robertson Smith and H. W. Robinson.

[Sidenote: Other Old Testament Books]

ESTHER, by T. K. Cheyne and, on the “additions,” Dr. Robert Henry
Charles, Grinfield lecturer, Oxford; and the articles AHASUERUS, SUSA,
COSMOGONY, PURIM.

RUTH, by W. Robertson Smith and S. A. Cook; and the articles BETHLEHEM,
CALEB, and, for the marriage custom underlying the story, the article on
LEVIRATE.

DANIEL, by John Dyneley Prince, professor of Semitic languages, Columbia
University, and, for the “additions,” Susannah, Bel and the Dragon, and
The Song of the Three Children, the Rev. Dr. Robert Henry Charles; the
article SEMITIC LANGUAGES for the Aramaic of chapters 2 (from verse 4)
to 7; ANGELS, GABRIEL, MICHAEL; CHALDAEAN and CHALDEE; BELSHAZZAR;
APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE (for chapters 7–12).

[Sidenote: Apocrypha]

Before passing to the New Testament the student should read the article
APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE, by Robert Henry Charles; and the articles on the
separate books: EZRA, THIRD BOOK OF (1 Esdras) and EZRA, FOURTH BOOK (or
APOCALYPSE), both by Robert Henry Charles; JUDITH, by the same scholar;
ECCLESIASTICUS, by Dr. W. E. Barnes; BARUCH, by R. H. Charles; TOBIT, by
St. George Stock; JEREMY, EPISTLE OF, by R. H. Charles; MACCABEES, BOOKS
OF, and MACCABEES, by the Rev. Dr. William Fairweather; MANASSES, PRAYER
OF, by R. H. Charles, and MANASSEH; and WISDOM, BOOK OF, by C. H. Toy.

[Sidenote: New Testament]

The general articles preliminary to a study of the New Testament
are:—besides the part of the article BIBLE dealing with New Testament,
Canon, Criticism, Text, Chronology, etc.—the following:

MESSIAH, by W. Robertson Smith and Dr. Owen Charles Whitehouse, lecturer
in Hebrew, Cheshunt College, Cambridge.

JESUS CHRIST, by the Very Rev. Dr. Joseph Armitage Robinson, dean of
Westminster, constituting a critical outline of the gospel story.

CHRISTIANITY, by Dr. George William Knox, late professor of philosophy
and history of religion, Union Theological Seminary, New York City.

In outlining a course of study on the New Testament, the order of the
books as printed in English Bibles will not be followed absolutely.
Here, as in studying the Old Testament, a rearrangement may be worth
while for topical study.

[Sidenote: The Gospels]

But first the student should read the article GOSPEL, by the Rev. Dr.
Vincent Henry Stanton, professor of divinity, Cambridge, and author of
_The Gospels as Historical Documents_, etc.; and the article by Dr.
Kirsopp Lake on TATIAN the compiler of the Diatessaron or “Gospel of the
Four Gospels.”

For the gospel story the student should read the following separate
articles:

JOHN THE BAPTIST, HEROD ANTIPAS, SALOME, JOSEPH (Vol. 15, p. 513, col.
2), MARY, IMMACULATE CONCEPTION, BETHLEHEM, NAZARETH, NAZARENES,
EBIONITES, GALILEE, CAPERNAUM, CANA, JORDAN, PETER, ANDREW, JAMES, JOHN,
PHILIP, BARTHOLOMEW, THOMAS, MATTHEW, JUDAS, DEMONOLOGY, POSSESSION,
EXORCISM, MIRACLE, MARY MAGDALENE, NATHANAEL, PHARISEES, SADDUCEES,
SABBATH, PASSOVER, EUCHARIST, PARABLE, CAESAREA PHILIPPI, JUDAEA,
JERUSALEM, BETHANY, OLIVES, MOUNT OF; GETHSEMANE, PILATE, CALVARY,
JOSEPH OF ARIMATHAEA.

In studying the separate Gospels, let the reader follow the order
suggested in the articles GOSPEL and JESUS CHRIST.

First he should study the article MARK, GOSPEL OF, by Dr. Stanton; the
article on ST. MARK, by Dr. James Vernon Bartlett, professor of Church
History, Mansfield College, Oxford, and, for a summary of the points in
the Marcan or Galilean narrative as contrasted with the Jerusalem
narrative in regard to the betrayal of Jesus and the period immediately
following, the article on ST. PETER by Dr. Kirsopp Lake.

MATTHEW, GOSPEL OF ST., by Dr. Vincent H. Stanton, and MATTHEW, by Dr.
J. V. Bartlett; with particular attention to the paragraph on additions
to Mark’s narrative in Vol. 15, p. 355, and to the stress on the
Messianic character, the mention of the church and of St. Peter as the
Rock in chapter 16.

LUKE, GOSPEL OF ST., by Dr. Stanton, and the biographical sketch of
LUKE, by Dr. Bartlett; and the paragraph on Luke’s additions to Mark’s
narrative in Vol. 15, p. 356. This is the universal gospel, just as
Mark’s was for extra-Palestinian use and Matthew’s particularly for the
Jew, as is shown by the incidents of Zaccheus and of the Samaritan
leper; and Renan’s characterization of the gospel of the one evangelist
who was not a Jew, “the most beautiful book in the world,” is quoted
twice in the Britannica.

JOHN, GOSPEL OF ST., and JOHN (the Apostle), both by Baron Friedrich von
Hügel, author of _The Mystical Element of Religion_: the paragraph on
the distinctive elements of John’s gospel (in Vol. 15, p. 357), such as
the story of John the Baptist (see the article on this “forerunner,” by
G. H. Box, late lecturer in theology, Oxford); the philosophical
prologue (see the article LOGOS, by the late Rev. Dr. Stewart Dingwall
Fordyce Salmon, professor of systematic theology, United Free Church
College, Aberdeen, and the Rev. A. J. Grieve, professor of New Testament
and church history, Yorkshire United Independent College, Bradford); the
Judean scene as contrasted with the predominance of Galilee and Samaria
in the other three (synoptic) gospels, and the prominence given to great
abstract ideas and symbols—the Light of the World, the Living Bread, the
Only-Begotten, the Re-Birth, Eternal Life, the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, Water and Wine, the Paraclete, and the refrain and variations on
the theme of Love.

Before studying the articles dealing with the book of ACTS, let the
reader consult Dr. Garvie’s article MIRACLE, for a study of the
supernatural and particularly for a development of the argument for
miracles from “the congruity of the miracle with divine truth and
grace”; the miracles of Jesus, and of the apostles, consist in “the
relief of need, the removal of suffering, the recovery of health and
strength.”

[Sidenote: Acts]

The article ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, by Dr. J. Vernon Bartlett, should be
supplemented by referring again to the article LUKE, and the student
should call to mind that the probable author was not a Jew, was a
personal friend and traveling companion of both Paul and Peter, and was
a physician, a trained scientific observer, as can be seen not only from
his descriptions of disease, but from his accuracy in geographical,
meteorological and other matters. The importance of the testimony of the
physician to the miracles of the apostles is brought out (p. 164, top of
column 2) in the article on the book. For the study of ACTS, besides the
article on the book, read the following separate articles:

LUKE, PETER, JOHN, JUDAS, ACELDAMA, MATTHIAS, PENTECOST, TONGUES, GIFT
OF; ANANIAS, GAMALIEL, STEPHEN, SIMON MAGUS, PHILIP, PAUL, JOPPA,
ANTIOCH, HEROD, BARNABAS, ICONIUM, LYCAONIA, MARK, TIMOTHY, SILAS,
PHILIPPI, THESSALONICA, ATHENS, AREOPAGUS, CORINTH, AQUILA, APOLLOS,
EPHESUS, FELIX, ANANIAS, AGRIPPA.

[Sidenote: St. Paul]

For a study of the book of Acts, which was probably written before any
one of the Gospels, one will need constantly to refer in the Britannica
to the article on PAUL, THE APOSTLE (Vol. 20, p. 938), by Dr. J. Vernon
Bartlett. This article, equivalent to 55 pages in this Guide, is so
important that it will be well to outline it here. After an
introduction, in which Paul’s attitude toward Jewish legalism is made an
explanation of the superficially obvious contrast between Jesus and
Paul, there is a biographical sketch: Paul of Tarsus, a Roman citizen
with Roman name, talking Latin and not a narrow, one-sided Jew; his
Jewish training; in Jerusalem, under Gamaliel (see the article
GAMALIEL); first impressions as to Jesus, and Saul as persecutor; the
vision at Damascus and its spiritual content; his new theory of the law
and its universal value; Christology of Paul,—his deep insight into
Jesus’s character; Paul’s theology rooted in experience; his early
apostolate; his first missionary journey; the issue of Gentile
Christianity raised; Paul’s conciliatory spirit; Peter’s visit to
Antioch; Paul’s protest; the second mission tour; Paul in Europe—Athens,
Corinth, etc.; first missionary letters; as an ethical teacher; Paul,
the Law, the Spirit; later travels; later letters; Paulinism—its
Christocentric character; apparent contrasts and contradictions between
Paul’s gospel and Jesus’s gospel—one seen through the eyes of a
conscious sinner, the other the sinless consciousness of the Saviour;
Paul’s position between Judaeo-Christianity and Gnosticism—see also the
article GNOSTICISM, by Wilhelm Bousset, professor of New Testament
exegesis, Göttingen.

[Sidenote: The Pauline Epistles]

In general on the Pauline epistles the student should not only read this
article PAUL, but should turn again to the treatment of New Testament
canon in the article BIBLE (Vol. 3, pp. 872–873), and should look over
the first part of the article JESUS CHRIST which finds in 1st
Thessalonians the earliest extant document of Christianity. Then let him
read the articles:

THESSALONIANS, EPISTLES TO THE, by the Rev. James Everett Frame,
professor of Biblical theology, Union Theological Seminary, New York
City. See also in the article PAUL (Vol. 20, pp. 945–946) for Paul at
Thessalonica, and the articles ESCHATOLOGY and APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE
for the doctrine of the “second coming” or “Parousia,” especially in 2
Thess., chap. 2.

CORINTHIANS, EPISTLES TO THE, by the Rev. Dr. James Hardy Ropes,
professor of New Testament criticism and interpretation, Harvard; and
the articles CORINTH, APOLLOS, PETER, ASCETICISM, FASTING, EUCHARIST (1
Cor., chap. 11, vs. 23 sqq. is the oldest extant account of the Lord’s
Supper), TITUS.

GALATIANS, EPISTLE TO THE, by the Rev. Dr. James Moffatt, author of _The
Historical New Testament_: and the articles GALATIA (for the “South
Galatian” theory), ANTINOMIANISM (for Christianity _vs._ legalism).

ROMANS, EPISTLE TO THE, by Dr. Moffatt; and the article HEBREW RELIGION
for the covenant which Paul here presents as one of faith and not of the
law.

EPHESIANS, EPISTLE TO THE, by Prof. J. H. Ropes, pointing out that the
theme is “the unity of mankind in Christ and hence the unity and
divinity of the Church of Christ”; the article EPHESUS; the articles on
COLOSSIANS and on 1st PETER for textual criticism; the article MARRIAGE
for Paul’s influence (Eph. ch. 5, v. 23–32) on the Church’s attitude
toward marriage; and the article GNOSTICISM for the tendency in the
church which Paul attacked in this epistle and in Colossians.

COLOSSIANS, by Prof. J. E. Frame; the article COLOSSAE; ANGEL (on chap.
2, v. 18); ASCETICISM (on chap. 2, v. 16).

PHILEMON, EPISTLE TO, by Dr. Moffatt; the article SLAVERY, _Rome_ (Vol.
25, p. 218) for the status of a runaway like Onesimus.

PHILIPPIANS, EPISTLE TO THE, by Dr. Moffatt; the article PHILIPPI;
ANTINOMIANISM (on the beginning of chap. 3); and on the Kenosis or
emptying of self of Christ in Phil. 2, 7, see the article on CHARLES
GORE (Vol. 2, p. 255), and in the article THEOLOGY the discussion in
column 1 of p. 781 (Vol. 26).

TIMOTHY, FIRST EPISTLE TO; and TIMOTHY, SECOND EPISTLE TO, by Dr.
Moffatt; the article TIMOTHY; the articles MARRIAGE and CELIBACY (on 1
Tim. 4, 3); FASTING, the article GNOSTICISM (for the “knowledge falsely
so-called” of 1 Tim. 6, 20), and the article PASTORAL EPISTLES on these
letters and on that to Titus. The article TITUS has much important
criticism on Timothy.

TITUS, THE EPISTLE TO, by Dr. Moffatt; the articles BISHOP and
PRESBYTER, etc.

HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE, by Dr. J. Vernon Bartlett; and, on authorship,
the articles PAUL, BARNABAS, APOLLOS, LUKE, CLEMENT, STEPHEN; and the
articles CLEMENTINE LITERATURE, HEBREW RELIGION, TEMPLE, ATONEMENT AND
DAY OF ATONEMENT, ANGEL, MOSES, PRIEST, AARON, MELCHIZEDEK, SACRIFICE,
MESSIAH.

[Sidenote: The Other Epistles]

Before turning to the articles on the other books of the New Testament,
let the student read a part of the article THEOLOGY, by the Rev. Dr.
Robert Mackintosh of the Lancashire Independent College, Manchester,
with special attention to the paragraphs (end of p. 773 and p. 774, Vol.
26) on Jewish theology, St. Paul and contents of the New Testament. Here
“Paulinism” is shown not merely in the Pauline writings but in the Acts,
in 1st Peter (“good independent Paulinism”), and even in the Apocalypse,
at least as regards the atonement and Christology. “The Johannine Gospel
and Epistles are later than Paulinism, and presuppose its leading or
less startling positions.” And the same article (p. 783) after pointing
out that Luther and the evangelical revival “went back to St. Paul” asks
“can Christianity not dig deeper by going back to Jesus?” The writer
also suggests that the German school of Ritschl in “not idolizing
Paulinism” have “idolized Luther.”

The other principal topics to be studied are:

JAMES, EPISTLE OF, by the Rev. Dr. Benjamin Wisner Bacon, professor of
New Testament criticism and exegesis, Yale; the article on JAMES by the
Rev. Dr. George Milligan, Professor of divinity and Biblical criticism,
Glasgow; and the articles REVELATION, CLEMENT, HERMAS, etc., for the
question of date and relation with other writings; WISDOM LITERATURE,
for earlier writings on the “Wisdom” and proverbial expressions of
chapter 3; MATTHEW, for a similar view of the gospel and the Church; and
on “Justification,” vol. 20, p. 954, in article PAUL.

PETER, EPISTLES OF, by Dr. Kirsopp Lake; the article on ST. PETER, by
the same scholar. For a date earlier than that of the Epistle of James,
see the article on that book. See also ROMANS and POLYCARP to supplement
what is here said of the relations of 1st Peter to these writings; and
ESCHATOLOGY on the expected “second coming” of 2nd Peter, chapter 3, vs.
1–13, and JUDE, EPISTLE OF, on its relation to this book.

JUDE, EPISTLE OF, by Prof. B. W. Bacon of Yale; the article on
HEGESIPPUS, the authority for the little we know of Jude; the articles
ESCHATOLOGY (for “the last time” of verse 18), ANGEL (for vs. 6, 9),
MICHAEL, and especially the articles APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE; MOSES,
ASSUMPTION OF; and ENOCH, BOOK OF, for the allusions in verses 9 and 14.

Under the head of Johannine are grouped, besides the fourth gospel, the
three epistles of John and the Revelation. On these see:

[Sidenote: Johannine Writings]

JOHN, THE EPISTLES OF, by Dr. Moffatt, and the article on St. John in
regard to authorship, which may more probably be assigned to John the
presbyter; and the articles ANTICHRIST (on 1 John, 2, 22), GNOSTICISM
(for chap. 3, vs. 4–7), etc.

REVELATION, BOOK OF, by the Rev. Dr. Robert Henry Charles, lecturer in
Biblical studies, Oxford. This book, and this article, should be studied
in connection with the article, also by Dr. Charles, on APOCALYPTIC
LITERATURE, and the canonical apocalyptic passages in Mark 13, Mathew
24, Luke 21 and 2nd Thessalonians 2, as well as the extra-canonical
apocalypses described in APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE and in the separate
articles ISAIAH, ASCENSION OF, and HERMAS, SHEPHERD OF. Besides see the
articles ESCHATOLOGY, MILLENIUM. The student should read the article
NERO, even if “666” does not certainly refer to him, and the articles
DOMITIAN and VESPASIAN on the possibility that one of them may have been
“the beast that was and is not, ... himself also an eighth” (see
footnote on p. 220, Vol. 23).

[Sidenote: Apocryphal Literature]

As an epilogue the student should read the articles APOCRYPHAL
LITERATURE, both of the Old and New Testament periods, by Dr. Charles
and at least the first part, by Dr. A. C. McGiffert of Union Theological
Seminary, New York City, of the article CHURCH HISTORY.

[Sidenote: A Biblical Encyclopaedia]

The study outline sketched in this chapter will give the student some
idea of the possibilities of the Britannica in helping him. The list of
articles dealing with the Bible on pp. 944–945 of the Index (Vol. 29)
will show that in the Britannica there is an adequate and excellent
encyclopaedia of the Bible or text-book of Bible Study.




                              CHAPTER XLII
                   HISTORY, INTRODUCTORY AND GENERAL


When you turn to the new Britannica to study history, you naturally
expect to learn a great deal that will be new to you. But you can
anticipate something more and better than that. You will find a great
deal that is new to _everyone_, even to those who have been reading
history for years. For the contributors to the work, in making a
completely fresh survey of the whole field of human knowledge, were
helping one another to obtain new light upon the history of even the
earliest periods. As all the articles were completed before a single
volume was printed, there was such an opportunity for comparison and
revision as has never before existed. When research upon one subject had
disclosed new evidence that was of value in relation to another subject,
the contributors and editors could co-operate as fully as if they had
all been assembled in a great international congress. And the result of
this collaboration is that the publication of the new Britannica does
more, at one stroke, to advance historical knowledge, to solve
historical doubts, and to correct historical mistakes than is done by
isolated historians in the course of a generation.

[Sidenote: Authority]

With this idea of _combined_ effort clearly before you, consider for a
moment the accumulated individual authority of such individual
specialists as those who deal with history in the Britannica. There are,
to name only a few, the Germans Eduard Meyer and Schiemann of Berlin,
Hashagen of Bonn, von Pastor of Innsbruck, Pauli of Göttingen, Keutgen
of Hamburg, and Count Lützow; Frenchmen like Mgr. Duchesne, Luchaire,
Valois, Anchel, Halphen, Babelon and Bémont; the Italians Villari,
Barnabei and Balzani; the Canadians Doughty, Grant, Dionne and Wrong;
among Americans, J. H. Robinson, W. A. Dunning, H. L. Osgood, C. H.
Hayes, G. W. Botsford, and J. T. Shotwell of Columbia; President
Emeritus Charles W. Eliot, and Drs. Edward Channing, F. J. Turner and
Charles Gross of Harvard; Drs. A. D. Morse, R. B. Richardson and
Preserved Smith of Amherst; Dr. T. F. Collier of Williams; Professors
William Graham Sumner, G. Burton Adams and J. C. Schwab of Yale; Prof.
Grant Showerman of Wisconsin; Prof. William MacDonald of Brown; Profs.
Fleming and Scroggs of Louisiana; Dr. McMaster of Pennsylvania; Prof. I.
J. Cox of Cincinnati; the late Alexander Johnston of Princeton; Prof. W.
Roy Smith of Bryn Mawr; Henry Cabot Lodge, Carl Schurz and James Ford
Rhodes; and—to mention only a few English names—S. R. Gardiner, Edward
Freeman, Thomas Hodgkin, James Bryce, James Gairdner, J. D. Bury, C. W.
C. Oman, A. F. Pollard, J. H. Round, H. W. C. Davis, Osmund Airy, G. W.
Prothero, John Morley, Reginald Lane Poole, J. Holland Rose, F. J.
Haverfield, W. Alison Phillips, Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace, R. Nisbet
Bain, W. Warde Fowler, J. L. Myres, J. S. Reid, W. J. Brodribb and H. F.
Pelham.

So much for the quality of the historical matter in the Britannica. The
quantity is equally remarkable.

  _If the history in the Britannica was printed in the usual volumes on
  heavy paper, containing 100,000 words to a volume, it would fill about
  70 such volumes, or, say, four good-sized shelves in an ordinary
  “unit” bookcase._

[Sidenote: Method of Treatment]

Every country and every event from the earliest syllable of recorded
time receives its proper treatment. Under such circumstances it is
obvious that in the limits of this Guide it would not be possible to
give outlines of courses of historical readings for all nations and
periods. Such readings in history alone would more than fill this whole
Guide. But the information is all in the Britannica, and what has been
said above will give the reader some notion of the authority of the
articles written by natives of nearly every civilized country in the
world, and some idea of the scope of treatment. The character of the
subject matter of history and the method of treatment in the Britannica
combine to make minute outlines less necessary for historical study than
for the pursuit of a course in almost any other subject. The Britannica,
the student will quickly see, contains in each instance a “key” article
on the history of each nation—either as a separate article, like ENGLISH
HISTORY or ROMAN HISTORY or as a historical section of the article on
the country—for instance, in the article GREECE there is a
“sub-article,” so to say, on history (Vol. 12, pp. 440–470), and in the
article UNITED STATES a sub-article on American history (Vol. 27, pp.
663–735). The student of any country’s history should read _first_ such
an article or sub-article, so that he will get a big outline view of the
subject, and then use it as a basis or starting point for further
reading, looking up in the Index volume the important topics mentioned
in the main article. These will be:

(1) Articles on the history of parts of the country he is
studying—states, provinces, counties, kingdoms, duchies, cities and
towns.

(2) Biographies of rulers, statesmen, soldiers, reformers, etc.

(3) Articles on wars and battles, each under its proper heading.

(4) Articles on movements and changes, sometimes of national, sometimes
of international importance, the Renaissance, political parties,
economic, political and religious revolutions, the Crusades, etc.

(5) Articles on churches, sects and denominations of historical
importance in the country under consideration.

But although it is impossible to give in this Guide complete courses of
reading for the history of all countries, it is possible and desirable
to give it in cases where it would be most useful to the greatest number
of readers.

The following chapter is an outline course of study in the _History of
the United States_, which is given in some detail, because it has a
peculiar interest to Americans.

Next is given an outline of a course of reading in Canadian and then in
English History, then in French History, and then in the History of the
countries of the Far East, India, China and Japan. These will show the
reader how fully and authoritatively the history of countries, whether
near or distant, is given in the Britannica; and if he wishes to pursue
his studies into the record of other countries, it is certain that with
these for an example, and with the aid of the Index, he will have no
trouble in so doing.




                             CHAPTER XLIII
                            AMERICAN HISTORY


The plan adopted in most of the chapters of this Guide is to give a
separate account of each of the more important articles on the subject
to which the chapter is devoted. But in the case of American history,
the articles are so numerous, and are so accurately dovetailed to make a
continuous story, that the reader’s convenience has been better served
by reversing this process, and grouping the articles under the periods
with which they deal. The reader is thus enabled to turn at once to any
one of the outstanding episodes of the story, and to find explicit
references to those parts of the Britannica in which the narrative is
continued from one article to another. The summary has been put in the
form of a table, in order that its contents may more easily be surveyed.
There is a much fuller summary, in narrative form, in the Britannica
itself in the historical portion of the article UNITED STATES (Vol. 27,
pp. 663–735). This is the most complete condensed history of the country
that has ever been written. It is not quite so long as this entire
Guide; but from each of its 412 sections the reader can turn to articles
describing in detail the events consecutively outlined.

It has been taken for granted that the reader will recognize the natural
connection between this and other chapters of the Guide. For example, no
attempt has been made in this chapter to indicate the articles,
elsewhere described, which discuss the history of American industries
and commerce, railroads and shipping, finance and economics, art and
literature. Again, the particular history of a city, town, or river may
be of the greatest interest in itself, although the events with which
its name is associated were not so typical of any period as to give the
article a place in the present chapter. Similarly, the numerous and
elaborate American biographies are represented, in this chapter, only by
the names of the foremost statesmen and soldiers of the periods included
in the table. In short, the articles named are so few, in proportion to
all those which directly relate to American history, that the general
effect is to make the space which the Britannica devotes to the subject
seem less than it really is. But it is not the purpose of this Guide to
impress upon the reader the magnitude of the volumes he is using. In
that respect the Britannica speaks for itself. The table instances a few
of the main topics of American history, in order to show the reader how
he may plan fuller courses of reading by combining other articles on the
principle indicated by these illustrations.

The left hand columns present a brief outline of the main periods and
aspects of American history. The right hand columns give the titles of
the articles to be read, the page numbers as well as the volume numbers
(so that when the reference is to only one section of a long article the
reader can find it at once) and the names of the contributors.

        _Topics for Reading_                     _Articles_

 _The Aborigines._

 Where did they come from, and when? AMERICA, _Ethnology and
   Their food, tools, clothing and     Archaeology_ (Vol. 1, p. 810,
   customs. How they carried on        fully illustrated), by Otis
   their wars. Their practical         Tufton Mason, late curator,
   knowledge and religion. What the    Department of Anthropology,
   white man has learned from the      National Museum, Washington;
   Indians. Over 1000 languages and    author of _Primitive Travel and
   dialects in America.                Transportation_, etc.

                                     INDIANS, NORTH AMERICAN (Vol. 14,
                                       p. 452), by Dr. A. F.
                                       Chamberlain, professor of
                                       anthropology, Clark University.

 Evidence of Asiatic origin. A state ARCHAEOLOGY (Vol. 2, p. 349), by
   of culture in Mexico and Peru,      Dr. Charles H. Read, keeper of
   “which in some respects must have   British and Medieval Antiquities
   put the Spaniards to shame.”        and Ethnography, British Museum.

 The fascinating story of the        MEXICO, _Ancient History and
   Aztecs. Did the Asiatic peoples     Civilization_ (Vol. 18, p. 329),
   make voyages to America long        by Dr. E. B. Tylor, professor of
   before Columbus?                    anthropology at Oxford; author of
                                       _Methods and Results in Mexican
                                       Research_.

 The splendid past of Central        CENTRAL AMERICA, _Archaeology of_
   America. What was accomplished      (Vol. 5, p. 677), by Dr. Walter
   during the 500 years of Mayan       Lehmann, Royal Ethnographical
   culture. An interesting calendar.   Museum, Munich.

 _First Voyages of Discovery._

 The Northmen first Europeans to     VINLAND (Vol. 28, p. 98), by Julius
   reach American continent, about     E. Olson, professor of
   1000 A.D. The story of the          Scandinavian languages,
   Icelandic sagas. Was Vinland Nova   University of Wisconsin, editor
   Scotia?                             of _Voyages of the Northmen_,
                                       etc.

 The accident of Leif’s discovery of LEIF ERICSSON (Vol. 16, p. 396), by
   the American continent.             Dr. C. R. Beazley, professor of
                                       modern history in the University
                                       of Birmingham, author of _The
                                       Dawn of Modern Geography_.

 The first colonizer (A.D. 1002).    THORFINN KARLSEFNI (Vol. 26, p.
   Fate of the colony. The hostile     878), by Dr. C. R. Beazley,
   Skraelings.                         author of _The_ _Dawn of Modern
                                       Geography_, etc.

 _Columbus and His Successors._

 Treaty of Tordesillas (1494).       AMERICA, _General Historical
                                       Sketch_ (Vol. 1, p. 806), by
                                       David Hannay, author of _A Short
                                       History of the Royal Navy_.

 Columbus thinks he discovers Asia.  COLUMBUS, CHRISTOPHER (Vol. 6, p.
   His voyages and colonies            741), by Dr. C. R. Beazley,
   (1492–1504).                        author of _The Dawn of Modern
                                       Geography_, etc.

 Discovery of the Mainland (1497).   CABOT, JOHN (Vol. 4, p. 921), by
                                       Henry P. Biggar, author of _The
                                       Voyage of the Cabots to
                                       Greenland_.

 How the New World received its      VESPUCCI, AMERIGO (Vol. 27, p.
   name. The beginning of free-lance   1053), by Dr. C. R. Beazley,
   expeditions. The mystery of the     author of _The Dawn of Modern
   voyage of 1497.                     Geography_, etc.

 The Discovery of the Pacific        BALBOA, VASCO NUÑEZ DE (Vol. 3, p.
   (1513).                             241).

 The existence of a new continent    MAGELLAN, FERDINAND (Vol. 17, p.
   distinct from Asia revealed to      302), by Dr. C. R. Beazley,
   the world. First circumnavigation   author of _The Dawn of Modern
   of the globe. The Pacific Ocean     Geography_, etc.
   named (1520).

                                     PACIFIC OCEAN, _History_ (Vol. 20,
                                       p. 438).

 The Conquest of Mexico (1519–1521). CORTES, HERNAN (Vol. 7, p. 205).
   “The Descendant of the Sun.”
   Discovery of Lower California.
   Ingratitude of Charles V.

                                     CALIFORNIA, LOWER (Vol. 5, p. 21).

 Exploration of Guatemala and        SOTO, FERDINANDO DE (Vol. 25, p.
   Yucatan (1528), and the             435).
   Mississippi (1541).

 France attacks Spain in the New     LAS CASAS, BARTOLOMÉ  DE (Vol. 16,
   World.                              p. 232).

 Discovery of the St. Lawrence       CARTIER, JACQUES (Vol. 5, p. 433),
   (1534). How Canada got its name.    by H. P. Biggar, author of _The
   Early Canadian History.             Voyage of the Cabots to
                                       Greenland_.

                                     CANADA, _History_ (Vol. 5, p. 156),
                                       by Dr. George McKinnon Wrong,
                                       University of Toronto.

 Foundation of Quebec (1608).        CHAMPLAIN, SAMUEL DE (Vol. 5, p.
   Discovery of Lake Champlain         830), by Prof. Narcisse E.
   (1609). Champlain assists           Dionne, Librarian of the
   Algonquins and Hurons against the   Legislature of the Province of
   Iroquois. The beginning of the      Quebec, author of _Life of Samuel
   murderous conflicts between the     de Champlain, Founder of Quebec_,
   French and the Iroquois.            etc.

 The Fortunes of New France.         FRONTENAC (Vol. 11, p. 249), by Dr.
   Colonial Expansion. Horrors of      Arthur G. Doughty, Dominion
   Indian Warfare.                     archivist of Canada, author of
                                       _The Cradle of New France_, etc.

 Louisiana in possession of France   LA SALLE, RENÉ ROBERT, SIEUR DE
   (1682). Discovery of the Ohio       (Vol. 16, p. 230), by Charles C.
   River.                              Whinery, assistant editor,
                                       Encyclopaedia Britannica.

 The first English colony (1583)     NEWFOUNDLAND, _History_ (Vol. 19,
   unsuccessful.                       p. 482), by Beckles Willson,
                                       author of _The Romance of
                                       Canada_, etc.

 The persistent efforts of Raleigh   NORTH CAROLINA, _History_ (Vol. 19,
   (1584–1587). First English child    p. 775).
   born in America (Aug. 15, 1587).

                                     NORTH CAROLINA, _History_ (Vol. 19,
                                       p. 775).

                                     RALEIGH, SIR WALTER (Vol. 22, p.
                                       869), by David Hannay, author of
                                       _Short History of the Royal
                                       Navy_.

 The first permanent English         VIRGINIA, _History_ (Vol. 28, p.
   settlement (1607).                  122).

                                     JAMESTOWN (Vol. 15, p. 148).

 _Colonial Expansion and Development
   of Imperial Control._

 The Thirteen Original Colonies,     UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
   their Founders and Leaders, and     p. 663), by Dr. Herbert L.
   their early Struggles.              Osgood, professor of history,
                                       Columbia University, author of
                                       _The American Colonies in the
                                       17th Century_, etc.

 Virginia.                           VIRGINIA (Vol. 28, p. 122).

                                     JAMESTOWN (Vol. 15, p. 148).

                                     SMITH, JOHN (Vol. 25, p. 264).

                                     GOSNOLD, BARTHOLOMEW (Vol. 12, p.
                                       265).

                                     BERKELEY, SIR WILLIAM (Vol. 3, p.
                                       781).

                                     BLAIR, JAMES (Vol. 4, p. 34).

                                     SPOTSWOOD, ALEXANDER (Vol. 25, p.
                                       735).

 North Carolina.                     NORTH CAROLINA (Vol. 19, p. 775).

 South Carolina.                     SOUTH CAROLINA (Vol. 25, p. 503).

 New England.                        NEW ENGLAND (Vol. 19, p. 476).

 Massachusetts.                      MASSACHUSETTS (Vol. 17, p. 858).

                                     PLYMOUTH, MASS. (Vol. 21, p. 863).

                                     BRADFORD, WILLIAM (Vol. 4, p. 370).

                                     STANDISH, MILES (Vol. 25, p. 772)

                                     ALDEN, JOHN (Vol. 1, p. 533).

                                     WINSLOW, EDWARD (Vol. 28, p. 733).

                                     ENDECOTT, JOHN (Vol. 9, p. 382).

                                     SALEM (Vol. 24, p. 62).

                                     WINTHROP, JOHN (Vol. 28, p. 736).

                                     BOSTON, MASS. (Vol. 4, p. 290).

                                     IPSWICH, MASS. (Vol. 14, p. 739).

                                     VANE, SIR HENRY (Vol. 27, p. 892).

                                     HUTCHINSON, ANNE (Vol. 14, p. 12).

 Maine (a part of Massachusetts).    MAINE (Vol. 17, p. 439).

                                     POPHAM, SIR JOHN (Vol. 22, p. 88).

                                     GORGES, SIR FERDINANDO (Vol. 12, p.
                                       256).

                                     PORTLAND, ME. (Vol. 22, p. 120).

 Rhode Island.                       RHODE ISLAND (Vol. 23, p. 251).

                                     WILLIAMS, ROGER (Vol. 28, p. 682).

                                     PROVIDENCE (Vol. 22, p. 512).

 New Hampshire.                      NEW HAMPSHIRE (Vol. 19, p. 496).

                                     PORTSMOUTH, N. H. (Vol. 22, p.
                                       132).

 Connecticut.                        CONNECTICUT (Vol. 6, p. 954).

                                     HOOKER, THOMAS (Vol. 13, p. 674).

                                     NEW HAVEN (Vol. 19, p. 499).

                                     EATON, THEOPHILUS (Vol. 8, p. 838).

                                     HARTFORD (Vol. 13, p. 33).

 Vermont.                            VERMONT (Vol. 27, p. 1028).

 Indian Wars in New England.         PEQUOT (Vol. 21, p. 132).

                                     PHILIP, KING (Vol. 21, p. 389).

 New York.                           NEW YORK (Vol. 19, p. 603).

                                     HUDSON, HENRY (Vol. 13, p. 849).

                                     IROQUOIS (Vol. 14, p. 839).

                                     NEW YORK (CITY) (Vol. 19, p. 620).

                                     ALBANY (Vol. 1, p. 490).

                                     STATEN ISLAND (Vol. 25, p. 802).

                                     LONG ISLAND (Vol. 16, p. 982).

                                     STUYVESANT, PETER (Vol. 25, p.
                                       1055).

 New Jersey.                         NEW JERSEY (Vol. 19, p. 508).

                                     CARTERET, SIR GEORGE (Vol. 5, p.
                                       413).

                                     ANDROS, SIR EDMUND (Vol. 2, p. 1).

                                     ELIZABETH, N. J. (Vol. 9, p. 287).

 Delaware.                           DELAWARE (Vol. 7, p. 949).

                                     LEWES (Vol. 16, p. 522).

                                     NEW CASTLE (Vol. 19, p. 472).

                                     WILMINGTON (Vol. 28, p. 690).

 Pennsylvania.                       PENNSYLVANIA (Vol. 21, p. 111).

                                     PENN, WILLIAM (Vol. 21, p. 99), by
                                       Osmund Airy, author of _Charles
                                       II_, editor of the _Lauderdale
                                       Papers_, etc.

                                     FRIENDS, SOCIETY OF (Vol. 11, p.
                                       227).

                                     PHILADELPHIA (Vol. 21, p. 372).

 Maryland.                           MARYLAND (Vol. 17, p. 831), by N.
                                       D. Mereness, Ph.D., author of
                                       _Maryland as a Proprietary
                                       Province_.

                                     BALTIMORE, GEORGE CALVERT, 1st
                                       Baron (Vol. 3, p. 288).

                                     BALTIMORE (Vol. 3, p. 290).

                                     MASON AND DIXON LINE (Vol. 17, p.
                                       841).

 Georgia.                            GEORGIA (Vol. 11, p. 755).

                                     OGLETHORPE, JAMES EDWARD (Vol. 20,
                                       p. 24).

                                     SAVANNAH (Vol. 24, p. 240).

 _The French and Indian Wars._

 Struggle of the British and the     UNITED STATES, _History_, The
   French in America. Pressure of      Struggle with the French
   British on the French “paper        (1690–1760) (Vol. 27, p. 670), by
   barriers.” Old-World quarrel        Prof. H. L. Osgood, Columbia
   carried into the New World.         University.

                                     CANADA, _History_ (Vol. 5, p. 156),
                                       by Prof. G. M. Wrong, author of
                                       _A Canadian Manor and Its
                                       Seigneurs_, etc.

 Capture of Louisburg, 1745.         LOUISBURG (Vol. 17, p. 52).

 Albany Congress of 1754.            ALBANY, N. Y. (Vol. 1, p. 490).

 The Continental Contest of which    SEVEN YEARS’ WAR (Vol. 24, p. 715),
   the French and Indian Wars were a   by Col. F. N. Maude, author of
   part.                               _War and the World’s Policy_, and
                                       David Hannay, author of _Short
                                       History of the Royal Navy_.

 Western Campaigns. In Pennsylvania  PITTSBURG (Vol. 21, p. 680).
   and Virginia.

                                     BRADDOCK, EDWARD (Vol. 4, p. 369).

                                     PONTIAC (Vol. 22, p. 65).

                                     DINWIDDIE, ROBERT (Vol. 8, p. 278).

                                     SHIRLEY, WILLIAM (Vol. 24, p. 991).

 The New York Frontier and Fighting  TICONDEROGA (Vol. 26, p. 937).
   there.

                                     GEORGE, LAKE (Vol. 11, p. 748).

                                     NIAGARA, FORT (Vol. 19, p. 634).

                                     JOHNSON, SIR WILLIAM (Vol. 15, p.
                                       472).

 The Campaign against Quebec and its QUEBEC (Vol. 22, p. 728).
   Capture by the British.

                                     WOLFE, JAMES (Vol. 28, p. 773).

                                     MONTCALM (Vol. 18, p. 761).

 _Colonization on the Pacific
   Coast._

 Spanish Government in California.   CALIFORNIA, _History_ (Vol. 5, p.
   Rule of the Missions. “A complete   17).
   failure save in the acquisition
   of material wealth.”

 The Spaniards neglect northwestern  OREGON, _History_ (Vol. 20, p.
   America.                            247).

 British Traders seize the           HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY (Vol. 13, p.
   opportunity.                        852).

 _The Colonial Revolt and Events
   Leading up to It._

 (1763–1783).                        UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
                                       p. 672), by Prof. H. L. Osgood,
                                       Columbia University.

 Immediate Causes:

 The Stamp Act (1765).               STAMP (Vol. 25, p. 772).

 Boston Massacre and Boston Tea      BOSTON (Vol. 4, p. 296);
   Party.                              HUTCHINSON, THOMAS (Vol. 14, p.
                                       13).

 Suffolk Resolves.                   MILTON, MASS. (Vol. 18, p. 492).

 Mecklenburg Resolutions and         NORTH CAROLINA (Vol. 19, p. 776).
   “Declaration,” May, 1775.

 Virginia leaders decide on          VIRGINIA, _History_ (Vol. 28, p.
   independence to secure foreign      123).
   assistance.

 The Leaders of Public Opinion:

 Virginia.                           HENRY, PATRICK (Vol. 13, p. 300),
                                       by N. D. Mereness, author of
                                       _Maryland, a Proprietary
                                       Province_.

                                     WASHINGTON, GEORGE (Vol. 28, p.
                                       344), by Prof. William MacDonald,
                                       Brown University.

                                     LEE, RICHARD HENRY (Vol. 16, p.
                                       362).

 Massachusetts.                      OTIS, JAMES (Vol. 20, p. 366).

                                     ADAMS, SAMUEL (Vol. 1, p. 180), by
                                       Prof. Edward Channing, Harvard.

                                     ADAMS, JOHN (Vol. 1, p. 176).

 New Hampshire.                      LANGDON, JOHN (Vol. 16, p. 172).

 Pennsylvania.                       DICKINSON, JOHN (Vol. 8, p. 184).

                                     FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN (Vol. 11, p.
                                       24), by Richard Webster.

 New York.                           HAMILTON, ALEXANDER (Vol. 12, p.
                                       881), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick and
                                       Hugh Chisholm, editor-in-chief
                                       Encyclopaedia Britannica.

 Conservative Leaders.               LOYALISTS, or TORIES (Vol. 17, p.
                                       79).

                                     GALLOWAY, JOSEPH (Vol. 11, p. 421).

                                     SEABURY, SAMUEL (Vol. 24, p. 531).

                                     TRYON, WILLIAM (Vol. 27, p. 340).

                                     JOHNSON, SIR WILLIAM and SIR JOHN
                                       (Vol. 15, p. 472).

 Why did not the Canadians revolt?   QUEBEC ACT (Vol. 22, p. 729).

 _Declaration of Independence._

 Resolution of Independence adopted  INDEPENDENCE, DECLARATION OF (Vol.
   July 2.                             14, p. 372), by Dr. F. S.
                                       Philbrick.

 Jefferson’s Declaration adopted
   July 4. Most of the signatures
   affixed Aug. 2. One not until
   1781.

 Some of the “Signers”:

 Virginia.                           JEFFERSON, THOMAS (Vol. 15, p.
                                       301), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick.

                                     LEE, RICHARD HENRY (Vol. 16, p.
                                       362).

                                     LEE, FRANCIS LIGHTFOOT (Vol. 16, p.
                                       362).

 Massachusetts.                      HANCOCK, JOHN (Vol. 12, p. 908).

                                     ADAMS, SAMUEL (Vol. 1, p. 180), by
                                       Prof. Edward Channing.

                                     ADAMS, JOHN (Vol. 1, p. 176), by
                                       Prof. Edward Channing.

                                     PAINE, ROBERT TREAT (Vol. 20, p.
                                       456).

                                     GERRY, ELBRIDGE (Vol. 11, p. 903).

 New York.                           LIVINGSTON, PHILIP (Vol. 16, p.
                                       813).

 Pennsylvania.                       MORRIS, ROBERT (Vol. 18, p. 871).

                                     RUSH, BENJAMIN (Vol. 23, p. 857).

                                     FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN (Vol. 11, p.
                                       24).

                                     WILSON, JAMES (Vol. 28, p. 693).

 New Jersey.                         WITHERSPOON, JOHN (Vol. 28, p.
                                       759).

                                     HOPKINSON, FRANCIS (Vol. 13, p.
                                       685).

 Connecticut.                        SHERMAN, ROGER (Vol. 24, p. 851).

                                     WOLCOTT, OLIVER (Vol. 28, p. 770).

 Rhode Island.                       ELLERY, WILLIAM (Vol. 9, p. 290).

 Maryland.                           CARROLL, CHARLES (Vol. 5, p. 409).

 South Carolina.                     MIDDLETON, ARTHUR (Vol. 18, p.
                                       415).

                                     RUTLEDGE, EDWARD (Vol. 23, p. 945).

 English Opinion and Policy.         GEORGE III (Vol. 11, p. 740), by
                                       Dr. S. R. Gardiner, author of
                                       _History of England_.

                                     GUILFORD, FREDERICK NORTH, 2nd Earl
                                       (Lord North) (Vol. 12, p. 691).

 “Conciliation.”                     BURKE, EDMUND (Vol. 4, p. 824), by
                                       John Morley (Viscount Morley of
                                       Blackburn).

                                     CHATHAM, EARL OF (Pitt) (Vol. 6, p.
                                       1).

                                     FOX, CHARLES JAMES (Vol. 10, p.
                                       761), by David Hannay.

 American Foreign Agents and their   FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN (Vol. 11, p.
   work, especially in France,         24).
   during the war.

                                     DEANE, SILAS (Vol. 7, p. 898).

                                     LEE, ARTHUR (Vol. 16, p. 360).

                                     JAY, JOHN (Vol. 15, p. 294).

 _The War for Independence._

 General outline.                    AMERICAN WAR OF INDEPENDENCE (Vol.
                                       1, p. 842), by Prof. Harry Phelps
                                       Johnston, New York University,
                                       author of _Loyalist History of
                                       the Revolution_, and, for naval
                                       affairs, by David Hannay, author
                                       of _A Short History of the Royal
                                       Navy_.

 American Leaders                    REVERE, PAUL (Vol. 23, p. 223).

 In early fighting in Massachusetts  WARREN, JOSEPH (Vol. 28, p. 330).

                                     PUTNAM, ISRAEL (Vol. 22, p. 670).

                                     WASHINGTON, GEORGE (Vol. 28, p.
                                       344), by Prof. William MacDonald,
                                       Brown University.

 On the border and in Canada         ALLEN, ETHAN (Vol. 1, p. 691).

                                     MONTGOMERY, RICHARD (Vol. 18, p.
                                       784).

                                     ARNOLD, BENEDICT (Vol. 2, p. 633).

                                     SCHUYLER, PHILIP JOHN (Vol. 24, p.
                                       387).

 In the Middle States                WASHINGTON, GEORGE (Vol. 28, p.
                                       344), by Prof. William MacDonald,
                                       Brown University.

                                     STIRLING, WILLIAM ALEXANDER, EARL
                                       OF (Vol. 25, p. 925).

                                     KNOX, HENRY (Vol. 15, p. 878).

                                     STARK, JOHN (Vol. 25, p. 798).

                                     WAYNE, ANTHONY (Vol. 28, p. 432).

                                     GATES, HORATIO (Vol. 11, p. 529).

                                     BENEDICT, ARNOLD (Vol. 2, p. 633).

                                     SULLIVAN, JOHN (Vol. 26, p. 57).

 In the South                        MOULTRIE, WILLIAM (Vol. 18, p.
                                       935).

                                     MORGAN, DANIEL (Vol. 18, p. 833).

                                     MARION, FRANCIS (Vol. 17, p. 722).

                                     PICKENS, ANDREW (Vol. 21, p. 582).

                                     SUMTER, THOMAS (Vol. 26, p. 85).

                                     SHELBY, ISAAC (Vol. 24, p. 826).

                                     GATES, HORATIO (Vol. 11, p. 529).

                                     LEE, HENRY (Vol. 16, p. 361).

                                     GREENE, NATHANIEL (Vol. 12, p.
                                       588).

 In the Northwest                    CLARK, GEORGE ROGERS (Vol. 6, p.
                                       442).

 On Sea                              JONES, JOHN PAUL (Vol. 15, p. 499).

                                     HOPKINS, ESEK (Vol. 13, p. 684).

 Foreign Officers in the War

 French                              LAFAYETTE (Vol. 16, p. 65).

                                     ROCHAMBEAU (Vol. 23, p. 425).

                                     GRASSE, COMTE DE (Vol. 12, p. 369).

                                     ESTAING, C. H. D’ (Vol. 9, p. 789).

 Polish                              KOSCIUSZKO (Vol. 15, p. 914).

                                     PULASKI (Vol. 22, p. 640).

 German                              STEUBEN (Vol. 25, p. 904).

                                     KALB, JOHANN (Vol. 15, p. 639).

 English Leaders

 On land                             HOWE, WILLIAM (Vol. 13, p. 839).

                                     CLINTON, SIR HENRY (Vol. 6, p.
                                       529).

                                     BURGOYNE, JOHN (Vol. 4, p. 819).

                                     ANDRÉ, JOHN (Vol. 1, p. 968).

                                     CORNWALLIS, CHARLES (Vol. 7, p.
                                       183).

                                     TARLETON, SIR BANASTRE (Vol. 26, p.
                                       428).

 On sea                              HASTINGS, MARQUESS OF (Lord Rawdon)
                                       (Vol. 13, p. 53).

                                     HOWE, RICHARD (Vol. 13, p. 836).

                                     RODNEY, GEORGE BRYDGES (Vol. 23, p.
                                       447).

                                     BYRON, JOHN (Vol. 4, p. 906).

 The Principal Engagements of the
   War, Separately Treated

 Around Boston                       LEXINGTON (Vol. 16, p. 527).

                                     CONCORD (Vol. 6, p. 830).

                                     BUNKER HILL (Vol. 4, p. 798).

                                     BOSTON (Vol. 4, p. 296).

 Canada and the Border               TICONDEROGA (Vol. 26, p. 938).

                                     CROWN POINT (Vol. 7, p. 519).

                                     QUEBEC (Vol. 22, p. 728).

 Middle States                       LONG ISLAND (Vol. 16, p. 984), by
                                       C. F. Atkinson, author of _The
                                       Wilderness and Cold Harbour_.

                                     NEW YORK CITY (Vol. 19, p. 622).

                                     TRENTON AND PRINCETON (Vol. 27, p.
                                       252).

                                     BRANDYWINE (Vol. 4, p. 430).

                                     GERMANTOWN (Vol. 11, p. 804).

                                     SARATOGA (Vol. 24, p. 205).

                                     BENNINGTON (Vol. 3, p. 743).

                                     VALLEY FORGE (Vol. 27, p. 864).

                                     MONMOUTH (Vol. 18, p. 727).

                                     STONY POINT (Vol. 25, p. 966).

                                     WEST POINT (Vol. 28, p. 559).

 South                               CHARLESTON (Vol. 5, p. 944).

                                     CAMDEN (Vol. 5, p. 102).

                                     KING’S MOUNTAIN (Vol. 15, p. 819).

                                     EUTAWVILLE (Vol. 9, p. 957).

                                     YORKTOWN (Vol. 28, p. 936).

 _Governmental History._

 First attempts at Confederation     UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
   (1776–1789). Article of             p. 681), by Prof. H. L. Osgood,
   Confederation (1777–1781).          Columbia University.

 Difficulties of ratification.       MARYLAND (Vol. 17, p. 832), by Dr.
                                       N. D. Mereness, author of
                                       _Maryland, a Proprietary
                                       Province_.

 Necessity for centralization seen   HAMILTON, ALEXANDER (Vol. 12, p.
   (1779–1780).                        880), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick and
                                       Hugh Chisholm, editor 11th
                                       Edition Encyclopaedia Britannica.

 Recognition of the United States.   FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN (Vol. 11, p.
   Treaty of Versailles (Sept.         27), by Richard Webster.
   1783).

                                     ADAMS, JOHN (Vol. 1, p. 176), by
                                       Dr. Edward Channing, Harvard
                                       University.

                                     JAY, JOHN (Vol. 15, p. 294).

                                     LAURENS, HENRY (Vol. 16, p. 284).

 Struggle for National Government.   UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
   The Critical Period.                p. 684), by Dr. Alexander
   Government found impossible under   Johnston, late professor of
   the articles (1783–1789).           history, Princeton University,
                                       and C. C. Whinery, assistant
                                       editor, Encyclopaedia Britannica.

 Territorial cessions and            JEFFERSON, THOMAS (Vol. 15, p.
   government. Ordinance of 1787.      303), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick.

 Roundabout origin of the            MADISON, JAMES (Vol. 17, p. 285).
   Constitutional Conventions:

 Alexandria (1785).                  ALEXANDRIA, VA. (Vol. 1, p. 572).

 Annapolis (1786).                   ANNAPOLIS, VA. (Vol. 2, p. 63).

 Philadelphia (1787).                PHILADELPHIA, _History_ (Vol. 21,
                                       p. 372).

 The three plans:

 Virginia                            RANDOLPH, EDMUND J. (Vol. 22, p.
                                       886).

 Pinckney                            PINCKNEY, CHARLES C. (Vol. 21, p.
                                       616).

 New Jersey (Paterson)               NEW JERSEY (Vol. 19, p. 512).

 Struggle over State Representation. MORRIS, GOUVERNEUR (Vol. 18, p.
                                       869).

 Origin of the Senate, Connecticut   CONNECTICUT, _History_ (Vol. 6, p.
   compromise.                         956).

 Opposition and Ratification.        HENRY, PATRICK (Vol. 13, p. 300).

                                     HAMILTON, ALEXANDER (Vol. 12, p.
                                       880), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick and
                                       Hugh Chisholm.

                                     MADISON, JAMES (Vol. 17, p. 286).

                                     JAY, JOHN (Vol. 15, p. 294).

 Federalists and Anti-Federalists.   FEDERALIST PARTY (Vol. 10, p. 235).

                                     ANTI-FEDERALISTS (Vol. 2, p. 124).

 Government Under the Constitution.

 The form of Government established  UNITED STATES, _Constitution and
   by the Constitution.                Government_ (Vol. 27, p. 646), by
                                       Hon. James Bryce, British
                                       Ambassador at Washington, and
                                       author of _The American
                                       Commonwealth_.

 Washington as President             WASHINGTON, GEORGE (Vol. 28, p.
   (1789–1797).                        347), by Dr. William MacDonald,
                                       professor of American History,
                                       Brown University.

 Development of Democracy            UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
   (1789–1801).                        p. 688), by Prof. Alexander
                                       Johnston and C. C. Whinery.

 Constitution finally ratified by    NORTH CAROLINA (Vol. 19, p. 777).
   all the States.

                                     RHODE ISLAND (Vol. 23, p. 252).

 The first Tariff act, 1789, a       TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 425), by Dr. F.
   moderate protective measure.        W. Taussig, professor Harvard
                                       University, author of _Principles
                                       of Economics_, etc.

 Admission of new States, Vermont    VERMONT (Vol. 27, p. 1028).
   and Kentucky.

                                     KENTUCKY (Vol. 15, p. 746).

 Hamilton’s efforts for strength and HAMILTON, ALEXANDER (Vol. 12, p.
   stability. His tendency towards     881), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick and
   Aristocracy. Opposition of          Hugh Chisholm, editor-in-chief
   Jefferson.                          Encyclopaedia Britannica.

                                     JEFFERSON, THOMAS (Vol. 15, p.
                                       303), by Dr. F. S. Philbrick.

 Excise troubles (1794). First       WHISKY INSURRECTION (Vol. 28, p.
   employment by the Federal           592).
   Executive of power to enforce
   Federal laws within the States.

                                     GALLATIN, ALBERT (Vol. 11, p. 414),
                                       by Henry Cabot Lodge, U. S.
                                       Senator from Massachusetts,
                                       biographer of Washington,
                                       Webster, etc.

 Jay’s treaty with England (1794).   JAY, JOHN (Vol. 15, p. 294).
   Its defects.

 Presidency of John Adams. Alien and ADAMS, JOHN (Vol. 1, p. 176), by
   Sedition Laws.                      Prof. Edward Channing of Harvard.

 Organization of Navy Department     NAVY AND NAVIES, _The United
   (1798).                             States_ (Vol. 19, p. 308), by
                                       David Hannay.

                                     ADMIRALTY ADMINISTRATION (Vol. 1,
                                       p. 201), by the late Rear-Admiral
                                       William T. Sampson, U. S. Navy.

 Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions.  VIRGINIA (Vol. 28, p. 124).

                                     KENTUCKY (Vol. 15, p. 746).

 Part in them taken by Jefferson and MADISON, JAMES (Vol. 17, p. 286).
   Madison.

 Idea of Secession present from the  SECESSION (Vol. 24, p. 568), by Dr.
   beginning. Early threats.           Walter L. Fleming, professor
                                       Louisiana State University.

 Invention of cotton gin (1793) and  WHITNEY, ELI (Vol. 28, p. 611).
   its far-reaching consequences,
   introducing a commercial element
   into slavery.

 _Democracy and Nationality_         UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
   (1801–1829).                        p. 692), by Prof. Alexander
                                       Johnston and C. C. Whinery.

 Election of Jefferson (1800). The   DEMOCRATIC PARTY (Vol. 8, p. 2).
   Democratic Party called by
   Jefferson the Republican Party,
   later and officially the
   Democratic-Republican, and later
   still simply the Democratic
   Party.

                                     STATE RIGHTS (Vol. 25, p. 802).

 The acquisition of Louisiana        LOUISIANA PURCHASE (Vol. 17, p.
   (1803).                             62).

 The Lewis-Clark expedition (1804);  LEWIS, MERIWETHER (Vol. 16, p.
   a basis for future acquisition of   523).
   territory in the far west.

                                     CLARK, WILLIAM (Vol. 6, p. 442).

                                     OREGON, _History_ (Vol. 20, p.
                                       248).

 War with the Barbary pirates        PIRATE AND PIRACY, _History_ (Vol.
   (1805). These robbers first         21, p. 638), by D. Hannay, author
   checked by the little American      of _Short History of the Royal
   navy.                               Navy_. EATON, WILLIAM (Vol. 8, p.
                                       839).

 War with Barbary Pirates.           DERNA (Vol. 8, p. 74), by D. G.
                                       Hogarth.

                                     HULL, ISAAC (Vol. 13, p. 869).

 Expedition of Aaron Burr            BURR, AARON (Vol. 4, p. 862).
   (1806–1807).

                                     WILKINSON, JAMES (Vol. 28, p. 647),
                                       by Dr. Isaac Joslin Cox,
                                       professor of history, University
                                       of Cincinnati.

 Election of Madison (1808).         MADISON, JAMES (Vol. 17, p. 284).

 Difficulties with Great Britain.    SEARCH, or VISIT AND SEARCH (Vol.
   Restrictions of Commerce and        24, p. 560), by Sir Thomas
   right of search.                    Barclay, author of _Problems of
                                       International Practice and
                                       Diplomacy_.

 _The War of 1812._

 Military and naval events.          AMERICAN WAR OF 1812 (Vol. 1, p.
                                       847), by David Hannay, author of
                                       _Short History of the Royal
                                       Navy_.

 Principal engagements and Strategic
   Points.

 In the Northwest                    MACKINAC ISLAND (Vol. 17, p. 255).

                                     DETROIT (Vol. 8, p. 116).

                                     MICHIGAN (Vol. 18, p. 376).

                                     TORONTO (Vol. 27, p. 53).

                                     SACKETT’S HARBOR (Vol. 23, p. 974).

                                     PLATTSBURG (Vol. 21, p. 825).

                                     CHAMPLAIN (Vol. 5, p. 831).

                                     NIAGARA, FORT (Vol. 19, p. 635).

 In the East                         WASHINGTON (Vol. 28, p. 352).

                                     BALTIMORE (Vol. 3, p. 290).

 In the Southwest                    NEW ORLEANS (Vol. 19, p. 531).

 Principal Leaders in the War on
   Land and on Sea.

 American                            RODGERS, JOHN (Vol. 23, p. 447).

                                     DECATUR, STEPHEN (Vol. 7, p. 910).

                                     HULL, ISAAC (Vol. 13, p. 869).

                                     BAINBRIDGE, WILLIAM (Vol. 3, p.
                                       223).

                                     PORTER, DAVID (Vol. 22, p. 113).

                                     CHAUNCEY, ISAAC (Vol. 6, p. 18).

                                     PERRY, OLIVER HAZARD (Vol. 21, p.
                                       185).

                                     BROWN, JACOB (Vol. 4, p. 659).

                                     SCOTT, WINFIELD (Vol. 24, p. 475).

                                     JACKSON, ANDREW (Vol. 15, p. 107).

 On the other side                   BROCK, SIR ISAAC (Vol. 4, p. 623).

                                     ROSS, ROBERT (Vol. 23, p. 740).

                                     BROKE, SIR P. B. V. (Vol. 4, p.
                                       628).

                                     TECUMSEH (Vol. 26, p. 499).

 Weakness of Madison’s               MADISON, JAMES (Vol. 17, p. 286).
   Administration.

 Opposition to the war in New        HARTFORD (Vol. 13, p. 33).
   England: The Hartford Convention.

 _After the War._

 Reaction against Federalist party   FEDERALIST PARTY (Vol. 10, p. 235).

 Acquisition of Florida (1819)       FLORIDA, _History_ (Vol. 10, p.
                                       545).

 Bank of the United States (1816).   BANKS AND BANKING, _United States_
                                       (Vol. 3, p. 345), by Charles A.
                                       Conant, author of _The History of
                                       Modern Banks_.

 Tariff revision (1816–1828).        TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 425), by Prof.
                                       F. W. Taussig, Harvard, author of
                                       _Tariff History of the United
                                       States_, etc.

 “The American System”—Clay’s name   PROTECTION (Vol. 22, p. 465), by
   for the combination of protective   Dr. Edmund J. James, president of
   tariff and internal improvements    University of Illinois, author of
   begun by Dallas and carried on by   _History of American Tariff
   himself and the Whig and            Legislation_.
   Republican parties.

                                     DALLAS, A. J. (Vol. 7, p. 768).

                                     CLAY, HENRY (Vol. 6, p. 471), by
                                       Carl Schurz, biographer of Clay.

 The Monroe Doctrine (1823).         MONROE, JAMES (Vol. 18, p. 736).

 The first weighty international     MONROE DOCTRINE (Vol. 18, p. 738),
   action of the Government—warning    by Dr. Theodore S. Woolsey,
   to European states at instance of   professor of International Law,
   England.                            Yale University.

 Admission of new States:

 Indiana (1816)                      INDIANA, _History_ (Vol. 14, p.
                                       425).

 Mississippi (1817)                  MISSISSIPPI, _History_ (Vol. 18, p.
                                       602).

 Illinois (1818)                     ILLINOIS, _History_ (Vol. 14, p.
                                       309).

 Alabama (1819)                      ALABAMA, _History_ (Vol. 1, p.
                                       462).

 Maine (1820)                        MAINE, _History_ (Vol. 17, p. 439).

 Missouri (1821)                     MISSOURI, _History_ (Vol. 18, p.
                                       613).

 Fixing the Northwest Boundary:      OREGON, _History_ (Vol. 20, p.
   Agreements with Great Britain       248).
   (1818 and 1827) and with Russia
   (1825).

 A nationalizing element in the      WHIG PARTY (Vol. 28, p. 589), by
   Republican Party fostered by        Dr. Anson D. Morse, professor of
   commercial and manufacturing        history, Amherst College.
   elements in the East fuses with
   broad constructionists to form
   new party (National Republican,
   later the Whig) under J. Q. Adams
   and Clay (1824).

                                     ADAMS, JOHN QUINCY (Vol. 1, p.
                                       178), by Prof. Edward Channing,
                                       Harvard University.

                                     CLAY, HENRY (Vol. 6, p. 470), by
                                       Carl Schurz, author of _Life of
                                       Henry Clay_.

                                     ANTI-MASONIC PARTY (Vol. 2, p.
                                       127).

 Jackson and the Democratic Party.   DEMOCRATIC PARTY (Vol. 8, p. 2).

 The “power of the people”           CRAWFORD, W. H. (Vol. 6, p. 386).
   established.

 Free _vs._ Slave States.            MISSOURI COMPROMISE (Vol. 18, p.
                                       614), by Prof. William Roy Smith,
                                       Bryn Mawr College.

 Beginning of a sectional struggle,  MISSOURI, _History_ (Vol. 18, p.
   which Clay and others tried to      613).
   compromise (1820).

 _Industrial Development and         UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
   Sectional Divergence._              p. 697), by Prof. Alexander
                                       Johnston and C. C. Whinery.

 _Tendencies to Disunion_
   (1829–1851).

 “The reign of Andrew Jackson”       JACKSON, ANDREW (Vol. 15, p. 107),
   (1829–1837).                        by the late Prof. William G.
                                       Sumner, Yale University, author
                                       of _Life of Andrew Jackson_, etc.

 The Kitchen Cabinet and the Cabinet GREEN, DUFF (Vol. 12, p. 534).
   Crisis.

                                     EATON, MARGARET O’NEILL (“Peggy
                                       O’Neill”) (Vol. 8, p. 838).

 Jackson and the Bank.               BANKS AND BANKING, _United States_
                                       (Vol. 3, p. 346), by C. A.
                                       Conant, author of _History of
                                       Modern Banks of Issue_.

 The new school of leaders.

 Jackson’s lieutenant and successor. VAN BUREN, MARTIN (Vol. 27, p.
                                       881), by Prof. William MacDonald,
                                       Brown University.

 Van Buren’s lieutenant in New York. MARCY, W. L. (Vol. 17, p. 696).

 The Jacksonian leader in the        BENTON, T. H. (Vol. 3, p. 753).
   Senate.

 Jackson’s War Secretary, 1831–36.   CASS, LEWIS (Vol. 5, p. 455).

 Jackson’s Attorney-General,         TANEY, R. B. (Vol. 26, p. 396).
   Treasurer, and (1835) Chief
   Justice.

 Jackson’s Secretary of State        LIVINGSTON, EDWARD (Vol. 16, p.
   (1831–33), who drafted the          811).
   anti-nullification proclamation.

 Georgia and the Cherokees.          GEORGIA, _History_ (Vol. 11, p.
   Opposition in the South to the      756).
   Protective System. Tariff of
   1832.

                                     TARIFF, _United States_ (Vol. 26,
                                       p. 425), by Prof. F. W. Taussig,
                                       Harvard University, author of
                                       _Tariff History of the United
                                       States_.

 Rise and fall of doctrine of        CALHOUN, JOHN C. (Vol. 5, p. 1), by
   Nullification (1830).               Hon. Henry A. M. Smith, U. S.
                                       District Judge, South Carolina.

                                     SOUTH CAROLINA, _History_ (Vol. 25,
                                       p. 504).

 Nullification not original with     NULLIFICATION (Vol. 19, p. 846), by
   Calhoun.                            Prof. Walter L. Fleming,
                                       Louisiana State University.

 The debate in the U. S. Senate on   WEBSTER, DANIEL (Vol. 28, p. 461),
   nullification—Webster and Hayne.    by Everett P. Wheeler, author of
                                       _Daniel Webster_, etc.

                                     HAYNE, ROBERT YOUNG (Vol. 13, p.
                                       114).

 Compromise Tariff of 1833.          TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 425), by Prof.
                                       F. W. Taussig, Harvard, author of
                                       _Tariff History of the United
                                       States_.

 Beginning of abolitionist movement  SLAVERY, _United States_ (Vol. 25,
   (1831). The “Liberator.”            p. 225), by Dr. J. K. Ingram.

 Foundation of American Anti-Slavery LUNDY, BENJAMIN (Vol. 17, p. 124).
   Society (1831). Its leaders.

                                     GARRISON, W. L. (Vol. 11, p. 477).

 Dissent from this view and          PHILLIPS, WENDELL (Vol. 21, p.
   formation of anti-slavery           407), by Thomas Wentworth
   political party (1840).             Higginson, author of _History of
                                       the United States_.

                                     LIBERTY PARTY (Vol. 16, p. 543).

                                     BIRNEY, JAMES G. (Vol. 3, p. 988).

                                     SMITH, GERRIT (Vol. 25, p. 261).

 “Dorr’s Rebellion.”                 RHODE ISLAND (Vol. 23, p. 252).

 Seminole War (1835–1842).           OSCEOLA (Vol. 20, p. 346).

 Texas independent of Mexico (1836). TEXAS, _History_ (Vol. 26, p. 692).

                                     HOUSTON, SAM (Vol. 13, p. 828).

 Admission of Texas (1845).          SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS (Vol. 24, p.
                                       126).

                                     AUSTIN, S. F. (Vol. 2, p. 940).

                                     CROCKETT, DAVID (Vol. 7, p. 477).

 Polk’s Administration.              POLK, J. K. (Vol. 21, p. 983), by
                                       Prof. W. R. Smith, Bryn Mawr
                                       College.

 War with Mexico (1846–1848).        TAYLOR, ZACHARY (Vol. 26, p. 473),
                                       by Prof. Isaac J. Cox, University
                                       of Cincinnati.

 The Generals and the Fighting.      SCOTT, WINFIELD (Vol. 24, p. 475).

                                     SANTA-ANA (Vol. 24, p. 184).

                                     MEXICO, _History_ (Vol. 18, p.
                                       340).

                                     MEXICO CITY (Vol. 18, p. 347).

 Wilmot Proviso and similar          WILMOT, DAVID (Vol. 28, p. 691).
   measures.

 Cession of California (1848), and   CALIFORNIA, _History_ (Vol. 5, p.
   Discovery of Gold there.            17).

 The Gadsden Purchase (1853).        GADSDEN, JAMES (Vol. 11, p. 383).

 Compromise Measures of 1850.        COMPROMISE MEASURES OF 1850 (Vol.
                                       6, p. 813), by Prof. W. R. Smith,
                                       Bryn Mawr College.

 Opposition in Georgia.              GEORGIA (Vol. 11, p. 756).

 Fugitive Slave Laws.                FUGITIVE SLAVE LAWS (Vol. 11, p.
                                       288).

 Various political elements join to  FREE SOIL PARTY (Vol. 11, p. 87).
   oppose introduction of slavery
   into territories (1847–1848).

 Tariff Reduction, Walker Bill of    TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 425), by Prof.
   1846.                               F. W. Taussig, Harvard
                                       University.

                                     WALKER, ROBERT JAMES (Vol. 28, p.
                                       273).

 Independent Treasury System (1846). POLK, J. K. (Vol. 21, p. 983), by
                                       Prof. W. R. Smith, Bryn Mawr.

 Clayton-Bulwer Treaty (1850).       CLAYTON-BULWER TREATY (Vol. 6, p.
                                       475).

                                     CLAYTON, JOHN M. (Vol. 6, p. 474).

 The northern boundary “Fifty-four   OREGON, _History_ (Vol. 20, p.
   forty or fight.”                    249).

                                     WASHINGTON, _History_ (Vol. 28, p.
                                       357).

 New Leaders in the ’50’s.

 Northern anti-slavery men.          SUMNER, CHARLES (Vol. 26, p. 81).

                                     SEWARD, WILLIAM H. (Vol. 24, p.
                                       733).

                                     CHASE, SALMON P. (Vol. 5, p. 955).

 Southern leaders, protecting        DAVIS, JEFFERSON (Vol. 7, p. 867),
   slavery in the Territories.         by Hon. W. W. Henry, late
                                       president of the American
                                       Historical Association, and Dr.
                                       N. D. Mereness.

                                     STEPHENS, A. H. (Vol. 26, p. 887).

 Northern “popular sovereignty       DOUGLAS, STEPHEN A. (Vol. 8, p.
   leader.”                            446).

 Attempt to uphold Fugitive Slave    WHIG PARTY (Vol. 28, p. 590), by
   Law of 1850—a death blow to the     Prof. A. D. Morse, Amherst
   Whig Party.                         College.

 The American or “Know Nothing”      KNOW NOTHING PARTY (Vol. 15, p.
   Party.                              877).

 Kansas-Nebraska Bill, repealing     KANSAS, _History_ (Vol. 15, p.
   Missouri Compromise.                658).

                                     NEBRASKA, _History_ (Vol. 19, p.
                                       330).

 Origin of the Republican Party      REPUBLICAN PARTY (Vol. 23, p. 177),
   (1854).                             by Prof. A. D. Morse, Amherst
                                       College.

 Opening of Japan (1854).            JAPAN, _History_ (Vol. 15, p. 237),
                                       by Capt. Frank Brinkley, late
                                       editor of “The Japan Mail”;
                                       author of _Japan_; PERRY, M. C.
                                       (Vol. 21, p. 184).

 Efforts to obtain Cuba in the       BUCHANAN, JAMES (Vol. 4, p. 716).
   interests of Slavery. The Ostend
   Manifesto (1854).

 The election of 1856.               FILLMORE, MILLARD (Vol. 10, p.
                                       344).

                                     FREMONT, JOHN C. (Vol. 11, p. 97).

 The Dred Scott decision and its     TANEY, ROGER B. (Vol. 26, p. 396).
   effects (1857).

 Lincoln and Douglas debates in      LINCOLN, ABRAHAM (Vol. 16, p. 705),
   Illinois. Senatorial contest        by J. G. Nicolay and C. C.
   (1858).                             Whinery.

                                     DOUGLAS, S. A. (Vol. 8, p. 446).

                                     FREEPORT, ILL. (Vol. 11, p. 85).

 John Brown’s Raid (1859).           BROWN, JOHN (Vol. 4, p. 660).

 Admission of Minnesota and Oregon.  MINNESOTA, _History_ (Vol. 17, p.
                                       553).

                                     OREGON, _History_ (Vol. 20, p.
                                       249).

 The Presidential Campaign of 1860.  BELL, JOHN (Vol. 3, p. 686).

                                     EVERETT, EDWARD (Vol. 10, p. 8), by
                                       Dr. Edward Everett Hale, author
                                       of _The Man Without a Country_,
                                       etc.

 Lincoln elected with Hannibal       LINCOLN, ABRAHAM (Vol. 16, p. 703),
   Hamlin of Maine as                  by John G. Nicolay, author (with
   Vice-President.                     John Hay) of _Abraham Lincoln—a
                                       History_, and C. C. Whinery,
                                       assistant editor, 11th edition,
                                       Encyclopaedia Britannica.

                                     HAMLIN, HANNIBAL (Vol. 12, p. 896).

 _Secession_ (1860–1861).            UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
                                       p. 707), by the late Prof.
                                       Alexander Johnston of Princeton
                                       and C. C. Whinery.

                                     SECESSION (Vol. 24, p. 568), by
                                       Prof. W. L. Fleming, Louisiana
                                       State University.

                                     STATE RIGHTS (Vol. 25, p. 802).

 Organization and administration of  CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA (Vol.
   the Confederacy.                    6, p. 899), by Dr. J. C. Schwab,
                                       Yale, author of _The Confederate
                                       States of America_.

 President                           DAVIS, JEFFERSON (Vol. 7, p. 867),
                                       by Hon. William Wirt Henry and N.
                                       D. Mereness.

 Vice-President                      STEPHENS, ALEXANDER H. (Vol. 25, p.
                                       87).

 Other leaders and administrators    BENJAMIN, JUDAH P. (Vol. 3, p.
                                       739).

                                     REAGAN, JOHN H. (Vol. 22, p. 940).

                                     COBB, HOWELL (Vol. 6, p. 606).

                                     TOOMBS, ROBERT (Vol. 27, p. 47).

                                     VANCE, Z. B. (Vol. 27, p. 882).

 Commissioners to Europe             YANCEY, WILLIAM LOWNDES (Vol. 28,
                                       p. 902).

                                     MASON, JAMES MURRAY (Vol. 17, p.
                                       839).

                                     SLIDELL, JOHN (Vol. 25, p. 241).

 Secession by popular vote, May      TENNESSEE, _History_ (Vol. 26, p.
   (1861).                             624).

                                     VIRGINIA, _History_ (Vol. 28, p.
                                       124).

 The people of Virginia divide the   WEST VIRGINIA, _History_ (Vol. 28,
   State (May, 1861).                  p. 563).

[Sidenote: Battles and Campaigns]

The main article AMERICAN CIVIL WAR (Vol. 1, p. 818), by Capt. Charles
F. Atkinson, author of _The Wilderness and Cold Harbour_, is richly
supplemented with detailed accounts of the principal campaigns and
battles, and biographies of military leaders on both the Federal and
Confederate sides. For battles and campaigns see: CHARLESTON (Vol. 5, p.
944); BULL RUN (Vol. 4, p. 791), with map and description of both famous
battles; LEXINGTON, Mo. (Vol. 16, p. 527); SHENANDOAH VALLEY CAMPAIGNS
(Vol. 24, p. 834); YORKTOWN (Vol. 28, p. 936); SEVEN DAYS’ BATTLE (Vol.
24, p. 707), both with fine maps, and written by Major George W. Redway,
author of _The War of Secession_; FAIR OAKS (Vol. 10, p. 133); HAMPTON
ROADS (Vol. 12, p. 906); DONELSON, FORT (Vol. 8, p. 414); SHILOH, BATTLE
OF (Vol. 24, p. 859); CORINTH (Vol. 7, p. 150); NEW MADRID (Vol. 19, p.
516); PERRYVILLE (Vol. 21, p. 185); IUKA (Vol. 15, p. 87); MEMPHIS (Vol.
18, p. 107); NEW ORLEANS (Vol. 19, p. 531); HARPER’S FERRY (Vol. 13, p.
14); ANTIETAM (Vol. 2, p. 124); FREDERICKSBURG (Vol. 11, p. 68); STONE
RIVER, BATTLE OF (Vol. 25, p. 966); CHANCELLORSVILLE (Vol. 5, p. 835),
see also WILDERNESS (Vol. 28, p. 633); GETTYSBURG (Vol. 11, p. 911),
with map; VICKSBURG (Vol. 28, p. 21), with maps; PORT HUDSON (Vol. 22,
p. 117); BATON ROUGE (Vol. 3, p. 521); HELENA, ARK. (Vol. 13, p. 219);
CHICKAMAUGA CREEK (Vol. 6, p. 130), with map; CHATTANOOGA (Vol. 6, p.
7); KNOXVILLE (Vol. 15, p. 883); RED RIVER (Vol. 22, p. 969); WILDERNESS
(Vol. 28, p. 633), with 4 maps, by C. F. Atkinson, author of _The
Wilderness and Cold Harbour_; WASHINGTON (Vol. 28, p. 352); MARIETTA,
Ga. (Vol. 17, p. 715); ATLANTA (Vol. 2, p. 854); SAVANNAH (Vol. 24, p.
241); MOBILE (Vol. 18, p. 636); GALVESTON (Vol. 11, p. 431); FRANKLIN,
Tenn. (Vol. 11, p. 34); NASHVILLE (Vol. 19, p. 247); PETERSBURG (Vol.
21, p. 301), with two maps, by Major G. W. Redway; COLUMBIA, S. C. (Vol.
6, p. 738); APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE (Vol. 2, p. 226); RICHMOND, Va. (Vol.
23, p. 311).

[Sidenote: Union Generals]

On the leaders on both sides see the biographical articles: MCCLELLAN,
GEORGE BRINTON (Vol. 17, p. 201); HALLECK, HENRY WAGER (Vol. 12, p.
854); GRANT, ULYSSES SIMPSON (Vol. 12, p. 355), by John Fiske and Capt.
C. F. Atkinson; DIX, JOHN ADAMS (Vol. 8, p. 346); MCDOWELL, IRVIN (Vol.
17, p. 214); BURNSIDE, AMBROSE EVERETT (Vol. 4, p. 861); HOOKER, JOSEPH
(Vol. 13, p. 671); MEADE, GEORGE GORDON (Vol. 17, p. 945); POPE, JOHN
(Vol. 22, p. 87); BUELL, DON CARLOS (Vol. 4, p. 751); ROSECRANS, WILLIAM
STARKE (Vol. 23, p. 734); SHERMAN, WILLIAM TECUMSEH (Vol. 24, p. 851);
THOMAS, GEORGE HENRY (Vol. 26, p. 866); MACPHERSON, JAMES BIRDSEYE (Vol.
17, p. 268); SHERIDAN, PHILIP HENRY (Vol. 24, p. 847); SLOCUM, HENRY
WARNER (Vol. 25, p. 243); BUTLER, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN (Vol. 4, p. 881);
HANCOCK, WINFIELD SCOTT (Vol. 12, p. 909); HUMPHREYS, ANDREW ATKINSON
(Vol. 13, p. 891); SEDGWICK, JOHN (Vol. 24, p. 578); REYNOLDS, JOHN
FULTON (Vol. 23, p. 226); WARREN, GOUVERNEUR KEMBLE (Vol. 28, p. 329);
HOWARD, OLIVER OTIS (Vol. 13, p. 833); DOUBLEDAY, ABNER (Vol. 8, p.
441); SICKLES, DANIEL EDGAR (Vol. 25, p. 36); SCHURZ, CARL (Vol. 24, p.
386); DEVENS, CHARLES (Vol. 8, p. 120); BUTTERFIELD, DANIEL (Vol. 4, p.
890); PORTER, HORACE (Vol. 22, p. 116); FRANKLIN, WILLIAM BUEL (Vol. 11,
p. 33); PORTER, FITZ-JOHN (Vol. 22, p. 115); SHIELDS, JAMES (Vol. 24, p.
856); HUNT, HENRY JACKSON (Vol. 13, p. 934); COUCH, DARIUS NASH (Vol. 7,
p. 307); COX, JACOB DOLSON (Vol. 7, p. 352); MEAGHER, THOMAS FRANCIS
(Vol. 17, p. 946); SUMNER, EDWIN VOSE (Vol. 26, p. 83); SIGEL, FRANZ
(Vol. 25, p. 60); KEARNY, PHILIP (Vol. 15, p. 707); SMITH, CHARLES
FERGUSON (Vol. 25, p. 259); SMITH, WILLIAM FARRAR (Vol. 25, p. 271);
CRITTENDEN, THOMAS LEONIDAS (Vol. 7, p. 471); MCCLERNAND, JOHN ALEXANDER
(Vol. 17, p. 202); SMITH, ANDREW JACKSON (Vol. 25, p. 259); GARFIELD,
JAMES ABRAM (Vol. 11, p. 464); WALLACE, LEWIS (Vol. 28, p. 276); BANKS,
NATHANIEL PRENTISS (Vol. 3, p. 333); WASHBURN, CADWALADER COLDEN (Vol.
28, p. 344); LOGAN, JOHN ALEXANDER (Vol. 16, p. 866); PALMER, JOHN
MCAULEY (Vol. 20, p. 645); MCCOOK, ALEXANDER MCDOWELL, MCCOOK, DANIEL,
and MCCOOK, JOHN JAMES (Vol. 17, p. 205); SMITH, MORGAN LEWIS, and
SMITH, GILES ALEXANDER (Vol. 25, p. 267); BLAIR, FRANCIS PRESTON (Vol.
4, p. 34); SCHOFIELD, JOHN MCALLISTER (Vol. 24, p. 345); NEWTON, JOHN
(Vol. 19, p. 592); MILES, NELSON A. (Vol. 18, p. 442); MERRITT, WESLEY
(Vol. 18, p. 173); CUSTER, GEORGE ARMSTRONG (Vol. 7, p. 668); STONEMAN,
GEORGE (Vol. 25, p. 962); WILSON, JAMES HARRISON (Vol. 28, p. 695);
TRACY, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN (Vol. 27, p. 127); LYON, NATHANIEL (Vol. 17, p.
173); FARRAGUT, DAVID GLASGOW (Vol. 10, p. 187); PORTER, DAVID DIXON
(Vol. 22, p. 113); FOOTE, ANDREW HULL (Vol. 10, p. 625); CUSHING,
WILLIAM BARKER (Vol. 7, p. 667).

[Sidenote: Confederate Generals]

And, for Confederate leaders: LEE, ROBERT EDWARD (Vol. 16, p. 362);
JACKSON, THOMAS JONATHAN, “STONEWALL” (Vol. 15, p. 110); LONGSTREET,
JAMES (Vol. 16, p. 985); JOHNSTON, ALBERT SIDNEY (Vol. 15, p. 472);
JOHNSTON, JOSEPH EGGLESTON (Vol. 15, p. 474); BEAUREGARD, PIERRE G. T.
(Vol. 3, p. 599); BRAGG, BRAXTON (Vol. 4, p. 376); HOOD, JOHN BELL (Vol.
13, p. 665); POLK, LEONIDAS (Vol. 21, p. 984); HARDEE, WILLIAM JOSEPH
(Vol. 12, p. 941); HILL, AMBROSE POWELL (Vol. 13, p. 463); HILL, DANIEL
HARVEY (Vol. 13, p. 464); EWELL, RICHARD STODDERT (Vol. 10, p. 40);
EARLY, JUBAL ANDERSON (Vol. 8, p. 797); ANDERSON, RICHARD HENRY (Vol. 1,
p. 960); FLOYD, JOHN BUCHANAN (Vol. 10, p. 573); BUCKNER, SIMON BOLIVAR
(Vol. 4, p. 732); CRITTENDEN, GEORGE BIBB (Vol. 7, p. 471);
BRECKINRIDGE, JOHN CABELL (Vol. 4, p. 483); SMITH, EDMUND KIRBY (Vol.
25, p. 260); LEE, STEPHEN DILL (Vol. 16, p. 364); VAN DORN, EARL (Vol.
27, p. 887); ASHBY, TURNER (Vol. 2, p. 730); STUART, JAMES EWELL BROWN
(Vol. 25, p. 1047); HAMPTON, WADE (Vol. 12, p. 905); LEE, FITZHUGH (Vol.
16, p. 360); WHEELER, JOSEPH (Vol. 28, p. 586); FORREST, NATHAN BEDFORD
(Vol. 10, p. 673); MORGAN, JOHN HUNT (Vol. 18, p. 834); MOSBY, JOHN
SINGLETON (Vol. 18, p. 890); WISE, HENRY ALEXANDER (Vol. 28, p. 751).

 _Topics for Reading_                _Articles_

 _Political History During the Civil
   War._

 Paper money (1862).                 GREENBACKS (Vol. 12, p. 537).

 Public lands given to settlers at   HOMESTEAD AND EXEMPTION LAWS (Vol.
   reduced rates (1862), and granted   13, p. 639), by Dr. N. D.
   to agricultural colleges (1862).    Mereness.

                                     MORRILL, J. S. (Vol. 18, p. 869).

 War Tariffs (1862–1864).            TARIFF, _United States_ (Vol. 26,
                                       p. 425), by Prof. F. W. Taussig,
                                       Harvard, author of _Tariff
                                       History of the United States_.

 Establishment of National Banking   BANKS AND BANKING, _United States_
   System (1862–1865).                 (Vol. 3, p. 347), by Charles A.
                                       Conant, author of _Banks of
                                       Issue_.

 Emancipation (1863).                LINCOLN, ABRAHAM (Vol. 16, p. 707),
                                       by J. G. Nicolay, biographer of
                                       Lincoln, and C. C. Whinery,
                                       assistant editor, Encyclopaedia
                                       Britannica.

 Second election of Lincoln (1864).  MCCLELLAN, G. B. (Vol. 17, p. 201).

 Opposition to the War in the North. KNIGHTS OF THE GOLDEN CIRCLE (Vol.
                                       15, p. 868), by Prof. W. L.
                                       Fleming, Louisiana State
                                       University.

                                     VALLANDIGHAM, C. L. (Vol. 27, p.
                                       862).

                                     COPPERHEADS (Vol. 7, p. 110).

 The War Governors of the Northern   ANDREW, JOHN A. (Vol. 1, p. 973).
   States.

                                     CURTIN, A. G. (Vol. 7, p. 651).

                                     MORGAN, E. D. (Vol. 18, p. 833).

                                     SEYMOUR, HORATIO (Vol. 24, p. 755).

                                     MORTON, OLIVER P. (Vol. 18, p.
                                       882).

                                     YATES, RICHARD (Vol. 28, p. 908).

 Assassination of Lincoln (1865).    LINCOLN, ABRAHAM (Vol. 16, p. 709),
                                       by J. G. Nicolay and C. C.
                                       Whinery.

 _The Reconstruction Period._        UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27,
                                       p. 711), by Dr. Frederick J.
                                       Turner, professor of history,
                                       Harvard University.

 Organizing the negroes into a       FREEDMEN’S BUREAU (Vol. 11, p. 75),
   political party.                    by Prof. W. L. Fleming.

                                     HOWARD, O. O. (Vol. 13, p. 833).

 Opposition to Reconstruction        KU KLUX KLAN (Vol. 15, p. 942), by
   Measures (1865–1876).               Prof. W. L. Fleming.

 Thirteenth, Fourteenth and          UNITED STATES, _Constitution and
   Fifteenth Amendments.               Government_ (Vol. 27, pp. 647,
                                       658, etc.), by James Bryce,
                                       author of _The American
                                       Commonwealth_.

 Character of Reconstruction         See under _History_ in articles on
   Government.                         Southern States.

 “Scalawags” and “Carpet Baggers.”   CARPET BAGGER (Vol. 5, p. 397).

 Johnson’s Policy: his impeachment.  JOHNSON, ANDREW (Vol. 15, p. 461).

                                     IMPEACHMENT (Vol. 14, p. 340).

 The Legal Tenders.                  MCCULLOCH, HUGH (Vol. 17, p. 207).

 Grant’s two administrations         GRANT, U. S. (Vol. 12, p. 357), by
   (1869–1877).                        Dr. John Fiske, author of
                                       _American Political Ideas_, etc.,
                                       and C. F. Atkinson, author of
                                       _Wilderness and Cold Harbour_,
                                       etc.

 Beginning of Woman’s Suffrage       WOMAN (Vol. 28, p. 788).
   (1869).

 Black Friday (1869).                GOULD, JAY (Vol. 12, p. 284).

                                     FISK, JAMES (Vol. 10, p. 437).

 The Alabama Claims, Treaty of       “ALABAMA” ARBITRATION (Vol. 1, p.
   Washington (1871).                  464), by Montague H.
                                       Crackanthorpe.

 The “Virginius” Affair (1873).      SANTIAGO DE CUBA (Vol. 24, p. 193).

 The Panic of 1873 and the Inflation GREENBACKS (Vol. 12, p. 536).
   Bill (1874).

 Political unrest in the West        FARMERS’ MOVEMENT (Vol. 10, p.
   (1873–1874).                        181).

 Railway abuses. The greatest        CRÉDIT MOBILIER OF AMERICA (Vol. 7,
   American political scandal.         p. 391).

 War with the Sioux. Custer massacre CUSTER, GEORGE A. (Vol. 7, p. 668).
   (1876).

 The Hayes-Tilden Contest (1876).    ELECTORAL COMMISSION (Vol. 9, p.
                                       172).

                                     TILDEN, S. J. (Vol. 26, p. 970).

 Withdrawal of Federal troops from   HAYES, R. B. (Vol. 13, p. 112), by
   the South.                          Carl Schurz.

 Civil Service Reform.               SCHURZ, CARL (Vol. 24, p. 386).

                                     GODKIN, E. L. (Vol. 12, p. 174).

 Monetary Question—Bland-Allison Act ALLISON, W. B. (Vol. 1, p. 696).
   (1878).

 Republicans regain control of       CONKLING, ROSCOE (Vol. 6, p. 950).
   Congress.

 Factions in Republican Party.       PLATT, T. C. (Vol. 21, p. 825).

 Assassination of Garfield.          GARFIELD, JAMES A. (Vol. 11, p.
                                       465), by Prof. John B. McMaster,
                                       University of Pennsylvania,
                                       author of _A History of the
                                       People of the United States_.

 Succession of the Vice-President.   ARTHUR, C. A. (Vol. 2, p. 683).

 Anti-Polygamy Act (1882).           MORMONS (Vol. 18, p. 846).

                                     UTAH (Vol. 27, p. 818).

 Triumph of Civil Service Reform     CIVIL SERVICE, _United States_
   (1883).                             (Vol. 6, p. 414).

 Tariff revision (1883).             TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 426), by Prof.
                                       F. W. Taussig, Harvard
                                       University, author of _Tariff
                                       History of the United States_.

 The Presidential campaign of 1884.  BLAINE, JAMES G. (Vol. 4, p. 32),
   First election of Grover            by Charles Emory Smith, late
   Cleveland.                          editor _Albany Journal_ and
                                       _Philadelphia Press_, and
                                       Postmaster-General of the United
                                       States.

                                     CLEVELAND, GROVER (Vol. 6, p. 501),
                                       by Horace White, formerly editor
                                       _The Evening Post_, New York;
                                       author of _The Tariff Question_.

 Party Breaks.                       MUGWUMP (Vol. 18, p. 956).

 Increasing problems of Interstate   INTERSTATE COMMERCE (Vol. 14, p.
   Commerce. Federal legislation       711), by Prof. Frank A. Fetter,
   (1887) on interstate commerce.      Princeton University, author of
                                       _The Principles of Economics._

 Labor combinations, social unrest.  TRADE UNIONS, _United States_ (Vol.
                                       27, p. 150), by Carroll D.
                                       Wright, late U. S. Commissioner
                                       of Labor.

                                     STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS, _United
                                       States_ (Vol. 25, p. 1033), by
                                       Carroll D. Wright.

 Republican success in 1888.         HARRISON, BENJAMIN (Vol. 13, p.
   Benjamin Harrison, president.       22), by Hon. J. W. Foster,
                                       formerly U. S. Secretary of
                                       State.

 Republican policy in Congress.      REED, THOMAS B. (Vol. 22, p. 973).

 American control in Samoa (1889).   SAMOA, _History_ (Vol. 24, p. 116).

 Republican and Democratic Tariffs:  TARIFF, _United States_ (Vol. 26,
   Mills Bill (1888), McKinley Act     p. 426), by Prof. F. W. Taussig.
   (1890).

                                     MILLS, R. Q. (Vol. 18, p. 475).

                                     MCKINLEY, WILLIAM (Vol. 17, p.
                                       256).

 States powerless to arrest the      TRUSTS (Vol. 27, p. 334), by Prof.
   progress of Industrial              J. W. Jenks, professor of Economy
   Combinations. Federal               and Government, New York
   legislation. Sherman Anti-Trust     University, special investigator
   Law (1890).                         of Trusts for U. S. Government.

 Party disruption over free coinage  SHERMAN, JOHN (Vol. 24, p. 850), by
   of silver. Sherman Silver           Prof. W. A. Dunning, Columbia
   Purchase Act (1890).                University, author of _Essays on
                                       Civil War and Reconstruction_,
                                       etc.

                                     BIMETALLISM (Vol. 3, p. 946), by C.
                                       F. Bastable, Dublin University,
                                       author of _Public Finance_.

 Opening of Indian Lands             OKLAHOMA, _History_ (Vol. 20, p.
   (1889–1898). Formation of           60).
   Oklahoma.

 Beginning of restriction of Negro   UNITED STATES, _Constitution and
   suffrage (1890), and adoption of    Government_ (Vol. 27, p. 647), by
   grandfather clauses in              Hon. James Bryce. Sections on
   constitutions of Southern states.   _Government_ of articles
                                       MISSISSIPPI, VIRGINIA, NORTH
                                       CAROLINA, GEORGIA, ALABAMA,
                                       LOUISIANA and OKLAHOMA.

 The campaign of 1892.

 The candidates.                     HARRISON, BENJAMIN (Vol. 13, p.
                                       22), by J. W. Foster, late U. S.
                                       Secretary of State.

 Second election of Cleveland.       WEAVER, JAMES B. (Vol. 28, p. 439).

 Panic of 1893.                      CLEVELAND, GROVER (Vol. 6, p. 502),
                                       by Horace White, late editor of
                                       _The New_ _York Evening Post_.

 Wilson Tariff (1894).               TARIFF, _United States_ (Vol. 26,
                                       p. 426), by Prof. F. W. Taussig.

 Venezuela Boundary Question (1895). CLEVELAND, GROVER (Vol. 6, p. 503),
                                       by Horace White.

 New phase of Monroe Doctrine.       OLNEY, RICHARD (Vol. 20, p. 91).

 The issues of 1896. McKinley’s      MCKINLEY, WILLIAM (Vol. 17, p.
   election.                           257).

 Republicans and Gold Standard.      HANNA, M. A. (Vol. 12, p. 919).

 Democrats and Silver.               BRYAN, WILLIAM J. (Vol. 9, p. 697).

 Gold Democrats.                     PALMER, J. M. (Vol. 20, p. 645).

                                     BUCKNER, S. B. (Vol. 4, p. 732).

 The Dingley Tariff (1897).          TARIFF, _United States_ (Vol. 26,
                                       p. 427), by Prof. F. W. Taussig.

 Annexation of Hawaii and events     HAWAII, _History_ (Vol. 13, p. 91).
   leading to it (1898).

 War with Spain (1898).              SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR OF 1898 (Vol.
                                       25, p. 594).

 Treaty of Paris (1898). The United  PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, _History_ (Vol.
   States finds itself “in a           21, p. 399), by Prof. Hiram
   position of increased importance    Bingham, Yale University.
   and prestige among the nations of
   the world.”

                                     PORTO RICO, _History_ (Vol. 22, p.
                                       126).

 Regeneration of Cuba (1898–1909).   CUBA, _History_ (Vol. 7, p. 604),
                                       by F. S. Philbrick.

 Initiative and Referendum first     SOUTH DAKOTA, _History_ (Vol. 25,
   adopted (1898).                     p. 508).

                                     UNITED STATES, _Constitution and
                                       Government_ (Vol. 27, p. 651), by
                                       Hon. James Bryce, author of _The
                                       American Commonwealth_.

 Discovery of gold in Alaska.        ALASKA (Vol. 1, p. 475).

 Conservation of National Resources, FOREST AND FORESTRY, _United
   a new policy.                       States_ (Vol. 10, p. 651), by
                                       Gifford Pinchot, formerly chief
                                       of the Forestry Service, U. S.
                                       Department of Agriculture.

 Assassination of McKinley. The      ROOSEVELT, THEODORE (Vol. 23, p.
   Roosevelt Administration            707), by Lawrence F. Abbott,
   (1901–1909).                        president of “The Outlook
                                       Company.”

 Isthmian Canal.                     PANAMA (Vol. 20, p. 666).

                                     PANAMA CANAL (Vol. 20, p. 666).

 Panic of 1907.                      BANKS AND BANKING (Vol. 3, p. 348),
                                       by Charles A. Conant, author of
                                       _A History of Modern Banks of
                                       Issue_.

 Elkins Law.                         RAILWAYS, _American Legislation_
                                       (Vol. 22, p. 829).

 Eastern Policy.                     HAY, JOHN (Vol. 13, p. 105).

                                     ROOT, ELIHU (Vol. 23, p. 711).

This sketch of American History closes with the inauguration of
President Roosevelt, for the questions that have arisen since that date
are questions into which current politics enter, and these are treated
in the chapter of this Guide on _Questions of the Day_. Here we need
only say that throughout his study of American history the reader will
constantly—and easily—find many more articles bearing on the subject
than are mentioned in the outline given above. In particular let him
note:

—that there are many biographies of figures prominent in nation and
state not mentioned above;

—that in each article devoted to a state there is a section on history,
which has a double value, as giving the outline of the state’s history
and as showing its part in the history of the nation;

—and that there is in articles on cities and towns a great deal of
important information of historical value, sometimes merely local, but
oftener bearing on the history of state or nation, or both.




                              CHAPTER XLIV
                            CANADIAN HISTORY


[Sidenote: “Young” Rivers and Lakes]

All the world thinks of Canada as the youngest of countries, for the
extraordinary rapidity with which her western territory has been
developed within recent years surpasses every other record of
agricultural expansion. But in order to realize how young Canada is, in
another sense, one must examine the less familiar facts of her
geological history. “The innumerable lakes and waterfalls,” says the
Britannica (Vol. 5, p. 143), prove “that the rivers have not been long
at work,” and that the country owes its contours to comparatively recent
geological action. “In many cases the lakes of Canada simply spill over,
at the lowest point, from one basin into the next below, since in so
young a country there has not yet been time for the rivers to have
carved wide valleys.... Thousands of these lakes have been mapped; and
every new survey brings to light small lakes hitherto unknown to the
white man.... For the great extent of lake-filled country there is no
comparison” in any part of the world. And because the rivers have not
yet worn their beds to an even slope, there are waterfalls enough to
provide unlimited horse power; so that the natural advantages of Canada
invite manufacturing just as the fertility of her soil invites
agriculture.

The geographical and geological portions of the article CANADA (Vol. 5,
p. 142) must be carefully read in order that the significance of the
historical account of the country may be fully grasped; and the same is
true of those parts of the article which deal with agriculture and with
the commerce of which the first developments were associated with early
exploration. There is ample and authoritative information on all these
subjects in the article, which is equivalent in length to 85 pages of
this Guide. The sections and their contributors are: _Geography_, by
Prof. A. P. Coleman, Toronto University; _Population_, _Commerce_, etc.,
by Prof. W. L. Grant, Queens University, Kingston; _Agriculture_, by E.
H. Godfrey, editor of Census and Statistics Office, Department of
Agriculture, Ottawa; _History_—to the Federation by G. M. Wrong,
University of Toronto, and after the Federation by G. R. Parkin, author
of _Imperial Federation_ and _Life of Sir John Macdonald_, etc., and
_Literature_—English-Canadian, by L. J. Burpee, author of _The Search
for the Western Sea_, and French-Canadian by William Wood, author of
_The Fight for Canada_.

[Sidenote: Exploration and Settlement]

On the early history of Canada the student should compare what is given
in this Guide on the early history of America in general and especially
the following articles: LEIF ERICSSON (Vol. 16, p. 396); VINLAND (Vol.
28, p. 98), by Prof. Julius Emil Olson, University of Wisconsin; JOHN
CABOT (Vol. 4, p. 921); and JACQUES CARTIER (Vol. 5, p. 433), both by H.
P. Biggar, author of _The Voyages of the Cabots to Greenland_; SAMUEL DE
CHAMPLAIN (Vol. 5, p. 830), by N. E. Dionne, librarian of the
Legislature of the Province of Quebec and biographer of Champlain;
JACQUES MARQUETTE (Vol. 17, p. 752); SIEUR DE LA SALLE (Vol. 16, p.
230), by Charles C. Whinery, assistant-editor Encyclopaedia Britannica;
FRONTENAC (Vol. 11, p. 249), by A. G. Doughty, Dominion archivist of
Canada; LOUISBURG; DETROIT; SAULT STE. MARIE; MACKINAC ISLAND;
PITTSBURG; NOVA SCOTIA, _History_; SEVEN YEARS’ WAR (Vol. 24, especially
page 722); QUEBEC; MONTCALM and WOLFE.

[Sidenote: The War Periods]

The close of the Seven Years’ War saw New France ceded to Great Britain.
On English rule down to Canadian Federation, the student should consult
the following articles: QUEBEC ACT; JAMES MURRAY; AMERICAN WAR OF
INDEPENDENCE—and particularly the articles on MONTGOMERY and ARNOLD,
leaders in the nearly successful attempt of the Americans to capture
Canada, and that on the 1st Baron DORCHESTER, the British defender of
Quebec; JOHN GRAVES SIMCOE; LOYALISTS—and the articles NEW BRUNSWICK and
ONTARIO, both regions largely influenced by the settlement there of
these Loyalists; AMERICAN WAR OF 1812—and especially the articles ISAAC
BROCK, by Prof. W. L. Grant, Queens University, Kingston; ERIE, OLIVER
H. PERRY, SACKETT’S HARBOR, TECUMSEH, LAKE CHAMPLAIN (Vol. 5, p. 830);
FORT NIAGARA (Vol. 19, p. 634); JOHN STRACHAN; PAPINEAU and W. L.
MACKENZIE for the two revolts of 1837; LORD DURHAM; LORD SYDENHAM;
ROBERT BALDWIN and SIR LOUIS LAFONTAINE, heads of the first Liberal
administrations; EARL ELGIN (Vol. 9, p. 268); SIR A. A. DORION; JOHN
SANDFIELD MACDONALD, “the Ishmael of Parliament”; SIR JOHN BEVERLEY
ROBINSON, head of the Tory “Family Compact”; and, for Irish-American
outrages on the Canadian border, the article FENIANS.

[Sidenote: Federation and Since]

On the period since federation (1867), see the article FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (Vol. 10, p. 233) for a general description of this form of
administration; the articles NOVA SCOTIA, ALFRED GILPIN JONES and JOSEPH
HOWE, for local opposition to federation; SIR CHARLES TUPPER, who alone
in the delegation from Nova Scotia favoured federation; THOMAS D’ARCY
MCGEE (by A. G. Doughty), a prominent opponent of Fenianism who was
assassinated by a Fenian; the articles HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY and SIR G.
E. CARTIER, by Prof. W. L. Grant, Queens University, Kingston, for the
extinction of the Hudson’s Bay Company claims and the transfer of its
territories to the government; LOUIS RIEL for the Red River Rebellion;
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND for its entrance into the Dominion; GEORGE BROWN, a
prominent advocate of federation, by Prof. Grant; GEORGE MONRO GRANT,
author of _Ocean to Ocean_; SIR JOHN MACDONALD, by G. R. Parkin, author
of _Imperial Federation_, and biographer of Macdonald; SIR FRANCIS
HINCKS and SIR ALEXANDER GALT, financiers; SIR HUGH ALLAN and SIR DAVID
MACPHERSON, for the Canadian Pacific Railway question; _Lord Dufferin_;
_Alexander Mackenzie_, head of a Liberal government from 1873 to 1878
when SIR JOHN MACDONALD returned to power on a platform calling for
protection of Canadian industries; GEORGE TAYLOR DENISON, founder of the
“Canada First” party; SIR SAMUEL LEONARD TILLEY, Macdonald’s minister of
finance, who was principally responsible for the tariff of 1879; _Sir
Louis Henry Davies_, Liberal politician and jurist; _Lord Strathcona_,
by Prof. W. L. Grant, BARON MOUNTSTEPHEN, SIR WILLIAM C. VAN HORNE and
SIR SANDFORD FLEMING for the completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway;
LOUIS RIEL for the Second Riel Rebellion; SIR JOHN THOMPSON; GEORGE
EULAS FOSTER; SIR H. G. JOLY DE LOTBINIÈRE; HONORÉ MERCIER, the French
leader of Quebec; S. N. PARENT; SIR MACKENZIE BOWELL, premier in
1894–1896; his successor, _Sir Charles Tupper_; EDWARD BLAKE, a Liberal
leader who in 1892 left Canadian politics to take a seat in the British
House of Commons; SIR OLIVER MOWAT, Blake’s successor as premier of
Ontario; GEORGE WILLIAM ROSS; SIR DANIEL WILSON, educational reformer,
by Professor Grant; SIR WILFRID LAURIER (by J. S. Willison, author of
_Sir W. Laurier and the Liberal Party: A Political History_), the great
Liberal leader of the last decade, and Laurier’s ministers of finance,
_Sir Richard John Cartwright_ and _W. S. Fielding_, and his minister of
militia SIR FREDERICK WILLIAM BORDEN; SIR WILLIAM MULOCK; and ROBERT L.
BORDEN, long leader of the Conservative opposition and premier in 1911.




                              CHAPTER XLV
                   ENGLISH, SCOTCH AND IRISH HISTORY


[Sidenote: The British Empire]

The student of English history in the Britannica may well begin with the
summary view in the article BRITISH EMPIRE (Vol. 4, p. 606), equivalent
to 30 pages of this Guide, by Lady Lugard, wife of the British explorer
and colonial administrator, Sir Frederick Lugard, herself an authority
on colonial subjects and well-known as colonial editor of the _Times_ of
London. On pp. 608–610 there is a chronological list of the acquisitions
of the Empire, and nothing will surprise the reader more than the
comparative recentness of the movement by which two small islands have
expanded into an empire covering nearly one-fourth of the earth’s land
surface. Except for the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man, and “the
nominal possession of Newfoundland by Sir Humphrey Gilbert in 1583, all
the territorial acquisitions of the Empire have been made in the 17th
and subsequent centuries.” On each of the localities mentioned in this
imposing list the reader will find a separate article in its proper
alphabetical place in the Encyclopaedia Britannica dealing with
geography, government and history. Here it will be possible only to call
attention to articles on the more important branches of the subject.

[Sidenote: Early Britain]

On the early inhabitants of the islands and on British archaeology,
read the elaborate article CELT (Vol. 5, p. 611; equivalent to 135
pages of this Guide), by Prof. William Ridgeway, Cambridge, author of
_The Oldest Irish Epic_, and E. C. Quiggin, lecturer in Celtic,
Cambridge,—with particularly full treatment of Celtic languages and
literatures,—Gaulish, Irish, Scottish, Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Breton and
Cornish; and the article BRITAIN (Vol. 4, p. 583; equivalent to 40
pages of this Guide), which is illustrated by a map of Roman Britain
and plans of Roman remains. The treatment of pre-Roman and Roman
Britain is by Professor F. J. Haverfield of Oxford; and later Britain
is described by Hector Munro Chadwick, librarian of Clare College,
Cambridge, and author of _Studies on Anglo-Saxon Institutions_.

Then read:

WALES, _History_ (Vol. 28, pp. 261–268), by Herbert Murray Vaughan,
Keble College, Oxford.

[Sidenote: Scottish History]

SCOTLAND, _Political History_ (Vol. 24, pp. 429–457), by Andrew Lang,
author of _History of Scotland from the Roman Occupation_; and, among
many other articles, SCOTLAND, CHURCH OF, (Vol. 24, 460), by the Rev.
Dr. Allan Menzies, St. Mary’s College, St. Andrews, and such biographies
as: MALCOLM III. (Canmore); ALEXANDER I, II AND III (Vol. 1, p. 563);
WILLIAM THE LION (Vol. 28, p. 665); WALLACE, SIR WILLIAM (Vol. 28, p.
277), by A. F. Hutchinson, late rector of the High School, Stirling;
ROBERT I, THE BRUCE (Vol. 23, p. 395); DAVID I AND II (Vol. 8, p. 859);
JAMES I, II, III, IV AND V (Vol. 15, p. 139); MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS (Vol.
17, p. 817), a striking biography by the poet and essayist Algernon
Charles Swinburne, author of the tragedies _Chastelard_, _Bothwell_ and
_Mary Stuart_; BOTHWELL (Vol. 4, p. 303), by P. C. Yorke; RIZZIO (Vol.
23, p. 388); DARNLEY (Vol. 7, p. 836), and see also the article CASKET
LETTERS (Vol. 5, p. 449), an examination of the evidence in this mystery
by Andrew Lang; MAR (Vol. 17, p. 666); KNOX, JOHN (Vol. 15, p. 878), by
Dr. Alexander Taylor Innes, author of JOHN KNOX and _Studies in Scottish
History_; GOWRIE (Vol. 12, p. 301), by R. J. McNeill, late editor _St.
James’s Gazette_; and JAMES I of England—VI of Scotland (Vol. 15, p.
136); and for the later period see ENGLISH HISTORY to supplement Andrew
Lang’s account of the period since the Union under SCOTLAND, _History_.

[Sidenote: Irish History]

IRELAND, _History_ (Vol. 14, p. 756), by Prof. E. C. Quiggin, of
Cambridge, on the early period, and Richard Bagwell, commissioner of
national education for Ireland and author of _Ireland under the Tudors_,
_Ireland under the Stuarts_, etc.; and to supplement this general
treatment such separate articles as ST. PATRICK (Vol. 20, p. 933) and
ST. COLUMBA (Vol. 6, p. 737), both by Dr. E. C. Quiggin; ST. BRENDAN
(Vol. 4, p. 495); BRIAN (Vol. 4, p. 515); BREHON LAWS (Vol. 4, p. 488),
by Laurence Ginnell, M. P. for North Westmeath and author of _Land and
Liberty_, etc.; O’NEILL family (Vol. 20, p. 107) and O’DONNELL family
(Vol. 20, p. 6), by R. J. McNeill; FITZGERALD family (Vol. 10, p. 441),
by J. H. Round, author of _Feudal England_, etc.; TYRONE, earls of (Vol.
27, p. 549); TYRCONNELL (Vol. 27, p. 548); ST. LEGER, SIR ANTHONY (Vol.
24, p. 23), by R. J. McNeill; DESMOND (Vol. 8, p. 98); BUTLER family
(Vol. 4, p. 879), by Oswald Barron, editor of _The Ancestor_; DROGHEDA
(Vol. 8, p. 587); PEEP-OF-DAY BOYS (Vol. 21, p. 45); ORANGEMEN (Vol. 20,
p. 160); FLOOD, HENRY (Vol. 10, p. 525); GRATTAN, HENRY (Vol. 12, p.
379); TONE, T. WOLFE (Vol. 27, p. 2) and EMMET, ROBERT and THOMAS A.
(Vol. 9, pp. 342–343), all by R. J. McNeill; O’CONNELL, DANIEL (Vol. 19,
p. 990), by the late William O’Connor Morris, author of _Irish History_,
etc.; FENIANS (Vol. 10, p. 254), by R. J. McNeill; BUTT, ISAAC (Vol. 4,
p. 889); PARNELL, C. S. (Vol. 20, p. 854), by James R. Thursfield,
author of _Peel_, etc.; DAVITT, MICHAEL (Vol. 7, p. 870); BOYCOTT (Vol.
4, p. 353); DILLON, JOHN (Vol. 8, p. 273); PLUNKETT, SIR HORACE CURZON
(Vol. 21, p. 857); REDMOND, JOHN E. (Vol. 22, p. 968); and many articles
on Irish towns and counties, and, on Home Rule and recent political
questions, the biographies of English viceroys, premiers and chief
secretaries, and the latter part of the article ENGLISH HISTORY.


                            ENGLISH HISTORY

On English history the student will find the Britannica particularly
valuable. The article ENGLISH HISTORY (Vol. 9, pp. 466–587), is itself
equivalent to about 380 pages of this Guide, and carries the story
through 13 centuries. This great article—a text-book of the subject in
scope and power—is written by: Prof. C. W. C. Oman, Oxford, author of
_England before the Norman Conquest_, etc., dealing with the period down
to the time of Elizabeth; Prof. A. F. Pollard, University of London,
assistant editor _Dictionary of National Biography_, for the Reformation
and the reign of Elizabeth, 1528–1603; Samuel Rawson Gardiner, best
known as the historian of the Puritan Revolution, who deals with the
period from 1603 to 1793; W. Alison Phillips, author of MODERN EUROPE,
on the years 1793 to 1837; and Hugh Chisholm, editor-in-chief of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, for the period since the accession of Queen
Victoria. And the article closes with a critical estimate of _Sources
and Writers of English History_, by Prof. Albert Frederick Pollard,
University of London.

For the period from 600 to 1066 read: Part 1 of ENGLISH HISTORY (Vol. 8,
pp. 466–474); and the separate articles:

[Sidenote: Anglo-Saxon Period]

For the introduction of Christianity and the “Kingdoms”—AUGUSTINE (Vol.
2, p. 910); AETHELBERHT (Vol. 1, p. 289); EDWIN (Vol. 9, p. 7), by F. G.
M. Beck, of Clare College, Cambridge; ANGLO-SAXONS (Vol. 2, p. 38), by
H. M. Chadwick; BRITAIN, _Anglo-Saxon_ (Vol. 4, pp. 589–595) and ANGLI
(Vol. 2, p. 18) and JUTES (Vol. 15, p. 609), by the same author; SAXONS
(Vol. 24, p. 264); NORTHUMBRIA (Vol. 19, p. 793); BERNICIA (Vol. 3, p.
802); DEIRA (Vol. 7, p. 933); EAST ANGLIA (Vol. 8, p. 827); WESSEX (Vol.
28, p. 534); MERCIA (Vol. 18, p. 151); SUSSEX, KINGDOM of (Vol. 26, p.
168), and KENT (Vol. 15, p. 735), ECGBERT (Vol. 8, p. 869); AETHELWULF
(Vol. 1, p. 292).

On the Danish invasions and the Anglo-Saxon period, VIKING (Vol. 28, pp.
62–66), by C. F. Keary, author of _The Vikings in Western Europe_;
ÆTHELBALD (Vol. 1, p. 289), ÆTHELBERHT (Vol. 1, p. 289) and ÆTHELRED I
(Vol. 1, p. 290); ALFRED THE GREAT (Vol. 1, p. 582), by Charles Plummer,
biographer of Alfred; DANELAGH (Vol. 7, p. 803), by Prof, Allen Mawer of
Armstrong College, Newcastle-on-Tyne; EDWARD “THE ELDER” (Vol. 8, p.
989), ÆTHELSTAN (Vol. 1, p. 291), EDMUND I (Vol. 8, p. 948), EDGAR (Vol.
8, p. 933), all by Prof. Mawer; ST. DUNSTAN (Vol. 8, p. 684), ÆTHELRED
II “the Unready” (Vol. 1, p. 290), by Rev. C. Stanley Phillips, King’s
College, Cambridge; SWEYN I (Vol. 26, p. 224), by R. Nisbet Bain of the
British Museum; DANEGELD (Vol. 7, p. 803); CANUTE (Vol. 5, p. 221), by
R. Nisbet Bain; EDMUND “Ironside” (Vol. 8, p. 948), by Rev. C. Stanley
Phillips; HAROLD I (Vol. 13, p. 11); HARDICANUTE (Vol. 12, p. 942);
EDWARD “the Confessor” (Vol. 8, p. 990), by Rev. C. Stanley Phillips;
HAROLD II (Vol. 13, p. 11).

For the Norman Conquest and the Norman and Angevin kings the student
should read the second section of the article ENGLISH HISTORY (Vol. 9,
pp. 474–486) and, at least, the following important articles:

[Sidenote: William the Conqueror
           William Rufus
           Henry I
           Stephen and Matilda
           Henry II]

WILLIAM I, “The Conqueror” (Vol. 28, p. 659), by H. W. Carless Davis of
Oxford, author of _England under the Normans and Angevins_; HEREWARD
(Vol. 13, p. 363), by J. H. Round, author of _Feudal England_, etc.;
FEUDALISM (Vol. 10, p. 297), by Prof. George Burton Adams, Yale
University, author of _Political History of England, 1066–1216_, etc.;
DOMESDAY BOOK (Vol. 8, p. 398), by J. H. Round; WILLIAM II, “Rufus”
(Vol. 28, p. 661) and LANFRANC (Vol. 16, p. 169), both by H. W. Carless
Davis; ANSELM (Vol. 2, p. 81); HENRY I (Vol. 13, p. 279), STEPHEN (Vol.
25, p. 881), MATILDA (Vol. 17, p. 888), HENRY II (Vol. 13, p. 281),
BECKET, THOMAS (Vol. 3, p. 608), RICHARD I, “Coeur de Lion” (Vol. 23, p.
294), all by H. W. Carless Davis.

[Sidenote: John Henry III Edward I to III]

In connection with the third section of the article ENGLISH HISTORY
dealing with the struggle for constitutional liberty from 1199 to 1337
(Vol. 9, pp. 486–501) the following supplementary articles are among the
many to which the student should turn: JOHN (Vol. 15, p. 439), and
LANGTON, STEPHEN (Vol. 16, p. 178), both by H. W. Carless Davis; MAGNA
CARTA (Vol. 16, p. 314), by A. W. Holland, late scholar of St. John’s,
Oxford; HENRY III (Vol. 13, p. 282), PEMBROKE (Vol. 21, p. 78),
MONTFORT, SIMON DE (Vol. 18, p. 781), EVESHAM (Vol. 10, p. 10); EDWARD I
(Vol. 8, p. 991–993), by Prof. T. F. Tout, University of Manchester,
author of _Edward I_; MORTMAIN (Vol. 18, p. 880); WESTMINSTER, STATUTES
OF (Vol. 28, p. 551); EDWARD II (Vol. 8, p. 993); LANCASTER, HENRY and
THOMAS, EARLS OF (Vol. 16, pp. 144 and 148); DESPENSER, HUGH LE (Vol. 8,
p. 101); MORTIMER family (Vol. 18, p. 879); and EDWARD III (Vol. 8, p.
994).

[Sidenote: Richard II Henry IV to VI]

On the Hundred Years’ War (1337–1453) and contemporary history, see the
section in ENGLISH HISTORY (Vol. 8, pp. 501–516); the article HUNDRED
YEARS’ WAR (Vol. 13, p. 893), by Jules Viard, archivist of the National
Archives, Paris; SLUYS, BATTLE OF (Vol. 25, p. 246), by D. Hannay,
author of _Short History of the Royal Navy_; CRÉCY (Vol. 7, p. 389);
POITIERS, BATTLE OF (Vol. 21, p. 898); EDWARD, THE BLACK PRINCE (Vol. 8,
p. 999), by Prof. Tout; WYCLIFFE (Vol. 28, p. 866), by R. Lane Poole,
author of _Wycliffe and Movements for Reform_, and W. Alison Phillips,
author of _Modern Europe_, etc.; LANCASTER, JOHN OF GAUNT, DUKE OF (Vol.
16, p. 146), by C. Lethbridge Kingsford, biographer of Henry V; RICHARD
II (Vol. 23, p. 295), also by C. L. Kingsford; TYLER, WAT (Vol. 27, p.
495); BALL, JOHN (Vol. 3, p. 263); LOLLARDS (Vol. 16, p. 929), by Dr. T.
M. Lindsay, author of _History of the Reformation_; GLOUCESTER, THOMAS,
DUKE OF (Vol. 12, p. 130); NORFOLK, THOMAS MOWBRAY, DUKE OF (Vol. 19, p.
742); HENRY IV (Vol. 13, p. 283), by C. L. Kingsford; GLENDOWER, OWEN
(Vol. 12, p. 120); NORTHUMBERLAND (Vol. 19, p. 787); HENRY V (Vol. 13,
p. 284) and OLDCASTLE, SIR JOHN (Vol. 20, p. 66), by C. L. Kingsford;
AGINCOURT (Vol. 1, p. 375); HENRY VI (Vol. 13, p. 285) and GLOUCESTER,
HUMPHREY, DUKE OF (Vol. 12, p. 129), both by C. L. Kingsford; BEDFORD
JOHN, DUKE OF (Vol. 3, p. 616); JOAN OF ARC (Vol. 15, p. 520), by Prof.
J. T. Shotwell of Columbia University and Hugh Chisholm, editor-in-chief
of the Encyclopaedia Britannica; BEAUFORT family (Vol. 3, p. 585); CADE,
JOHN (Vol. 4, p. 927).

[Sidenote: Edward IV and V
           Richard III
           Henry VII]

On the fifth period of English history, read section 5, _The Wars of the
Roses (1453–1497)_ in the article ENGLISH HISTORY (Vol. 9, pp. 516–525);
the separate article, ROSES, WARS OF THE (Vol. 23, p. 735); and the
articles: YORK, HOUSE OF (Vol. 28, p. 924), and LANCASTER, HOUSE OF
(Vol. 16, p. 143), both by James Gairdner, author of _The Houses of
Lancaster and York_, etc.; YORK, RICHARD, DUKE OF (Vol. 28, p. 926),
WARWICK, RICHARD NEVILLE, EARL OF (Vol. 28, p. 339), EDWARD IV (Vol. 8,
p. 996), MARGARET OF ANJOU (Vol. 17, p. 702), CLARENCE, GEORGE, DUKE OF
(Vol. 6, p. 428), EDWARD V (Vol. 8, p. 996), RICHARD III (Vol. 23, p.
296), and BUCKINGHAM, HENRY STAFFORD, 2ND DUKE OF (Vol. 4, p. 726), all
by C. L. Kingsford; HENRY VII (Vol. 13, p. 286), by James Gairdner,
author of _The Houses of Lancaster and York_, and biographer of Henry
VII; WARBECK, PERKIN (Vol. 28, p. 316).

[Sidenote: Henry VIII Edward VI Mary Elizabeth]

The sixth section of the article ENGLISH HISTORY, dealing with the years
1497–1528 (Vol. 9, pp. 525–530), should be supplemented by the latter
part of James Gairdner’s article on HENRY VII and by the articles:
REFORMATION (Vol. 23, p. 4), by Prof. James Harvey Robinson, Columbia
University, author of _History of Western Europe_, etc.; HENRY VIII
(Vol. 13, p. 287) and FOX, RICHARD (Vol. 10, p. 766), both by Prof. A. F
Pollard; WOLSEY, THOMAS (Vol. 28, p 779); CATHERINE OF ARAGON (Vol. 5 p.
529) and BOLEYN, ANNE (Vol. 4, p. 159), by P. C. Yorke, Oxford; CROMWELL
THOMAS (Vol. 7, p. 499); CRANMER THOMAS (Vol. 7, p. 375); FISHER, JOHN
(Vol. 10, p. 427), by Rev. E. L. Taunton, author of _The English Black
Monks of St. Benedict_, etc.; MORE, SIR THOMAS (Vol. 18, p. 822), by
Mark Pattison, late rector of Lincoln College, Oxford; HOWARD, CATHERINE
(Vol. 13, p. 832); PARR, CATHERINE (Vol. 20, p. 861); NORFOLK, THOMAS
HOWARD, 3RD DUKE OF (Vol. 19, p. 743); ASKEW, ANNE (Vol. 2, p. 762), by
A. F. Pollard; EDWARD VI (Vol. 8, p. 996); SOMERSET, EDWARD SEYMOUR,
DUKE OF (Vol. 25, p. 386); NORTHUMBERLAND, JOHN DUDLEY, EARL OF WARWICK,
AND DUKE OF (Vol. 19, p. 788); GREY, LADY JANE (Vol. 12, p. 590); MARY I
(Vol. 17, p. 814) and GARDINER, STEPHEN (Vol. 11, p. 460), both by James
Gairdner; WYAT, SIR THOMAS (Vol. 28, p. 862); POLE, CARDINAL (Vol. 21,
p. 974), by E. L. Taunton; RIDLEY, NICHOLAS (Vol. 23, p. 320); LATIMER,
HUGH (Vol. 16, p. 242), by T. F. Henderson, author of _Mary Queen of
Scots and the Casket Letters_; ELIZABETH (Vol. 9, p. 282); MARY QUEEN OF
SCOTS (Vol. 17, p. 817), by A. C. Swinburne; NORFOLK, THOMAS HOWARD, 4TH
DUKE OF (Vol. 19, p. 744); ARMADA (Vol. 2, p. 560); HAWKINS, SIR RICHARD
(Vol. 13, p. 99); DRAKE, SIR FRANCIS (Vol. 8, p. 473); RALEIGH, SIR
WALTER (Vol. 22, p. 869); LEICESTER, ROBERT DUDLEY, EARL OF (Vol. 16, p.
390); ESSEX, ROBERT DEVEREUX, EARL OF (Vol. 9, p. 782); BACON, FRANCIS
(Vol. 3, p. 135), by Prof. Robert Adamson of Glasgow, and J. Malcolm
Mitchell, University of London; BURGHLEY, WILLIAM CECIL, BARON (Vol. 4,
p. 816); and—for this whole period the article ENGLAND, CHURCH OF (Vol.
9, especially pp. 447–448), by William Hunt, author of _History of the
English Church_.

[Sidenote: James I Charles I The Commonwealth Charles II James II]

The seventh part of the article ENGLISH HISTORY (Vol. 9, pp. 535–542)
deals with the _Stuart Monarchy, the Great Rebellion and the Restoration
(1603–1689)_. From the great wealth of supplementary material in the
Britannica on this interesting period, at least the following articles
should be selected: STEWART or STUART family (Vol. 12, p. 911); JAMES I
(Vol. 15, p. 136); GUNPOWDER PLOT (Vol. 12, p. 727); BIBLE, ENGLISH
(Vol. 3, p. 894); SALISBURY, ROBERT CECIL, 1ST EARL OF (Vol. 24, p. 76);
BUCKINGHAM, GEORGE VILLIERS, 1ST DUKE OF (Vol. 4, p. 722); THIRTY YEARS’
WAR (Vol. 26, p. 852); CHARLES I (Vol. 5, p. 906) and LAUD, WILLIAM
(Vol. 16, p. 276), both by P. Chesney York; SHIP-MONEY (Vol. 24, p.
982); HAMPDEN, JOHN (Vol. 12, p. 900); PYM, JOHN (Vol. 22, p. 680) and
STRAFFORD, THOMAS WENTWORTH, EARL OF (Vol. 25, p. 978), both by P. C.
Yorke; GREAT REBELLION (Vol. 12, p. 403); CROMWELL, OLIVER (Vol. 7, p.
487), by P. C. Yorke, C. F. Atkinson and R. J. McNeill; Cromwell,
Richard (Vol. 7, p. 498); for the military operations of the Great
Rebellion, the articles listed under that heading in the chapter of this
Guide entitled _For Army Officers_; MONK, GEORGE (Vol. 18, p. 723);
CHARLES II, (Vol. 5, p. 912); CLARENDON, EDWARD HYDE, 1ST EARL OF (Vol.
6, p. 428); BUCKINGHAM, GEORGE VILLIERS, 2ND DUKE OF (Vol. 4, p. 724);
CLEVELAND, DUCHESS OF (Vol. 6, p. 500); PORTSMOUTH, DUCHESS OF (Vol. 22,
p. 131); GWYN, NELL (Vol. 12, p. 750); LAUDERDALE, DUKE OF (Vol. 16, p.
279); SHAFTESBURY, 1ST EARL (Vol. 24, p. 760) by Osmund Airy, biographer
of Charles II; DUTCH WARS (Vol. 9, p. 729); TEST ACTS (Vol. 26, p. 665);
JAMES II (Vol. 15, p. 138); ARGYLL, 9TH EARL OF (Vol. 2, p. 484);
MONMOUTH, DUKE OF (Vol. 18, p. 725); TYRCONNELL (Vol. 27, p. 548).

[Sidenote: William and Mary; Anne]

On the Revolution and the age of Anne (1689–1714) see the article
ENGLISH HISTORY (Vol. 9, pp. 542–544), and WILLIAM III. (Vol. 28, p.
662); MARY II. (Vol. 17, p. 816); BURNET, GILBERT (Vol. 4, p. 851);
GRAND ALLIANCE (Vol. 12, p. 342), and for additional military articles
the chapter _For Army Officers_ in this Guide; ANNE (Vol. 2, p. 65);
MARLBOROUGH, 1ST DUKE OF (Vol. 17, p. 737), by W. Prideaux Courtney;
MASHAM, LADY (Vol. 17, p. 836); GODOLPHIN (Vol. 12, p. 174); SOMERS
(Vol. 25, p. 384); HALIFAX, 1ST MARQUESS OF (Vol. 12, p. 839); OXFORD,
1ST EARL (Vol. 20, p. 403); BOLINGBROKE, VISCOUNT (Vol. 4, p. 161);
SHREWSBURY, DUKE OF (Vol. 24, p. 1016).

[Sidenote: George I to IV William IV]

The part of the article ENGLISH HISTORY dealing with the Hanoverian
Kings, 1714–1793 (Vol. 9, pp. 544–551) and that on the Revolutionary
epoch, the reaction and the triumph of reform, 1793–1837 (pp. 551–558)
are respectively by S. R. Gardiner and W. Alison Phillips. They should
be supplemented by S. R. Gardiner’s articles on the four Georges (Vol.
11, pp. 737–745); SOUTH SEA BUBBLE (Vol. 25, p. 515); STANHOPE, 1ST EARL
(Vol. 25, p. 773); WALPOLE, HORATIO (Vol. 28, p. 288); WHIG AND TORY
(Vol. 28, p. 588); TOWNSHEND, CHARLES (Vol. 27, p. 111); CAROLINE (Vol.
5, p. 380); PELHAM, HENRY (Vol. 21, p. 67); CHARLES EDWARD, “the Young
Pretender” (Vol. 5, p. 940), by H. M. Vaughan, author of _The Last of
the Royal Stuarts_; METHODISM (Vol. 18, p. 293); WESLEY, JOHN (Vol. 28,
p. 527); NEWCASTLE, THOMAS PELHAM HOLLES, DUKE OF (Vol. 19, p. 471);
CHATHAM, WILLIAM PITT, 1ST EARL OF (Vol. 6, p. 1); SEVEN YEARS’ WAR
(Vol. 24, p. 715) and, for engagements and commanders in the war, see
the chapter in this Guide _For Army Officers_; INDIA, _History_ (Vol.
14, especially pp. 407–409); CANADA, _History_ (Vol. 5, especially p.
158); BUTE, 3RD EARL OF (Vol. 4, p. 877); GRENVILLE, GEORGE (Vol. 12, p.
580); ROCKINGHAM, MARQUESS OF (Vol. 23, p. 434); GUILFORD, 2ND EARL,
Lord North (Vol. 12, p. 691); WILKES, JOHN (Vol. 28, p. 642); BURKE,
EDMUND (Vol. 4, p. 824), by John Morley; FOX, CHARLES JAMES (Vol. 10, p.
761); GORDON, LORD GEORGE (Vol. 12, p. 253); LANSDOWNE, MARQUESS OF,
Lord Shelburne (Vol. 16, p. 184); PORTLAND, 3RD DUKE (Vol. 22, p. 119);
PITT, WILLIAM (Vol. 21, p. 667); FRENCH REVOLUTIONARY WARS (Vol. 11, p.
171), NAPOLEONIC CAMPAIGNS (Vol. 19, p. 216) and, for leaders and
engagements in these wars, in the Peninsular War, and in the American
War for Independence, see the chapter in this Guide _For Army Officers_;
CAROLINE AMELIA AUGUSTA (Vol. 5, p. 380); WELLESLEY, MARQUESS (Vol. 28,
p. 506); LONDONDERRY, MARQUESS OF, Castlereagh (Vol. 16, p. 969);
CANNING, GEORGE (Vol. 5, p. 186); CORN LAWS (Vol. 7, p. 174); COBBETT,
WILLIAM (Vol. 6, p. 606); WELLINGTON, DUKE OF (Vol. 28, p. 507); WILLIAM
IV. (Vol. 28, p. 664); GREY, 2ND EARL (Vol. 12, p. 586); BROUGHAM, LORD
(Vol. 4, p. 652); PARLIAMENT (Vol. 20, especially p. 843); MELBOURNE,
2ND VISCOUNT (Vol. 18, p. 90); PEEL, SIR ROBERT (Vol. 21, p. 40).

[Sidenote: Victoria]

On the reign of Victoria the section of the article ENGLISH HISTORY
(Vol. 9, pp. 558–582) gives a very full treatment, which should be
supplemented by the study of such articles as: VICTORIA (Vol. 28, p.
28), by Hugh Chisholm, editor-in-chief of the Encyclopaedia Britannica;
ALBERT (Vol. 1, p. 495), by the same author; PALMERSTON (Vol. 20, p.
645); RUSSELL, 1ST EARL (Vol. 23, p. 863); O’BRIEN, WILLIAM SMITH (Vol.
19, p. 953); CHARTISM (Vol. 5, p. 953); DERBY, 14TH EARL (Vol. 8, p.
66); CRIMEAN WAR (Vol. 7, p. 450); “ALABAMA” ARBITRATION (Vol. 1, p.
464); BRIGHT, JOHN (Vol. 4, p. 567); COBDEN, RICHARD (Vol. 6, p. 607);
BEACONSFIELD (Vol. 3, p. 563); GLADSTONE, W. E. (Vol. 12, p. 66), by G.
W. E. Russell, biographer of Gladstone; SALISBURY (Vol. 24, p. 72);
TRANSVAAL, _History_ (Vol. 27, p. 193); PARNELL, C. S. (Vol. 20, p.
854); GORDON, C. G. (Vol. 11, p. 249); ROSEBERY (Vol. 23, p. 731);
RHODES, C. J. (Vol. 23, p. 254).

[Sidenote: Edward VII George V]

For the years since Victoria’s death see the articles: EDWARD VII. (Vol.
8, p. 997) and GEORGE V. (Vol. 11, p. 745), and the articles on recent
political leaders: BALFOUR (Vol. 3, p. 250); CHAMBERLAIN (Vol. 5, p.
813); CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN (Vol. 5, p. 131); ASQUITH (Vol. 2, p. 769); and
LLOYD GEORGE (Vol. 16, p. 832); and on the reform of the House of Lords
PARLIAMENT (Vol. 20, especially pp. 845–847) and REPRESENTATION (Vol.
23, especially pp. 111–113).




                              CHAPTER XLVI
                             FRENCH HISTORY


The article FRANCE in the Encyclopaedia Britannica includes a section on
_History_ (Vol. 10, pp. 801–906) equivalent to 320 pages of this Guide,
of which the first part, down to 1870, is by Paul Wiriath, director of
the École Supérieure Pratique de Commerce et d’Industrie, Paris, and the
part since 1870 is by J. E. C. Bodley, author of _France_, etc. Opposite
page 802 are four coloured historical maps showing France at the end of
the 10th, 13th and 14th centuries, and the changes in the eastern
frontier from 1598 to 1789. The historical part of the article closes
with a historiographic section, or critical summary of French historical
writing, by Charles Bémont of the University of Paris.

Supplementing this main treatment, see:

[Sidenote: Early History of France]

On prehistoric and Roman France, GAUL (Vol. 11, p. 533), by Prof. F. J.
Haverfield, Oxford, the well-known authority on Roman occupation of
Britain and Gaul; BIBRACTE, ALESIA, ITIUS PORTUS, DRUIDISM, and, on
Caesar’s campaigns, CAESAR, JULIUS; and, on Roman remains, ARLES, NÎMES,
ORANGE, ARCHITECTURE, AQUEDUCT, and AMPHITHEATRE.

On the Franks, the articles FRANKS (Vol. 11, p. 35) and SALIC LAW (Vol.
24, p. 68), by Prof. Christian Pfister of the Sorbonne; and the
articles, AUSTRASIA, MEROVINGIANS, CHILDERIC, CLOVIS, CHILDEBERT,
CLOTAIRE, SIGEBERT, CHARIBERT, GUNTRAM, FREDEGOND, BRUNHILDA, CLOTAIRE
II, DAGOBERT, PIPPIN I, II and III, EBROIN, CAROLINGIANS, CHARLES MARTEL
(Vol. 5, p. 942), CARLOMAN, CHILDERIC; CHARLEMAGNE, ROLAND, EINHARD,
ALCUIN; LOUIS I “the Pious,” LOTHAIR (Vol. 17, p. 17); CHARLES II “the
Bald” (Vol. 5, p. 897); FEUDALISM; LOUIS II and III; CHARLES III “the
Fat” (Vol. 5, p. 898); ODO; LOUIS IV (Vol. 17, p. 35), by Dr. René
Poupardin, secretary of the École des Charles; LOTHAIR (Vol. 17, p. 18);
BRUNO; LOUIS V.

[Sidenote: Medieval France]

For the Capetian period, the articles CAPET (Vol. 5, p. 251); ROBERT
“the Strong” (Vol. 23, p. 402); HUGH “the Great” (Vol. 13, p. 857); HUGH
CAPET (Vol. 13, p. 858); ROBERT “the Pious” (Vol. 23, p. 399); HENRY I
(Vol. 13, p. 290); PHILIP I (Vol. 21, p. 378); LOUIS VI (Vol. 17, p.
35), by Prof. J. T. Shotwell, Columbia University; Prof. Shotwell’s
article on LOUIS VII; SUGER; ELEANOR OF AQUITAINE (Vol. 9, p. 168);
PHILIP AUGUSTUS (Vol. 21, p. 378); INGEBORG; ALBIGENSES; and for French
and English relations, RICHARD I and JOHN of England; LOUIS VIII;
BLANCHE OF CASTILE (Vol. 4, p. 40); Prof. Shotwell’s article on LOUIS IX
“St. Louis”; and the article CRUSADES; PHILIP III “the Bold” (Vol. 21,
p. 381); PHILIP IV; BONIFACE VIII; SAISSET; NOGARET; TEMPLARS; LOUIS X;
PHILIP V and CHARLES IV.

For the Valois line and the history of the period (1328–1498), the
article HUNDRED YEARS’ WAR; SLUYS; CRÉCY; and for detail of the war the
articles under that head in the chapter _For the Army Officer_ in this
Guide; and PHILIP VI (Vol. 21, p. 383); FLANDERS; ARTEVELDE (Jacob and
Philip van); DAUPHINÉ; DAUPHIN; GABELLE; JOHN II (Vol. 15, p. 441);
POITIERS; MARCEL; LE COQ; STATES GENERAL; CHARLES II of Navarre (Vol. 5,
p. 924); CHARLES V (Vol. 5, p. 917); JACQUERIE; DU GUESCLIN; CHARLES VI;
ARMAGNAC; ISABELLA of Bavaria (Vol. 14, p. 860); BENEDICT XIII (Vol. 3,
p. 718); JOHN “the Fearless” (Vol. 15, p. 445); AGINCOURT; CHARLES VII;
ARTHUR III of Brittany (Vol. 2, p. 682); JOAN OF ARC; COEUR; AGNES SOREL
(Vol. 25, p. 432); BRÉZÉ; PRAGUERIE; LOUIS XI; BALUE; LE DAIM; LIÈGE,
_History_; CHARLES “the Bold” of Burgundy (Vol. 5, p. 932); CHARLES
VIII; ANNE of France (Vol. 2, p. 70); ANNE of Brittany (Vol. 2, p. 69).

[Sidenote: 16th Century]

For the years, 1498–1589, and the Orleans dynasty, LOUIS XII and
AMBOISE, by Prof. Jules Isaac of the Lyons Lycée; MARY (Vol. 17, p.
824); FRANCIS I (Vol. 10, p. 934), by Prof. Isaac; LOUISE OF SAVOY;
MARIGNANO; PAVIA; MARGUERITE D’ANGOULÊME (Vol. 17, p. 706); ÉTAMPES
(Vol. 9, p. 803); DU PRAT, ANNE DE MONTMORENCY (Vol. 18, p. 787); HENRY
II (Vol. 13, p. 291); DIANE DE POITIERS; CATHERINE DE’ MEDICI; FRANCIS
II; GUISE (Vol. 12, p. 699); L’HÔPITAL; CONDÉ; AMBOISE; ROMORANTIN;
HUGUENOTS; CHARLES IX; COLIGNY; SAINT ANDRÉ; ST. BARTHOLOMEW; HENRY III.

[Sidenote: The Bourbons]

For the Bourbon kings, beginning 1589—BOURBON (with genealogical chart);
HENRY IV; Duke of MAYENNE; EDICT OF NANTES (Vol. 19, p. 165); SULLY;
LOUIS XIII; MARIE DE’ MEDICI; RICHELIEU, by Prof. J. T. Shotwell,
Columbia University; CONCINI; LUYNES; CINQUE-MARS; ROHAN; SOUBISE;
JANSENISM; THIRTY YEARS’ WAR; and for leaders and engagements in that
conflict the titles listed in the chapter in this Guide entitled _For
Army Officers_; LOUIS XIV, by Prof. A. J. Grant of Leeds University;
MAZARIN, by Prof. H. Morse Stephens, University of California; MARIE
THERÈSE; LA VALLIÈRE; MONTESPAN; MAINTENON; Duc de BEAUFORT; FRONDE;
TURENNE; RETZ and LA ROCHEFOUCAULD, by Prof. George Saintsbury of
Edinburgh University; FOUQUET; COLBERT, by Prof. J. T. Shotwell,
Columbia; CHAMPLAIN; LA SALLE; LOUVOIS; CAMISARDS, by M. Frank Puaux,
president of the Socíeté de l’Histoire du Protestantisme Français;
JANSENISM, by Viscount St. Cyres; PORT ROYAL; BOSSUET; FENELON; LE
TELLIER; GRAND ALLIANCE; and for details of military operations and
sketches of commanders the articles enumerated in the chapter in this
Guide _For Army Officers_; LOUIS XV; Philip II, Duke of ORLEANS (Vol.
20, p. 286); FLEURY; AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION and SEVEN YEARS’ WAR and
articles under these heads in the chapter in this Guide _For Army
Officers_; CHATEAUROUX; POMPADOUR; DU BARRY; COMTE D’ ARGENSON (Vol. 2,
p. 459), CHOISEUL; MAUPEOU; AIGUILLON.

[Sidenote: The Revolution]

On the Revolution and the period immediately before it, the articles
LOUIS XVI, by Robert Anchel, archivist to the Department de l’Eure;
MARIE ANTOINETTE; BEAUMARCHAIS; MAUREPAS; TURGOT; NECKER; VERGENNES;
CALONNE; DIAMOND NECKLACE; LOMÉNIE DE BRIENNE; FRENCH REVOLUTION (Vol.
10, p. 154, equivalent to 58 pages of this Guide), by Prof. F. C.
Montague, University College, London; DES MOULINS; MIRABEAU; SIEYÈS;
DANTON; ROBESPIERRE; MOUNNIER; LA FAYETTE; MONTMORIN DE SAINT-HÉREM;
MARAT; CORDAY; TALLEYRAND; ASSIGNATS; NARBONNE-LARA; JACOBINS;
GIRONDISTS; ROLAND; BRISSOT; MOUNTAIN; DIRECTORY; BABEUF; FRENCH
REVOLUTIONARY WARS; and for battles and leaders in these wars the
articles mentioned under this head in the chapter in this Guide _For
Army Officers_.

[Sidenote: The First Empire]

On the Napoleonic period, the articles by J. Holland Rose, author of
_Napoleonic Studies_, etc., on NAPOLEON (Vol. 19, p. 190)—equivalent to
65 pages of this Guide, and on the principal figures of the Napoleonic
period,—for example, BONAPARTE family, FOUCHÉ, GARDANE, JUNOT; the
articles NAPOLEONIC CAMPAIGNS, PENINSULAR WAR and WATERLOO and the
articles listed under these two heads in the chapter in this Guide _For
Army Officers_.

[Sidenote: The Kingdom Again]

On the Bourbon restoration, LOUIS XVIII; DECAZES; Duc de RICHELIEU (Vol.
23, p. 302); Duc de BERRY; VILLÈLE; CHARLES X (Vol. 5, p. 921);
MARTIGNAC; POLIGNAC; MARMONT.

On the revolution of 1830 and the rule of Louis Philippe, the articles
LOUIS PHILIPPE (Vol. 17, p. 51); CAVAIGNAC; THIERS; GUIZOT; CONSTANT;
CASIMIR PÉRIER; LAFITTE; BARROT; DUPONT DE L’EURE; BERRYER; SAINT-SIMON;
FOURIER; LAMENNAIS; LOUIS BLANC; MOLÉ.

[Sidenote: The Second Empire]

On the revolution of 1848 and the second Empire, besides most of the
articles in the preceding paragraph, NAPOLEON III, by Albert Thomas,
author of _The Second Empire_; CRÉMIEUX; LEDRU-ROLLIN; CARNOT;
GARNIER-PAGÈS; MONTALEMBERT; OLLIVIER; ROUHER; FAVRE; PICARD; CRIMEAN
WAR; ITALIAN WARS; FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR; and articles listed under those
heads in the chapter in this Guide _For Army Officers_; EUGÈNIE;
MAXIMILIAN of Mexico (Vol. 17, p. 924).

[Sidenote: Modern Times]

On the Third Republic, 1870 and the following years, the story in Vol.
10, pp. 873–904 (equivalent to 100 pages of this Guide) is to be
supplemented by the articles THIERS; RÉMUSAT; SIMON; BARTHÉLEMY;
BROGLIE; MACMAHON; DUFAURE; GRÈVY; FERRY; GAMBETTA; FREYCINET; CHAMBORD;
CLÉMENCEAU; BRISSON; BOULANGER; CARNOT; LOUBET; LESSEPS; CASIMIR-PÉRIER;
FAURE; RIBOT; MÉLINE; WALDECK-ROUSSEAU; DREYFUS; DUPUY; RIBOT;
GALLIFFET; JAURÈS; MILLERAND; COMBES; DELCASSÉ; ROUVIER; PELLETAN;
BRIAND; LEMIRE; FALLIÈRES; POINCARÉ.




                             CHAPTER XLVII
                              THE FAR EAST


[Sidenote: Asiatic Characteristics]

An account, in this chapter, of the principal articles dealing with the
history of India, China and Japan, will sufficiently indicate to the
student the plan adopted in the Britannica’s treatment of all the
countries in the far East. But before turning to these three groups of
articles, he should read ASIA (Vol. 2, p. 734), which defines the social
and economic position of the Orient in general, and gives a survey of
the field covered by articles on Eastern countries other than the three
dealt with in this chapter. This article, equivalent in length to 65
pages of this Guide, is by Sir Richard Strachey, the famous Indian
administrator; Sir Charles Eliot, of the British diplomatic service Sir
T. H. Holdich, of the Indian Frontier Survey; and Philip Lake, the
Oriental geologist. The general survey of Asiatic characteristics, as
revealed by history, with which the historical section (p. 749) of the
article begins, is noteworthy in connection with current political
questions:

  The words “Asiatic” and “oriental” are often used as if they denoted a
  definite and homogeneous type, but Russians resemble Asiatics in many
  ways, and Turks, Hindus, Chinese, etc., differ in so many important
  points that the common substratum is small. It amounts to this, that
  Asiatics have not the same sentiment of independence and freedom as
  Europeans. Individuals are thought of as members of a family, state or
  religion, rather than as entities with a destiny and rights of their
  own. This leads to autocracy in politics, fatalism in religion, and
  conservatism in both.

All three of these are certainly conspicuous in the history of the first
Eastern country dealt with in this chapter.


                                 INDIA

In the article INDIA (Vol. 14, p. 375), (equivalent to 140 pages of this
Guide) there is much of value to the historical student besides the
chapter on _History_ (p. 395), which is written by Sir William Wilson
Hunter, administrative head of the statistical survey of India and one
of the editors of _The Imperial Gazetteer of India_, and by James
Sutherland Cotton, editor of this same Gazetteer. Particularly important
are the sections, _The People_ (p. 382), _Administration_ (p. 385), and
_Indian Costume_ (p. 417), illustrated from pen-and-ink drawings by J.
Lockwood Kipling, known to many as the illustrator of his son’s book
_Kim_. And the student of Oriental history will find it possible to gain
a little comprehension—at least—of Oriental ways of thought, Eastern
setting and colour, by reading in the Britannica such articles as CASTE
(Vol. 5, p. 464), HINDUISM (Vol. 13, p. 501), BRAHMANISM, BRAHMAN and
BRAHMANA (Vol. 4, p. 378), all by Prof. Julius Eggeling, Edinburgh;
BUDDHA and BUDDHISM (Vol. 4, p. 737), both by Prof. T. W. Rhys Davids of
Manchester, author of _Sacred Books of the Buddhas_, etc.; MAHOMET (Vol.
17, p. 399), by Prof. D. G. Margoliouth, Oxford; MAHOMMEDAN INSTITUTIONS
and MAHOMMEDAN LAW (Vol. 17, p. 411), by Prof. D. S. Macdonald, Hartford
Theological Seminary, and MAHOMMEDAN RELIGION (Vol. 17, p. 417), by Rev.
G. W. Thatcher, Camden College, Sydney, N. S. W.; INDIAN LAW (Vol. 14,
p. 434), by Sir William Markby, author of _Lectures on English Law_,
etc.; and ZOROASTER (Vol. 28, p. 1039), by Prof. Karl Geldner, Marburg,
and PARSEES (Vol. 20, p. 866). This list of articles subsidiary to the
history of India could be prolonged almost indefinitely, but enough has
been given to put the student on the track of valuable articles which
might otherwise escape his notice.

Before we come to the authentic history of India there is a legendary
period, the only historic test for which is the rock inscriptions,—see
the article INSCRIPTIONS, _Indian_ (Vol. 14, p. 621), by J. F. Fleet,
author of _Inscriptions of the Early Gupta Kings_. On the earliest
literary description of the Aryans in India and their contests with the
Dravidians see the article SANSKRIT, _Vedic Period_ (especially p. 161
of Vol. 24, on the _Rig Veda_)—and in general the articles ARYAN and
DRAVIDIAN. An interesting reconstruction of the civilization of the
primitive Aryans on the basis of languages will be found in the article
INDO-EUROPEAN LANGUAGES (Vol. 14, especially pp. 498–500), by Dr. Peter
Giles, Cambridge, author of _Manual of Comparative Philology_; and this
picture of Aryan life before the conquest of India will hold in the main
for the earlier period of the Aryans in India.

[Sidenote: Early Buddhism]

With the 6th century we come to the beginning of the Buddhist period.
See the article JAINS, the articles on Buddhism already mentioned, and
the articles: ASOKA, the great Buddhist emperor and organizer of the
faith, whose rock inscriptions throughout India are so valuable as
historical records; KANISHKA, the Buddhist king of Kabul and Kashmir;
FA-HIEN and HSÜAN TSANG, the Chinese pilgrims of India, who left
important records of early Buddhism and of Brahmanism, which was
steadily growing in power and strength.

The Hindu period, overlapping the Buddhist, is marked by the beginning
of Western influences on India. For the Persians in India see the
articles PERSIA (Vol. 21, especially pp. 209–210), DARIUS (Vol. 7, p.
832), and SCYLAX, the Greek who under Darius’s orders explored the
course of the Indus. Far more important was the conquest by Alexander
the Great and the establishment of the Hellenistic empire of the
Seleucids in Syria, Bactria and India: see ALEXANDER THE GREAT (Vol. 1,
especially p. 548), NEARCHUS, Alexander’s admiral and navigator, and
SELEUCID DYNASTY. The first paramount ruler of India was CHANDRAGUPTA
(Vol. 5, p. 839), whom the Greeks called Sandracottus and who crushed
the Seleucid power and founded the Maurya dynasty. Of his grandson Asoka
we have already spoken in outlining the growth and decline of Buddhism.
In this period Greek thought and art influenced India greatly, and in
the period immediately following—2nd century B.C.—northwestern India was
invaded again by western troops: see DEMETRIUS, EUCRATIDES, MENANDER.
The records of the next four centuries are confused and vague; on the
invasions from the North, see SAKA and YUE-CHI, by Sir Charles Norton
Edgcumbe Eliot.

The Yue-Chi founded the Kushan dynasty, in which the greatest king was
KANISHKA (Vol. 15, p. 653), already mentioned as a Buddhist ruler whose
policy marked the beginning of the end of Buddhism in India. On the
succeeding dynasty see the article GUPTA; and refer again to the article
FA-HIEN for the Chinese account of the rule of the second Gupta king,
Chandragupta,—on whom in legend see VIKRAMADITYA. On the White Huns and
their invasion consult the articles EPHTHALITES and HUNS. On the only
other great king of this period, who was paramount monarch of northern
India in the first half of the 7th century and whose administration was
described by Hsüan-Tsang, see HARSHA. On the principal Deccan dynasties
of the Hindu period, see CHALUKYA and RASHTRAKUTA, and the article
DECCAN.

[Sidenote: Mahommedans and Moslems]

For a general notion of the Mahommedan period in India the student
should read the articles on Mahommedanism already mentioned, and for
more definite information about India, the articles on the 11th century
invader MAHMUD OF GHAZNI (Vol. 17, p. 397), and on SOMNATH, the temple
city which he captured and sacked in 1025. See DECCAN and GUJARAT for
the Moslem conquest of these states by Ala-ud-din. For the destruction
of the Tughlak dynasty, which followed Ala-ud-din’s successors, see
AFGHANISTAN (Vol. 1, especially p. 315) and TIMUR (Vol. 26, p. 994), by
Major-General Sir Frederick John Goldsmid. The “last stand made by the
national faith in India against conquering Islam” was in VIJAYANAGAR
(Vol. 28, p. 62). With the 16th century and the Mogul dynasty, India is
quite definitely Moslem: see BABER, HUMAYUN, AKBAR, ABUL FAZL the
historian of Akbar’s reign, JAHANGIR, SHAH JAHAN, and AGRA and INDIAN
ARCHITECTURE (especially Fig. 17, opposite p. 433, Vol. 14) for the Taj
Mahal, the Mausoleum built by Shah Jahan for his wife Mumtäz Mal,
and—for the culmination of the Mogul power, the beginning of its decay,
and the first sign of Moslem bigotry and intolerance on the part of the
Mogul emperors,—AURANGZEB. His attempt to conquer the Mahommedan kings
of the Deccan gave the natives an opportunity to regain power: see the
article MAHRATTAS, and for the earlier risings of the Mahrattas, SIVAJI.
And for the rise of Afghan power under the Durani dynasty and the battle
of Panipat in 1761, a crushing defeat for the Mahrattas, see
AFGHANISTAN, _History_ (Vol. 1, especially p. 316), and AHMAD SHAH.

On earlier European settlements in India see the article INDIA,
_History_ (Vol. 14, p. 404), and more particularly for Portuguese
explorations and settlements the articles VASCO DA GAMA (Vol. 11, p.
433), ALBUQUERQUE (Vol. 1, p. 516), and GOA the capitol of Portuguese
India, the last article being by K. G. Jayne, author of _Vasco da Gama
and His Successors_: for Dutch rule the article DUTCH EAST INDIA COMPANY
(Vol. 8, p. 716); and for the beginning of British influence in India
the articles EAST INDIA COMPANY; SURAT; MADRAS, where the first English
fort was built in 1640 and the first grant, except for factory use, was
made by the English; BOMBAY, acquired from Portugal in 1661–65; SIR JOHN
and SIR JOSIAH CHILD; JOB CHARNOCK, founder of Calcutta, and the article
on CALCUTTA.

[Sidenote: The British Conquest]

On British political history in India in the 18th century, see the
articles on PONDICHERRY, DUPLEIX, French Governor-General in
Pondicherry, his rival CLIVE the founder of the British Empire and of
the power of the East India Company in India, EYRE COOTE who took
Pondicherry from the French in 1761, SURAJ-UD-DOWLAH and CALCUTTA for
the siege of the city and story of the Black Hole, PLASSEY, SHAH ALAM
for the massacre of PATNA; and for the period after CLIVE the articles
WARREN HASTINGS, MAHRATTAS for the first Mahratta war, HYDER ALI and
MYSORE for the first Mysore war; TIPPOO SAHIB and CORNWALLIS for the
second Mysore war; TEIGNMOUTH and BENGAL, for the permanent settlement
of Bengal under Cornwallis; WELLESLEY and TIPPOO SAHIB and SERINGAPATAM,
WELLINGTON and LAKE (Vol. 16, p. 85) for the campaigns against the
French and natives during Wellesley’s governor-generalship; LORD MINTO
for the years from 1807 to 1813; MARQUESS OF HASTINGS, OCHTERLONY and
NEPAL for the war in Nepal; for the wars of 1817 the articles PINDARIS,
MAHRATTAS, ELPHINSTONE, SIR JOHN MALCOLM; for the administration
(1823–28) of Lord Amherst, the articles AMHERST, BURMESE WARS, BHARATPUR
and COMBERMERE; for Bentinck’s rule, the articles BENTINCK, SUTTEE,
THUGS by Reinhold Rost, late secretary of the Royal Asiatic Society, and
MYSORE; METCALFE, for a view of his short tenure of office; for the
stormy period of the ’40’s, AUCKLAND, ELLENBOROUGH, AFGHANISTAN, SIR W.
H. MACNAGHTEN, SIR R. H. SALE and SIND; and for the Sikh wars, HARDINGE,
PUNJAB, SIKH WARS, RANJIT SINGH, SIR HUGH GOUGH, DALHOUSIE, SIR HENRY
LAWRENCE, EDWARDES, BURMESE WARS for the second war of 1852, and OUDH
for its annexation; and for the close of the Company’s rule, the
articles LORD CANNING, INDIAN MUTINY, DELHI, LORD LAWRENCE, RICHARD
BAIRD SMITH, JOHN NICHOLSON, SIR NEVILLE CHAMBERLAIN, CAWNPORE, NANA
SAHIB, LUCKNOW, SIR HENRY LAWRENCE, SIR J. E. W. INGLIS, HAVELOCK, J. G.
S. NEILL, OUTRAM, Sir Colin Campbell.

On India under the Crown, since 1858, see particularly the articles on
the viceroys, CANNING, ELGIN, LAWRENCE, MAYO, NORTHBROOK, LYTTON (see
also SHERE ALI and YAKUB KHAN),—RIPON (see also AYUB KHAN, EARL ROBERTS,
and ABDUR RAHMAN KHAN), DUFFERIN (see also PANJDEH for the Russian scare
of 1885 and BURMA and BURMESE WARS for the dispute with Thebaw), CURZON
and KITCHENER, and MINTO.


                                 CHINA

As with India, so with China, the whole of the article in the Britannica
is of value to the historical student. The article CHINA (Vol. 6, pp.
166–231) is equivalent to 200 pages of this Guide. The most important
part for the student of history is section V. (pp. 188–212) on
_History_: but such parts of the article as _Geography_, with a coloured
map, the _People_ (pp. 171–174), _Religion_ (174–177), _Economics_
(177–181), _Government and Administration_ (181–188), _Art_ (213–216)
with illustrations, and _Language and Literature_ (216–231) are all of
importance to help get the background that is so baffling to an
occidental studying the Far East. As was the case with India, the study
of religions is particularly important and besides the section
_Religion_ in the article CHINA, the student should turn to the articles
LAO-TSZE, the founder of a philosophy debased into Taoism, MENCIUS, and
CONFUCIUS, all by the Rev. James Legge, author of _The Religions of
China_, and the editor of _The Chinese Classics_, and BUDDHISM and
LAMAISM, the latter the form of Buddhism in vogue in China,—and he
should remember that there are some Mahommedans in China. In connection
with the latest developments in Chinese history he should read with
great care in the article CHINA, Section IV, _Government and
Administration_, especially p. 184 on the Civil Service, an elaborate
merit system.

Section V. of the article CHINA opens with a treatment by Sir Henry
Yule, the famous Orientalist, of the European knowledge of China before
1615, particularly “Cathay” and the early explorers of Mongolia, CARPINI
(see Vol. 5, p. 397) and RUBRUQUIS (see Vol. 23, pp. 810–812), and of
Cathay itself MARCO POLO (see Vol. 22, pp. 7–10). The internal history
of China begins (Vol. 6, p. 191) with a discussion of Chinese origins:
“anthropological arguments seem to contradict the idea of any connection
with Babylonians, Egyptians, Assyrians, or Indians. The earliest
hieroglyphics of the Chinese, ascribed by them to the Shang dynasty
(second millenium B.C.) betray the Mongol character of the nation that
invented them by the decided obliquity of the human eye whenever it
appears in an ideograph.... Our standpoint as regards the origin of the
Chinese race is, therefore, that of the agnostic.... Their civilization
was already old at a time when Britain and Germany were peopled by
half-naked barbarians, and the philosophical and ethical principles on
which it is based remain, to all appearances, as firmly rooted as ever.”
Chinese legendary history goes back to Fu-hi as the “first historical
emperor; and they place his lifetime in the years 2852–2738 B.C.”
[Sidenote: The First Definite Date] There is much that is purely
legendary and mythical in these early records, but with the year 776
B.C. we find a veritable record: in an ode referring to a wicked emperor
there is mention of “certain signs showing that Heaven itself is
indignant at Yu-wang’s crimes. One of these signs was an eclipse of the
sun ... the date and month being clearly stated. This date corresponds
exactly with August 29, 776 B.C.; and astronomers have calculated that
on that precise date an eclipse of the sun was visible in North China.”
It is an interesting coincidence that this earliest sure date in Chinese
history is the date of the first Greek Olympiad, from which time was
reckoned in the Greek calendar—though there are no certain dates in
Greek history until much later. The first outstanding event in the
history of China was nearly 20 centuries later—the Mongol invasion; see
the articles MONGOLS (Vol. 18, pp. 712–719) and JENGHIZ KHAN (Vol. 15,
p. 316), both by Sir Robert K. Douglas, author of _The Life of Jenghiz
Khan_. On the period immediately following see KUBLAI KHAN, for the
foundation of the Mongol dynasty, and the section _Medieval Cathay_
(Vol. 6, p. 189) of the article CHINA for early exploration and
missionary effort. Mongol rule was broken in the 14th century by the
founder of the Ming dynasty. [Sidenote: Foreign Relations] The
Portuguese arrival at Canton in 1517 marked the beginning of modern
intercourse with Europe; and see the article MATTEO RICCI by Sir Henry
Yule, for the first important work of a Christian missionary in China
early in the 17th century. Immediately thereafter came the Manchu
invasion, on which see the article MANCHURIA, by Sir R. K. Douglas.
Trade with Europe on a large scale began in the second half of the 18th
century; see the article CANTON. British diplomatic missions for the
improvement of the condition of traders in Canton were unsuccessful, but
in 1840 the opium war made China feel the weight of Great Britain’s
power when Hong Kong was ceded to the English and other ports were
opened to trade: see LORD NAPIER, SIR HUGH GOUGH, and HONG-KONG. On the
T’ai-p’ing rebellion, the “Arrow” affair, and the second interference of
Great Britain with China, see SIR H. S. PARKES, CHARLES GEORGE GORDON
(“Chinese Gordon”), EARL OF ELGIN (Vol. 9, p. 268), TSENG KUO-FAN, LI
HUNG CHANG. On the Russian boundary disputes of 1858 and 1860 see AMUR
and VLADIVOSTOK.

The history of China since 1875 is told pretty completely in the article
CHINA, in two sections, the first on 1875–1901 being by Sir Valentine
Chirol, author of _The Far Eastern Question_. But in connection with the
general treatment the student should read the articles on KOREA, ANNAM
and TONGKING for the earlier efforts to detach from the Chinese empire
these quasi-vassals; CHINO-JAPANESE WAR for the military details of the
struggle by which Japan got command of the Korean coast-line; MEKONG for
the dispute of 1895 with Great Britain; KIAOCHOW BAY, PORT ARTHUR and
WEI-HAI-WEI for the seizures of 1897 and 1898 by Germany, Russia and
Great Britain respectively; JOHN HAY for America’s part in the Open Door
policy; PEKING and TIENTSIN for details added to the general account in
the article CHINA, of the “Boxer” rising; MANCHURIA for Russian
encroachments before, and JAPAN for Manchuria after the Russo-Japanese
War.


                                 JAPAN

[Sidenote: Japanese in America]

The article JAPAN (Vol. 15, p. 156) is equivalent to 370 pages of this
Guide,—and is almost entirely the work of Captain Frank Brinkley, editor
of the _Japan Mail_, author of _Japan_, _A History of Japan_, _An
Unabridged Japanese-English Dictionary_, etc. The article is divided
into 10 parts—_Geography_, _People_, _Language and Literature_, _Art_,
_Economic Conditions_, _Government and Administration_, _Religion_,
_Foreign Intercourse_, _Domestic History_, and _The Claim of Japan; A
Japanese View_, by Baron Dairoku Kikuchi, in which the president of the
Imperial University of Kyoto and of the Imperial Academy of Japan
discusses “the ambition of the Japanese people ... to be recognized as
an equal by the Great Powers,” their resenting “any discrimination
against them as an Asiatic people,” the “misrepresentation, arising from
want of proper knowledge of Japanese character and feelings,” that the
Japanese immediately after the war with Russia were “ready and eager to
fight with the United States”—whereas the Japanese have always regarded
the Americans with a special good will, due no doubt to the steady
liberal attitude of the American government and people towards Japan and
Japanese, and they look upon the idea of war between Japan and the
United States as ridiculous.

[Sidenote: Marks of the Race]

Any justifiable discrimination against the Japanese as Asiatics must of
course be based upon such characteristics of custom and thought as
render Japanese immigration undesirable, and not upon the colour of the
Japanese skin or any other peculiarity of appearance. But it is none the
less interesting to turn from Baron Dairoku Kikuchi’s argument to Capt.
Brinkley’s careful study (p. 164) of the physical characteristics of the
Japanese. “The best authorities are agreed that the Japanese do not
differ, physically, from their Korean and Chinese neighbors as much as
the inhabitants of Northern Europe differ from those of Southern
Europe.” Some of the bodily traits which distinguish the Japanese from
races of European origin are to be observed “in the eyes, the eyelashes,
the cheekbones and the beard.” The eyeball does not differ from that of
an occidental, but the eye is less deeply set. The conspicuous
peculiarity is that the upper eyelids are much heavier at the inner
corners than at the outer, making the eyes apparently oblique; and a
fold of the upper lids hangs over the roots of the upper lashes. The
lashes, too, are short and scanty, and converge, instead of diverging as
they do in occidentals, so that the tips are nearer together than the
roots. There is but little hair on the face (except among the Ainus),
and it is nearly always straight. The cheekbones are prominent among the
lower, rather than the upper classes. The article proceeds to discuss
the moral characteristics of the Japanese; attributing to them a degree
of frugality and endurance such as to make it virtually impossible for
any occidental race, living in reasonable comfort, to compete with
Japanese labour.

As in the study of India and China, it will be well for the student of
Japanese history to make himself familiar with the Britannica’s full
material on native religion: see Vol. 15, p. 222, noting especially that
in the section on Shinto it is said: “The grandson of the sun goddess
was the first sovereign of Japan, and his descendants have ruled the
land in unbroken succession ever since.”

[Sidenote: Foreign intercourse]

In Japanese history two main topics of study present themselves—foreign
intercourse and domestic or internal history—the former naturally the
more attractive to the foreign student, and of additional interest both
because of its picturesque and romantic early detail and by reason of
its explaining the sudden emergence of Japan as a power in world
politics. Portuguese shipwrecked in Japan in 1542 or 1543 opened the
country to Portuguese trade and in 1549 landed the great Jesuit
missionary, FRANCISCO DE XAVIER: see the article by K. G. Jayne, author
of _Vasco da Gama and his Successors_. The contest between Spain and
Portugal for Eastern trade and between Jesuits and Franciscans for
Japanese converts to Christianity and the other factors that resulted in
the suppression of Christianity in 1614 and the consequent persecutions
of converts and missionaries are told in the article JAPAN—and so also
is the story of the foothold that Dutch and English traders got before
the Japanese practically excluded them also, as Christians rather than
as foreigners or traders. From the middle of the 17th to the beginning
of the 19th century Japan was practically untouched by Western
civilization. The part of the United States navy in opening the country
to trade in 1853 is described in the article JAPAN (pp. 237–238) and in
the article MATTHEW CALBRAITH PERRY. The article JAPAN also devotes much
space (p. 238) to the work done by another American, Townsend Harris,
who was less known than Perry, but who carried through the immensely
important first commercial treaty.

[Sidenote: Recent Wars]

The remainder of the story of Japan’s foreign relations is given in the
main article JAPAN, but the student should read besides the articles
CHINO-JAPANESE WAR, MANCHURIA, and RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR. The last of these
would be equivalent to 40 pages of this Guide; it is accompanied by the
following plans: _General Dispositions after Nanshan_, _Liao-Yang_,
_Port Arthur_, and _Mukden_: and it is a remarkable critical summary of
the military operations of the war. Read also the biographies of
KATSURA, KODAMA, KUROKI, NOGI, NOZU, OKUMA, OYAMA, TOGO, YAMAGATA.

[Sidenote: Domestic History]

As for domestic history, it is important to note that early Japanese
history is more purely mythical and legendary, and is chronologically
untrustworthy for a longer period than is Chinese history. The
conventionally accepted date of the establishment of the Empire is 660
B. C.; and from this year all dates are reckoned; but Japanese annals
are self-contradictory and are proved faulty by Chinese and Korean
records. Even the famed Japanese invasion of Korea in 200 is possibly
apocryphal, and there are few trustworthy recorded facts before 400 A.D.
or dates before 500 A.D. In the middle of the 6th century Chinese
influence, through Korea, became strong, and in 552 Buddhism was
introduced from Korea. A century later legislative government and
administrative reform began.

On the Japanese feudal system beginning in the 12th century see: the
article BUSHIDO; in the article JAPAN the account of the earlier army;
and the articles SHOGUN and MIKADO. The more important separate articles
for the later period are: TOKUGAWA and ARISUGAWA for the rival families
of the 17th–19th centuries; MUTSU HITO; SANJO; OKUBO TOSHIMITSU; SAIGO;
MUTSU; IWAKURA MATSUKATA, the financier; KATO; KOMURA; ITO; ENOMOTO;
ITAGAKI, “the first to organize and lead a political party in Japan”;
INOUYE; OKUMA; YAMAGATA; HAYASHI.




                             CHAPTER XLVIII
                      ECONOMICS AND SOCIAL SCIENCE


Many topics in the field of economics and social science are treated
with some detail in other parts of this Guide. For public finance, for
instance, see the chapter _For Bankers and Financiers_. Tariffs, trusts,
labour questions and the problems of population (such as immigration,
eugenics, aliens and race-conflict, the liquor traffic, penal and
charitable institutions) are among the topics presented in the course on
_Questions of the Day_. In this chapter is a brief outline of the entire
subject, including these special topics.

The key article, equivalent to 35 pages in this Guide, is ECONOMICS,
(Vol. 8, p. 899), by W. A. S. Hewins, formerly director of the London
School of Economics, secretary of the tariff commission.

[Sidenote: Great Economists]

For the history of economic theory in biographies of great
economists, see JEAN BODIN; THOMAS MUN; HOBBES; SIR WILLIAM PETTY;
SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE; SIR JOSIAH CHILD; VAUBAN; SIR DUDLEY NORTH;
FÉNELON; CHARLES DAVENANT; PIERRE BOISGUILBERT; MONTESQUIEU;
FRANÇOIS QUESNAY; BENJAMIN FRANKLIN; ANTONIO GENOVESI; SIR JAMES
STEUART; JOSIAH TUCKER; VICTOR MIRABEAU; COUNT OF CARLI-RUBBI;
JUSTUS MÖSER; PEDRO RODRIGUEZ; ADAM SMITH; ANNE ROBERT JACQUES
TURGOT; FERDINANDO GALIANI; BECCARIA-BONESANA; DU PONT DE NEMOURS;
GASPAR MELCHOR DE JOVELLANOS; GAETANO FILANGIERI; ALEXANDER
HAMILTON; HENRY THORNTON; THOMAS ROBERT MALTHUS; MELCHIORRE GIOJA;
JEAN BAPTISTE SAY; DAVID RICARDO; JEAN C. L. DE SISMONDI; JAMES
MILL; THOMAS TOOKE; RICHARD JONES; ROBERT TORRENS; FRIEDRICH LIST;
J. R. M’CULLOCH; NASSAU W. SENIOR; KARL HEINRICH RAU; HENRY CHARLES
CAREY; AUGUSTE COMTE; FREDERIC BASTIAT; HARRIET MARTINEAU; JOHN
STUART MILL; BONAMY PRICE; W. T. THORNTON; EMILE DE LAVELEYE; J. E.
CAIRNES; J. E. THOROLD ROGERS; J. K. INGRAM; WALTER BAGEHOT; T. E.
CLIFFE LESLIE; DAVID AMES WELLS; W. STANLEY JEVONS; HENRY GEORGE;
FRANCIS AMASA WALKER; W. G. SUMNER; L. J. BRENTANO; WILLIAM
CUNNINGHAM; EUGEN BOEHM VON BAWERK; ARNOLD TOYNBEE; R. T. ELY; A. T.
HADLEY; D. R. DEWEY; F. W. TAUSSIG; W. J. ASHLEY; E. W. BEMIS; and
E. R. A. SELIGMAN.

For the chief branches of economic theory read:

[Sidenote: Economic Theory]

VALUE (Vol. 27, p. 867) by Dr. J. S. Nicholson, professor of political
economy, Edinburgh University, author of _Principles of Political
Economy_, etc. This article, equivalent to 25 pages of this Guide,
distinguishes between utility and value—to be valuable a “thing must
have some utility; and there must be some difficulty in its attainment.”
There are three laws of value—supply and demand, in the discussion of
which monopoly-values and competition-values are considered; that of
cost of production, in which cost of raw material and wages are obvious
factors; and that of increasing cost with increased quantity of
production,—upon which depends the theory of rent.

WEALTH (Vol. 28, p. 437) is by the same author, who adopts the
definition of wealth connected with the name of Adolf von Held, based on
a study of _consumption_, _production_ and _distribution_ of
wealth,—“consumable utilities which require labour for their production
and can be appropriated and exchanged.”

CONSUMPTION (Vol. 7, p. 23) is the “destruction of utilities.”

PRODUCTION (Vol. 22, p. 423) is the creation of utilities.

CAPITAL (Vol. 5, p. 278) is accumulated wealth available for earning
interest and producing fresh wealth. “It is not antithetical to labour,
but ... the accumulated savings of labour and of the profits accruing
from the savings of labour.” The “importance of ability or brain-work,
as against much of modern theorizing against capitalism,” must not be
overlooked.

WAGES (Vol. 28, p. 229), also by Dr. Nicholson, is equivalent to 17
pages in this Guide. It distinguishes between nominal and real wages,
describes the economic wages fund theory, and deals with such topics as
state regulation of wages, factory legislation, trades unions and wages,
effects of machinery on wages.

Further information, more particularly in the field of finance, will be
found in:

BANKS AND BANKING (Vol. 3, p. 334), with a special treatment of American
banking by Charles A. Conant, formerly treasurer of the Morton Trust
Co., New York City, and author of _History of Modern Banks of Issue_,
and with the general description by Sir Robert Palgrave, director of
Barclay & Co., Ltd., and editor of the _Dictionary of Political
Economy_.

TRUST COMPANY (Vol. 27, p. 329) is by C. A. Conant, late treasurer of
the Morton Trust Co., New York.

MONEY (Vol. 18, p. 694) and FINANCE (Vol. 10, p. 347) are by Prof.
Charles Francis Bastable, University of Dublin, author of _Public
Finance_, etc.

See also the articles on GOLD, SILVER, BIMETALLISM, and MONETARY
CONFERENCES.

On “Ideal” social systems, see these four groups of articles:

[Sidenote: Anarchism, Socialism, etc.]

ANARCHISM (Vol. 1, p. 914), by Prince Kropotkin, author of _Modern
Science and Anarchism_, and a contributor to the Britannica on Russian
geography; and NIHILISM (Vol. 19, p. 686), by Sir Donald Mackenzie
Wallace, author of _Russia_, and _The Web of Empire_; and biographies of
WILLIAM GODWIN, PROUDHON, BAKUNIN, CLÉMENCE LOUISE MICHEL, KROPOTKIN,
MOST, RECLUS (like Kropotkin, well known as a geographer), TOLSTOY, and
on “anarchist” outrages see CHICAGO (Vol. 6, p. 125), MCKINLEY,
ALEXANDER II of Russia, M. F. S. CARNOT, ELIZABETH of Austria (Vol. 9,
p. 285), and HUMBERT.

COMMUNISM (Vol. 6, p. 791), and see also ROBERT OWEN, NEW HARMONY,
AMANA, SHAKERS, FOURIER, BROOK FARM, CONSIDERANT, CABET, SAINT-SIMON and
ONEIDA COMMUNITY; and on Plato’s “Republic,” PLATO (especially pp.
818–819, Vol. 21); on More’s “Utopia,” the article SIR THOMAS MORE
(especially p. 825, Vol. 18); on Bacon’s “New Atlantis,” the article
FRANCIS BACON (especially p. 144, Vol. 3); on Hobbe’s “Leviathan,” the
article HOBBES (especially p. 547, Vol. 13); on Campanella’s “Civitas
Solis” or “City of the Sun,” the article CAMPANELLA (Vol. 5, p. 121);
SAMUEL BUTLER (Vol. 4, p. 887) for “Erewhon” and “Erewhon Revisited”;
and EDWARD BELLAMY (Vol. 3, p. 694) for “Looking Backward,” the latest
of the well-known literary pictures of an ideal commonwealth.

CO-OPERATION (Vol. 7, p. 82), by Aneurin Williams, chairman of
executive, International Co-Operative Alliance, and author of
_Twenty-eight Years of Co-operation at Guise_; and BUILDING SOCIETIES
(Vol. 4, p. 766) and FRIENDLY SOCIETIES (Vol. 11, p. 217), both
collaborative articles by Sir Edward William Brabrook, late chief
registrar of friendly societies, and Dr. Carroll D. Wright, late United
States Commissioner of Labor; and for the different co-operative
experiments, see, in addition to the articles mentioned under Communism
above: ROCHDALE, GUISE, JEAN BAPTISTE, ANDRÉ GODIN, E. V. NEALE,
RAIFFEISEN and SCHULZE-DELITZSCH for German co-operative banks and rural
credit, IRELAND (especially p. 749, Vol. 14), FRANCE (especially p. 782,
Vol. 10), ITALY (especially p. 14, Vol. 15), RUSSIA (especially p. 887,
Vol. 23, on the _Artel_); and for American approaches to co-operation
the articles HOPEDALE, PULLMAN and MORMONS (especially p. 846, Vol. 18).

SOCIALISM (Vol. 25, p. 301), by James Bonar, author of _Philosophy and
Political Economy_; and supplement this by the articles ROBERT OWEN;
KARL MARX, by Edward Bernstein, author of _Theorie and Geschichte des
Socialismus_ and formerly a Socialist member of the Reichstag and a
leader of the German Socialist movement away from Marx; RODBERTUS;
LASSALLE; KETTLER; BEBEL; LIEBKNECHT; SCHMOLLER; JAURES; MILLERAND;
HENRY GEORGE; WILLIAM MORRIS; H. G. WELLS; BERNARD SHAW; JOHN BURNS; and
local articles, especially NEW ZEALAND and FINLAND.

[Sidenote: Tariffs, Trusts, etc.]

Among the more interesting general economic topics are tariffs and
trusts, matters of constant and great importance both in politics and
business. See the articles: TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 422), by Dr. F. W.
Taussig, professor at Harvard, and author of _The Tariff History of the
United States_; FREE TRADE (Vol. 11, p. 88), by Dr. William Cunningham,
archdeacon of Ely, author of _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_.

PROTECTION (Vol. 22, p. 464), by E. J. James, president of the
University of Illinois, author of _History of American Tariff
Legislation_, etc.

For the history of tariff legislation in the United States, the articles
ALEXANDER HAMILTON, HENRY CLAY, FEDERALIST PARTY, ANTI-FEDERALIST PARTY,
DEMOCRATIC PARTY, WHIG PARTY, REPUBLICAN PARTY, J. S. MORRILL, MCKINLEY,
etc., and UNITED STATES HISTORY (Vol. 27) especially § 113 (p. 689), §
151 (p. 694), § 195 (p. 701), § 241 (p. 708), § 297 (p. 716), § 314 (p.
718), § 354 (p. 728), § 370 (p. 728), § 373 (p. 729), etc.

And for the English tariff legislation in the last hundred years, the
articles CORN LAWS, JOHN BRIGHT, COBDEN, JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN, etc.

The article TRUSTS (Vol. 27, p. 334), by Prof. J. W. Jenks of New York
University should be supplemented by the article GILDS (Vol. 12, p. 14),
contributed by the late Professor Charles Gross of Harvard University,
and for American Trust Legislation, by the articles INTERSTATE COMMERCE
(Vol. 14, p. 711) and UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27), especially
pages 725–726, 729, 734. See also under separate state headings.

[Sidenote: Labour and Wages]

The article on Gilds just referred to will serve as an introduction to
the subject of labour and labour organizations. The most important
articles on modern conditions are TRADE UNIONS (Vol. 27, p. 140);
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS (Vol. 25, p. 1024); and LABOUR LEGISLATION (Vol.
16, p. 7), all with American sections by Carroll D. Wright, late U. S.
Commissioner of Labor. On labour legislation see the special article
EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY (Vol. 9, p. 356) and the sections on legislation
and miscellaneous laws in separate state articles.

[Sidenote: Statistics, Population, etc.]

One of the great branches of economics is the study of statistics.
Advisedly we say “_study_ of statistics” and in the Britannica the
student will find comparatively few statistical tables, but much
analysis both of statistics and of their meaning. For statistics of
population see, for instance, the section on population in the article
UNITED STATES or in any one of the state or city articles. Under
_Population and Social Conditions_ in the article UNITED STATES (Vol.
27, pp. 634–638) are treated: growth of the nation geographically and in
population, with special consideration of immigration; changes in
localities; urban and rural population; interstate migration; sexes;
vital statistics—death rate, marriage, families, birth-rate, illiteracy;
religious statistics; occupations; national wealth. And the state
articles give: total population at each census; foreign-born and of
foreign parentage,—often with analysis and historical outlines of
immigration and its variation and character and amount; religious
statistics; negroes and whites, Indians, Asiatics, etc.; urban
population, with list of larger cities and population of each. In
articles on American cities and towns population figures are given from
the last census; comparisons are made between native and foreign-born
and the foreign-born are classified, and, where there is a predominant
element, like the Germans in Cincinnati and St. Louis, an estimate of
the influence of this element.

One of the problems of population peculiar to the United States,
particularly the Southern states, is the negro. See the article NEGRO
(Vol. 19, p. 344), especially the part dealing with the United States,
which is by Walter F. Willcox, professor of social science and
statistics in Cornell University and chief statistician of the U. S.
Census Bureau. This article and that on DIVORCE (Vol. 8, p. 334)—another
urgent American problem—are remarkable examples of the treatment of a
social question from the point of view of a statistician in a most
interesting and illuminating manner, although based on dry statistics,
and in a manner all the more satisfying and accurate because it has
carefully analyzed figures at the back of it.

The status of the negro in different states is described in the separate
state articles, and there, too, the reader will find a summary of local
divorce laws.

Other articles coming under the head of population are INFANTICIDE,
ILLEGITIMACY, LEGITIMACY and LEGITIMATION.

[Sidenote: Social Legislation]

In the chapter in this Guide on _Questions of the Day_ attention is
called to the increasing tendency of the state to control and regulate
matters which a generation or so ago were considered outside the sphere
of government. Two particular economic questions—“social evils” we
sometimes call them—are foremost in this category and on these the
student of economics should read in the Britannica:

The article PROSTITUTION (Vol. 22, p. 457), by Dr. Arthur Shadwell,
member of the Council of the Epidemiological Society and author of
_Industrial Efficiency and Drink_, _Temperance and Legislation_, and the
articles LIQUOR LAWS (Vol. 16, p. 759) and TEMPERANCE (Vol. 26, p. 578),
also by Dr. Shadwell. These should be supplemented by accounts of local
legislation against liquor, as for example in the articles MAINE,
KANSAS, SOUTH CAROLINA, etc. On the Gothenburg system of Sweden and
Norway see Vol. 16, pp. 769 and 780, and Vol. 26, p. 587, where, we
learn that the essence of this method of conducting the retail traffic
is that the element of private gain is eliminated. See besides
biographies of temperance reformers—e.g., THEOBALD MATHEW, NEAL DOW,
JOHN B. GOUGH, etc.

Another great problem which the state and the municipality are
attempting to solve, or to help solve, by means of legislation is that
of housing. See the article HOUSING (Vol. 13, p. 814), which comprises
not only the topic of city housing and its faults due to overcrowding,
excessive value of land in great cities, etc., but the subject of rural
housing, and the experiments in garden cities, model towns, etc. See
also the article OCTAVIA HILL (Vol. 13, p. 465), and for American model
towns, HOPEDALE, PULLMAN, etc.

[Sidenote: Social Welfare]

Many movements for social welfare are of a very different character and
are based on an entirely different principle from that of repressive or
controlling legislation. Charities, education, care of insane, training
of defectives, prison reform—such are a few of these topics, and the
student will quickly learn that these burdens have been borne quite as
much by the individual as by the State, and that in many instances
individual initiative has by long and laborious effort succeeded in
reforming in this field abuses which had flourished under government
care.

[Sidenote: Charity]

Of prime importance to the student is the elaborate article on CHARITY
AND CHARITIES (Vol. 5, p. 860), by Dr. Charles Stewart Loch, secretary
to the council of the London Charity Organization Society and author of
_Charity Organization_, _Methods of Social Advance_, etc. This article,
equivalent in contents to 100 pages of this Guide, is made up of an
introduction and six parts, as follows:

Introduction: “Charity,” as used in New Testament, means love and
mercy—an ideal social state.

Part I.—Primitive Charity—highly developed idea of duty to guest or
stranger, whether beggar or vagrant.

Part II.—Charity among the Greeks. “In Crete and Sparta the citizens
were wholly supported out of the public resources.” In Athens, charity
by: legal enactment for release of debts; assisted emigration; gifts of
grain; poor relief for infirm and for orphans of soldiers; pay for
public service; private charity; loan societies.

Part III.—Charity in Roman Times. “The system obliged the hard-working
to maintain the idlers, while it continually increased their number.”
“The effect on agriculture, and proportionally on commerce generally,
was ruinous.”

Part IV.—Jewish and Christian Charity. In Christianity a fusion of
Jewish and Greco-Roman practice. Summary of Hebrew Charity. “To mark the
line of development, we compare: 1. The family among Jews and in the
early Christian church. 2. The sources of relief and the tithe, the
treatment of the poor and their aid, and the assistance of special
classes of poor. 3. The care of strangers; and, lastly, we would
consider the theory of alms giving, friendship or love, and charity.”

Part V.—Medieval Charity and its Development. St. Francis and his
influence. St. Thomas Aquinas. Medieval endowed charities.

Part VI.—After the Reformation. “The religious life was to be
democratic—not in religious bodies, but in the whole people; and in a
new sense—in relation to family and social life—it was to be moral. That
was the significance of the Reformation.” Organization of municipal
relief. Poor relief acts and statutory serfdom. Progress of thought in
18th and 19th century: influence of Rousseau, of Law, of Howard, of
Bentham, of Nonconformists, particularly Friends in England; Society for
Bettering the Condition of the Poor (1796). The Poor Law. Movement for
Old Age Pensions. Charity Organization. Hospitals.

American charities and their peculiar problems.

Other articles bearing on the subject are:

POOR LAW (Vol. 22, p. 74), for the British system, and Dr. T. A.
Ingram’s articles UNEMPLOYMENT (Vol. 27, p. 578) and VAGRANCY (Vol. 27,
p. 837).

[Sidenote: Prisons]

One of the earliest and most important definite charitable movements was
prison reform. On this subject see in the Britannica the articles,—all
by Major Arthur Griffiths, British inspector of prisons,—PRISON, CRIME,
CRIMINOLOGY, CHILDREN’S COURTS, POLICE, JUVENILE OFFENDERS, DEPORTATION,
FINGER PRINTS, IDENTIFICATION. This series of articles shows both the
improvements in methods of treating criminals, in itself a means of
protecting society, and the better methods of defense and of police.

[Sidenote: Insane]

On the treatment of the insane and feeble-minded, on the gradual
assumption of responsibility for them by governments, and on the
transition from the prison-like asylum to the modern hospital, see the
article INSANITY, particularly part III (Vol. 14, p. 616), on Hospital
Treatment, by Dr. Frederick Peterson, professor of psychiatry, Columbia
University, author of _Mental Diseases_, etc.

[Sidenote: Deaf and Blind]

As great as the change in treatment of the insane has been that in the
treatment of the deaf and blind. On this subject read the articles;
BLINDNESS (Vol. 4, p. 59), by Sir Francis J. Campbell, principal of the
Royal Normal College for the Blind; and DEAF AND DUMB (Vol. 7, p. 880),
by the Rev. Arnold Hill Payne, chaplain of the Oxford Diocesan Mission
to the Deaf and Dumb. Both these authors have had experience in teaching
in the United States as well as in Great Britain,—one of the many
striking instances of the wisdom displayed in the choice of contributors
to the Britannica. And see the articles on GALLAUDET (Vol. 11, p. 416),
the great teacher of the deaf, and S. G. HOWE (Vol. 13, p. 837), the
educator of the blind.

[Sidenote: Biographies]

The following list, arranged for the most part in chronological order,
gives some of the names of reformers and philanthropists about whom
there are separate articles. These biographical sketches will be of
great value for the study of the history and development of charitable
work for the public welfare.

 John Kyrle
 Thomas Guy
 Thomas Coram
 Adam Anderson
 Gen. Booth
 John Howard
 Tuke (family)
 Baron de Montyon
 Granville Sharp
 Johann Beckmann
 Sir Thomas Bernard
 Robert Owen
 François Charles Marie Fourier
 George Birkbeck
 Elizabeth Fry
 Sir M. H. Montefiore
 Sir Thomas F. Buxton
 Theobald Mathew
 Lucretia Mott
 Joseph Sturge
 Sir Rowland Hill
 B. N. M. Appert
 Gerrit Smith
 Framjee Nasarwanjee Patel
 Victor P. Considerant
 E. Vansittart Neale
 Baroness Burdett-Coutts
 Grace Horsley Darling
 J. B. A. Godin
 John B. Gough
 George Jacob Holyoake
 Madhowdas Vurjcevandas
 Clara Barton
 Louis Adolphe Bertillon
 Henri Cernuschi
 Mary Ashton Livermore
 Sir Francis Galton
 Geo. Thorndike Angell
 Sir D. M. Petit
 George Smith of Coalville
 M. E. L. Walras
 Emily Faithfull
 Lyman Judson Gage
 Octavia and Miranda Hill
 A. Carnegie
 Baron Rowton
 J. D. Rockefeller
 Benjamin Waugh
 Frances E. Willard
 F. A. Bebel
 Charles Booth
 Gabriel Tarde
 Laurence Gronlund
 Samuel Gompers
 Sidney Webb
 Jane Addams
 Helen Gould




                              CHAPTER XLIX
                           HEALTH AND DISEASE


You may have happened to glance at one of the text-books written for the
use of medical students and of doctors, and found that you could hardly
understand a word of it. And yet you have found, when you consulted a
specialist, and he wanted to explain to you just what was wrong with
some part of your body, that he could make it all quite clear to you.
The six hundred articles on health and disease in the Britannica are
written by specialists, most of them, indeed, by professors in the
leading medical schools; and these contributors to the Britannica are
also the authors of many of the best text-books that practising
physicians and surgeons habitually use. But in the Britannica the
specialists were writing for the general public; and for that reason
they have taken care not to be too technical either in their point of
view or in the language they use.

[Sidenote: Right and Wrong Way to Read]

In this present chapter of the Reader’s Guide, the subject of health and
disease is treated just as the Guide treats any other department of
knowledge. You may want to learn something about it because it is one of
the most wonderful branches of science, just as you would take up the
course of reading on astronomy. Or you may feel that you ought to know
more than you do about your own body, about the way you should live in
order to preserve your health, and about the causes of the diseases to
which you are exposed. Some people will tell you that it is unwise to
read about the subject at all. That is absurd. There are no doubt
exceptional people, with unsound nerves, who will imagine they must take
every patent medicine they see advertised, and who long to try every
newly discovered serum that the newspapers tell them about.

[Sidenote: The Danger of “Doctoring” Yourself]

Again, you may be told that if you try to learn something about health
and disease, you will be tempted to think you know as much as the
doctor; and so neglect to go to him when you need his advice. But this
objection, again, applies only to people who lack good sense. For
example, if you read the article on DENTISTRY, by Dr. E. C. Kirk, dean
of the Dental Faculty of the University of Pennsylvania, it will help
you to understand whatever your dentist may be doing for you. But it
will certainly not give you the idea that you could fill your own teeth.

When you find your watch has stopped, you wind it. Then, if it does not
start, you take it to the watchmaker. If, instead of doing that, you
tried to tinker with it yourself, you would soon be in trouble. On the
other hand, it would be ridiculous to go to the watchmaker without first
finding out whether the watch merely wanted winding, and a man ought to
know enough about his watch to connect the fact that it has stopped with
the probability that he has forgotten to wind it. The daily winding is
his work, not the watchmaker’s. The chemical and mechanical work that is
going on within you is as complicated as anything in a watch or anything
that you could see in a laboratory or factory. It is your business (_and
your most important business, for if you neglect it, you will not be
able to do anything properly, for yourself or for anybody else_) to keep
this machinery running, and to do that is not so simple as to wind a
watch. Your body needs food and warmth. It very probably gets too much
of both. Furthermore, the food is often unwholesome, and the warmed air
is often bad air. But unless you are a millionaire invalid, you do not
have a private doctor with you at all hours to watch the food put on
your plate and to ventilate your room.

[Sidenote: The Kind of Knowledge You Need]

The average watch is better treated than the average human body, and
when the average body goes wrong, through the average man’s
thoughtlessness, he proceeds, without in the least knowing what is
wrong, to take violent medicines, or to experiment with some fad about
diet or underclothing or gymnastics, and to make matters very much
worse. The knowledge he can gain from the Britannica will tend to keep
him from being careless, and also from trying to doctor himself when he
needs professional care. Whether you undertake a complete course of
medical reading or not, it is certainly worth your while to read the
first group of articles mentioned in this chapter—those which have to do
with the healthy routine of life.

[Sidenote: Eating and Drinking]

You will find the best introduction to the subject of diet in general in
a section (Vol. 26, p. 799) of the article THERAPEUTICS, by Sir Lauder
Brunton. He is one of the most famous consulting physicians in the
world, and he gives you advice which your own doctor will certainly
confirm when he tells you that the way to avoid indigestion is to
masticate your food well and sip half a pint of hot water four times a
day—when you go to bed, when you get up, and again about an hour before
luncheon and dinner, instead of drinking anything with any meal except
your breakfast. If you try that treatment for a week, you will be glad
that you looked at this chapter of the Guide. NUTRITION (Vol. 19, p.
920), by Prof. Noel Paton and Dr. Cathcart, describes the process of
nourishment and shows how important it is to chew the food thoroughly,
not only in order to break it up, but also in order to combine with it a
sufficient supply of the chemical juices which come from the glands in
the mouth. DIETETICS (Vol. 8, p. 214) shows what use your body makes of
each kind of food that you eat. This article, by the late Dr. Atwater of
the United States Department of Agriculture, who conducted the famous
government investigation of diet, and R. D. Milner, also of the
Department, contains tables showing the amount of nourishment required
by persons who are doing light or heavy muscular work, as well as by
those who lead a sedentary life. It will interest you to see (p. 218)
how the food of an American business man compares with that of an
American working in a lumber camp. The article DIETARY (Vol. 8, p. 212),
describing the food given to prisoners, soldiers and sailors in various
parts of the world, contains some striking information as to the
possibilities of the simple life. In Sweden prisoners get only two meals
a day, and those consisting chiefly of porridge or gruel; and the
“punishment diet” in English prisons is one pound of bread a day, and
nothing else but water. The article WATER SUPPLY (Vol. 28, p. 387), by
G. F. Deacon, deals with the storage and distribution of water, and
shows how it should be filtered for drinking. SEWERAGE (Vol. 24, p. 735)
describes the sanitary systems which prevent the pollution of streams
and wells. MINERAL WATERS (Vol. 18, p. 517) describes the great variety
of springs from which the table-waters in general use are obtained.
Their medicinal values are also indicated, and in the table which
classifies thirty of the most important American springs it is curious
to see that nearly all of them lie in the Appalachian Mountain chain.

[Sidenote: Hurtful Foods]

VEGETARIANISM (Vol. 27, p. 967), by Dr. Josiah Oldfield, describes the
various systems of diet which reject flesh, the most extreme of which
exclude everything but nuts, fruit and cereals, all to be eaten raw.
COOKERY (Vol. 7, p. 74) shows how the digestibility of food is
influenced by methods of cooking, and unhesitatingly condemns the
general practice of baking meat. ADULTERATION (Vol. 1, p. 218), by Dr.
Otto Hehner, describes the dangers to health which arise from the use of
preservatives as well as substitutes. For the use of boracic acid, which
has been proved to be slightly unwholesome, but not really dangerous,
there is at any rate the excuse that it keeps food from spoiling, but
the article has nothing but blame for the “coppering” of vegetables.
“Many years ago some artful, if stupid, cook found that green vegetables
like peas or spinach, when cooked in a copper pan, by preference a dirty
one, showed a far more brilliant colour than the same vegetable cooked
in earthenware or iron. The manufacturer who puts up substances like
peas in pots or tins for sale produces the same effect which the cook
obtained by the wilful addition of a substance known to be injurious to
health, namely, sulphate of copper.” FOOD PRESERVATION (Vol. 10, p. 612)
also shows the risks of using carelessly canned goods. TEMPERANCE (Vol.
26, p. 578), by Dr. Arthur Shadwell, tells the story of the reforms that
have been effected since the 18th century days when London bars used to
put up signs inviting customers to get “drunk for one penny” or “dead
drunk for twopence;” and LIQUOR LAWS (Vol. 16, p. 759) describes
temperance legislation in all parts of the world, with a most
interesting section on prohibition in the United States. DRUNKENNESS
(Vol. 8, p. 601) deals specifically with the effects of excess on the
health.

ALIMENTARY CANAL (Vol. 1, p. 663), by Dr. Chalmers Mitchell, describes
all the organs of the body that deal with food. DIGESTIVE ORGANS (Vol.
8, p. 262), by Dr. Andrew Gillespie, shows how indigestion arises, and
DYSPEPSIA (Vol. 8, p. 786) describes the symptoms caused by habitual
indigestion. METABOLIC DISEASES (Vol. 18, p. 195), by Dr. Noel Paton,
covers all the maladies arising from defective nutrition. CORPULENCE
(Vol. 7, p. 192) tells about the reduction of superfluous fat, while
FASTING (Vol. 10, p. 193) and HUNGER AND THIRST (Vol. 13, p. 931)
discuss the intentional or accidental cutting down of the usual food
supply. FAMINE (Vol. 10, p. 166) gives a most interesting account of the
disasters with which crop failures still threaten Asiatic countries. The
feeding of young children is, of course, a distinct subject, and is
treated in great detail in the article INFANCY (Vol. 14, p. 513), by Dr.
Harriet Hennessy.

[Sidenote: Sleep and the Want of it]

SLEEP (Vol. 25, p. 238), by Prof. McKendrick, is an elaborate study of
the curious changes in the action of the brain and other organs which
take place during slumber. INSOMNIA (Vol. 14, p. 644) is a practical
article on the causes and treatment of sleeplessness. Between absolutely
lying awake and obtaining a really good night’s rest there are many
intermediate stages, and the article DREAM (Vol. 8, p. 558) contains a
great deal of curious information about disturbed sleep. SOMNAMBULISM
(Vol. 25, p. 393) shows that when dreams are vivid enough to produce
sleepwalking there must be nervous trouble calling for immediate
treatment. NARCOTICS (Vol. 19, p. 239) describes the dangers of the
drugs to produce sleep; and in HYPNOTISM (Vol. 14, p. 201) and
SUGGESTION (Vol. 26, p. 48) there is a full account of the treatment
frequently used for sleeplessness and other nervous disorders.

[Sidenote: The Right Kind of Air]

The effect of climates upon health is the subject of a special section
(Vol. 6, p. 526) of the article CLIMATE. VENTILATION (Vol. 27, p. 1008)
shows how to secure fresh air in the house without draughts. DUST (Vol.
8, p. 713), by Dr. Aitken, the inventor of the ingenious machine for
counting the particles of dust floating in the atmosphere, gives a very
full account of the impurities in the air. HEATING (Vol. 13, p. 160)
contains descriptions and diagrams of the best methods of warming
houses, and there is at the end of the article an account of the system
of steam heating employed at Lockport, N. Y., where buildings anywhere
within three miles of the central plant are heated at a very moderate
cost.

[Sidenote: General Hygiene]

BATHS (Vol. 3, p. 514), and HYDROPATHY (Vol. 14, p. 165), and
BALNEOTHERAPEUTICS (Vol. 3, p. 284) describe all the bathing treatments
in which water, steam and hot air are employed. Electric baths are
described in ELECTROTHERAPEUTICS (Vol. 9, p. 249), and AEROTHERAPEUTICS
deals with compressed air baths. MASSAGE (Vol. 17, p. 863), by Dr.
Arthur Shadwell, describes all the systems of rubbing. GYMNASTICS (Vol.
12, p. 752) gives an account of the Swedish and other systems of
hygienic exercise; and out-door exercises of every kind are described in
the articles mentioned in the chapter of _Readings in Connection with
Recreations and Vacations_. Two other articles which relate to general
hygiene are DISINFECTANTS (Vol. 8, p. 312) and ANTISEPTICS (Vol. 2, p.
146). The proper care of the hair is indicated in the article BALDNESS
(Vol. 3, p. 243), where prescriptions for lotions are given.

[Sidenote: Various Diseases]

The articles already named cover very fully the application of medical
science to the ordinary routine of life, and will help you to regulate
wisely your habits in regard to eating, sleeping and to the general care
of your body. It may be the case that you wish, for your own sake, or
for the sake of some member of your family, to carry your reading
further in respect to some one disease or some one part of the body. In
the list of articles at the end of this chapter you will find more than
two hundred, each of which deals with one disease, such as rheumatism,
catarrh, malaria or neuralgia. In the case of a very simple trouble you
will find directions for treatment, as for example in the article CORN,
where you are advised to use a solution of salicylic acid in collodion,
or, for a soft corn, to paint it with spirits of camphor. Where the
trouble is anything more serious, you should of course consult a doctor,
but you will understand what he tells you all the better, and worry
less, if you have read an article, which describes the usual course of
the disease.

[Sidenote: Parts of the Body]

Again, you may have a special reason for wishing to learn all you can
about some one part of the body: the eye, the ear, or the heart. There
are fifty articles, in the list below, each dealing with some one organ
or part of the body. The illustrations in these articles will help you
to understand the exact position of any trouble which you have read
about in the article on a disease affecting that particular part.
Another set of articles divides the body into groups of organs, one
dealing with the NERVOUS SYSTEM, another with the MUSCULAR SYSTEM,
another with the RESPIRATORY SYSTEM, and so on. Then you have the five
general articles: ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, PATHOLOGY, THERAPEUTICS and
SURGERY, which outline all medical science. The article MEDICINE gives a
complete history of medical science, and its section on _Modern
Progress_ reviews all that has been accomplished within recent years.

[Sidenote: More Advanced Study]

Beginning with the six articles just mentioned, and then taking the more
detailed articles in the groups into which their subjects divide them,
it is quite possible to follow in the Britannica a complete course of
reading on medicine and surgery, and you may desire to do that, just as
someone else likes to read about geology or astronomy. But do not forget
that no amount of reading can give you more than a theoretical
knowledge. When your doctor discovers what is the nature of your illness
(which is much the most difficult part of his work), and when he gives
you the treatment you need, his eye is comparing what it sees in your
case, and his hand is comparing what it touches in your case, with the
thousands of observations that he has made in the wards and in the
operating theatre of the hospital. Without going through the course that
he has gone through in the dissecting room, and studying the living body
as he has studied it, you can never know what he knows. But you will be
a more understanding patient, and a better nurse, if occasion brings
nursing for you to do, if you have learned something of medical science
from the Britannica.


 ALPHABETICAL LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA RELATING
                           TO MEDICAL SCIENCE

 Abattoir
 Abdomen
 Abortion
 Abscess
 Abscission
 Acne
 Aconite
 Acromegaly
 Actinomycosis (Streptotrichosis)
 Acupressure
 Acupuncture
 Adam’s Apple
 Addison’s Disease
 Adenoids
 Adulteration
 Aerotherapeutics
 Ague
 Ala
 Albuminuria
 Alienist
 Alimentary Canal
 Amaurosis
 Ambulance
 Anaemia
 Anaesthesia and Anaesthetics
 Anatomy
 Aneurysm, or Aneurism
 Angina Pectoris
 Animal Heat
 Ankle
 Ankylosis, or Anchylosis
 Ankylostomiasis
 Anodyne
 Antiseptics
 Aphasia
 Aphemia
 Apnoea
 Aponeurosis
 Apophysis
 Apoplexy
 Apothecary
 Appendicitis
 Apyrexia
 Araroba Powder
 Arm
 Arnica
 Arteries
 Arthritis
 Articulation
 Arytenoid
 Asafetida
 Ascites
 Asphyxia
 Asthma
 Athetosis
 Atrophy
 Auscultation
 Autopsy
 Bacteriology
 Baldness
 Balneotherapeutics
 Balsam
 Baths
 Bedsore
 Belladonna
 Beriberi
 Bhang
 Bibirine
 Bilharziosis
 Blackwater Fever
 Bladder
 Bladder and Prostate Diseases
 Blindness
 Blister
 Blood
 Blood-letting
 Boil
 Bone
 Bow-leg
 Brain
 Breast
 Bright’s Disease
 Bronchiectasis
 Bronchitis
 Bronchotomy
 Bunion
 Burns and Scalds
 Caesarean Section
 Caisson Disease
 Cajaput Oil
 Calabar Bean
 Cancer, or Carcinoma
 Cantharides
 Capsicum
 Carbuncle
 Cartilage
 Castor Oil
 Catalepsy
 Catarrh
 Caul
 Chicken-pox
 Chilblains
 Chirurgeon
 Cholera
 Chamomile, or Camomile Flowers
 Climacteric
 Cleft Palate and Hare-Lip
 Clinic
 Club-foot
 Cod-Liver Oil
 Coelom and Serous Membranes
 Colic
 Colon
 Coma
 Connective Tissues
 Constipation
 Convulsions
 Corn
 Corpulence or Obesity
 Cramp
 Cremation
 Cretinism
 Croton Oil
 Croup
 Cubebs
 Cupping
 Delirium
 Dengue
 Dentistry
 Diabetes
 Diaphoretics
 Diaphragm
 Diarrhoea
 Dietary
 Dietetics
 Digestive Organs
 Digitalis
 Dilatation
 Dill
 Diphtheria
 Dipsomania
 Disinfectants
 Diuretics
 Dropsy
 Drowning and Life Saving
 Drug
 Drunkenness
 Ductless Glands
 Dysentery
 Dyspepsia
 Ear
 Eczema
 Elaterium
 Elbow
 Electrotherapeutics
 Elephantiasis
 Emetics
 Emphysema
 Enteritis
 Epilepsy
 Epistaxis
 Epithelial, Endothelial and Glandular Tissues
 Equilibrium
 Ergot, or Spurred Rye
 Erysipelas
 Eucalyptus
 Euphorbium
 Excretion
 Eye
 Face
 Fauces
 Favus
 Fever
 Fibrin
 Filariasis
 Finger
 Fistula
 Food
 Foot
 Frostbite
 Fumigation
 Galangal
 Galbanum
 Gall
 Gamboge
 Gangrene
 Gastric Ulcer
 Gastritis
 Gelsemium
 Ginseng
 Goitre
 Gout
 Guaco, Huaco, or Guao
 Guaiacum
 Guarana
 Guinea-Worm
 Gynaecology
 Haematocele
 Haemophilia
 Haemorrhage
 Haemorrhoids
 Hammer-toe
 Hand
 Hashish
 Hay Fever, or Summer Catarrh
 Head
 Heart
 Heel
 Hernia
 Herpes
 Hip
 Homoeopathy
 Hospital
 Humane Society, Royal
 Hunger and Thirst
 Hydrocele
 Hydrocephalus
 Hydropathy
 Hydrophobia, or Rabies
 Hygiene
 Hypertrophy
 Hypnotism
 Hypochondriasis
 Hysteria
 Icthyosis or Xeroderma
 Imbecile
 Infancy
 Influenza
 Insanity
 Insomnia
 Intestinal Obstruction
 Intestine
 Intoxication
 Ipecacuanha
 Jaborandi
 Jalap
 Jaundice
 Jaw
 Joints
 Kámalá
 Kala-Azar
 Kidney Diseases
 Kino
 Knee
 Kousso
 Laryngitis
 Laudanum
 Lead Poisoning
 Leg
 Leontiasis Ossea
 Leprosy
 Lethargy
 Lichen
 Ligament
 Lip
 Liver
 Lobe
 Locomotor Ataxia
 Lumbago
 Lung
 Lupus
 Lymph
 Lymphatic System
 Malaria
 Malta Fever
 Mammary Gland
 Massage
 Matrix
 Measles
 Medicine
 Medical Education
 Medical Jurisprudence
 Ménière’s Disease
 Meningitis
 Metabolic Diseases
 Midwife
 Mineral Waters
 Morphine
 Mortification
 Mouth and Salivary Glands
 Mumps
 Muscle and Nerve
 Muscular System
 Myelitis
 Myxoedema
 Naevus
 Narcotics
 Navel
 Necrosis
 Nepenthes
 Nerve
 Nervous System
 Nettlerash, or Urticaria
 Neuralgia
 Neurasthenia
 Neuritis
 Neuropathology
 Nose
 Nosology
 Nostalgia
 Nursing
 Nutrition
 Nux Vomica
 Obstetrics
 Oesophagus
 Officinal
 Olfactory System
 Ophthalmology
 Opium
 Ovariotomy
 Pain
 Palate
 Pancreas
 Paralysis or Palsy
 Paranoia
 Parasitic Diseases
 Pathology
 Pediculosis
 Pellagra
 Pelvis
 Pemphigus
 Pepsin
 Peritonitis
 Perspiration
 Phagocytosis
 Pharmacology
 Pharmacopoeia
 Pharmacy
 Pharyngitis
 Pharynx
 Phlebitis
 Phrenology
 Phthisis
 Physiology
 Picrotoxin
 Pinto
 Pityriasis Versicolor
 Placenta
 Plague
 Pleurisy or Pleuritis
 Pneumonia
 Podophyllin
 Poison
 Polypus
 Poultice
 Prognosis
 Pruritus
 Psoriasis
 Psorospermiasis
 Ptomaine Poisoning
 Puberty
 Public Health, Law of
 Puerperal Fever
 Purpura
 Pulse
 Quarantine
 Quassia
 Quinine
 Quinsy
 Raynaud’s Disease
 Relapsing Fever
 Reproductive System
 Respiratory System
 Rhamnus Purshiana
 Rhatany, or Krameria Root
 Rheumatism
 Rheumatoid Arthritis
 Rhubarb
 Rickets
 Ringworm
 St. Vitus’ Dance, or Chorea
 Salep
 Salicin, Salicinum
 Sanatorium
 Sandalwood
 Sandarach
 Santonin
 Sarsaparilla
 Scabies, or Itch
 Scalp
 Scarlet Fever
 Sciatica
 Scrofula, or Struma
 Scurvy
 Sea-Sickness
 Seborrhoea
 Senega
 Senna
 Sepsis
 Sewerage
 Shock or Collapse
 Shoulder
 Sinew
 Skeleton
 Skin and Exoskeleton
 Skin Diseases
 Skull
 Slaughter-house
 Sleep
 Sleeping-sickness
 Smallpox
 Sneezing
 Somnambulism
 Spinal Cord
 Spleen
 Sprue
 Squill
 Stammering or Stuttering
 Starvation
 Stethoscope
 Stomach
 Stramonium
 Strychnine
 Sumbul, or Sumbal
 Sunstroke
 Supra-renal Extract
 Surgery
 Surgical Instruments
 Sweating-sickness
 Sweetbread
 Sympathetic System
 Syncope
 Taraxacum
 Teeth
 Temperance
 Tetanus
 Therapeutics
 Thorax
 Throat
 Thyroid
 Tongue
 Tonsillitis
 Toxicology
 Tracheotomy
 Trachoma
 Trichinosis
 Tuberculosis
 Tumour
 Typhoid Fever
 Typhus Fever
 Ulcer
 Upas
 Urinary System
 Vaccination
 Valerian
 Varicose Veins
 Vascular System
 Vegetarianism
 Veins
 Venereal Diseases
 Viburnum
 Vivisection
 Voice
 Wart
 Water-supply
 Whitlow
 Whooping-Cough
 Windpipe
 Wound
 Wrist
 Wry-neck
 X-Ray Treatment
 Yaws
 Yellow Fever
 Zymotic Diseases




                               CHAPTER L
                       GEOGRAPHY AND EXPLORATION


[Sidenote: A Library of Geography]

The Britannica devotes nearly one fourth of all its space to
geographical subjects. You may miss the full significance of this
statement; therefore let us put it differently. The matter in the
Britannica on geography is equivalent to more than 100 ordinary volumes
each containing 100,000 words, which, put on shelves about 5 feet long,
would fill a section in your library 5 shelves high. But by the use of
new India paper, this same material on geography, combined with three
times as much on other subjects of importance, occupies in the
Britannica less than 3 feet of shelf space. The unity of plan and
treatment and the high authority of the Britannica in these articles are
far beyond comparison with that you could get in the most wisely and
carefully selected hundred volumes on Geography that would give an
equivalent number of words.

[Sidenote: A Science as well as a Body of Facts]

Geographical information is so useful that the student is likely to
overlook the scientific importance of geography in itself. The articles
in the Encyclopaedia Britannica described in this chapter, besides
giving the fullest information on countries, cities, towns, rivers,
mountains, etc., trace the development of the science from its
beginning; and the gradual increase of geographical knowledge, as told
in the Britannica, is a story of fine out-of-door adventure, of just the
kind of spirited action that has supplied the theme of the most popular
works of fiction.

This chapter will suggest an outline course of reading in geography,
systematically grouping the more important articles in the Britannica.

The starting point for this course of study is the article GEOGRAPHY
(Vol. 11, p. 619), equivalent in length to 70 pages of this Guide,
written by Hugh R. Mill, author of _Hints on the Choice of Geographical
Books_, etc. The story that it tells us is a most interesting one.

[Sidenote: What Early Writers Taught about the Earth]

The early Greeks thought of the earth as a flat disk, circular or
elliptical in outline; and even in Homeric times this supposition had
“acquired a special definiteness by the introduction of the idea of the
ocean river bounding the whole.” Hecataeus recognized two continents on
the circular disk. Herodotus, traveler and historian both (see the
article HERODOTUS Vol. 13, p. 381, by George Rawlinson and Edward M.
Walker), who knew only the lands around the roughly elliptical
Mediterranean Sea, was certain that the earth was not a circle because
it was longer from east to west than from north to south, and he
distinguished _three_ continents, adding Africa to Europe and Asia. “The
effect of Herodotus’s hypothesis that the Nile must flow from west to
east before turning north in order to balance the Danube running from
west to east before turning south lingered in the maps of Africa down to
the time of Mungo Park.” Aristotle (see also the article ARISTOTLE, Vol.
2, p. 501, by Thomas Case, president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford,
and author of _Physical Realism_, etc.,) was the real founder of
scientific geography. “He demonstrated the sphericity of the earth by
three arguments, two of which are important ... only a sphere could
always throw a circular shadow on the moon during an eclipse; and that
the shifting of the horizon and the appearance of new constellations ...
as one travelled from north to south, could only be explained on the
hypothesis that the earth was a sphere.... He formed a comprehensive
theory of the variations of climate with latitude and season ...
speculated on the differences in the character of races of mankind
living in different climates, and correlated the political forms of
communities with their situation on a seashore, or in the neighborhood
of natural strongholds.” The article PTOLEMY (Vol. 22, p. 618),
equivalent to 27 pages of this Guide, by the late Sir Edward Herbert
Bunbury, the historian of ancient geography, and Dr. C. R. Beazley,
author of _The Dawn of Modern Geography_, etc., should be studied in
conjunction with the summary, in the article _Geography_, of Ptolemy’s
achievements. “He concentrated in his writings the final outcome of all
Greek geographical learning,” but his great aim was to collect and
compare all existing determinations of latitude and estimates of
longitude, and to solve the problem of representing the curved surface
of the earth on the flat surface of a map.

[Sidenote: Geography in the Middle Ages]

The science of geography was at a low ebb in Christendom during the
Middle Ages, when verbal interpretation of the Scriptures led the Church
to oppose the spherical theory and also the theory of the motion of the
earth. But among the Arabs, geography was kept alive—especially by
Al-Mamun (see the article MAMUN) (Vol. 17, p. 533), who had Ptolemy
translated into Arabic.

[Sidenote: New World: New Geography]

The story of the great discoveries of the 15th and 16th centuries is
outlined later in the article GEOGRAPHY. The effect on geographical
theory was enormous.

  The old arguments of Aristotle and the old measurements of Ptolemy
  were used by Toscanelli and Columbus in urging a westward voyage to
  India; and mainly on this account did the crossing of the Atlantic
  rank higher in the history of scientific geography than the laborious
  feeling out of the coast-line of Africa. But not until the voyage of
  Magellan shook the scales from the eyes of Europe did modern geography
  begin to advance. Discovery had outrun theory; the rush of new facts
  made Ptolemy practically obsolete in a generation, after having been
  the fount and origin of all geography for a millennium.

In the century and a half after the discovery of America important
theoretical work was done by Peter Apian, Sebastian Münster, Philip
Cluwer, Nathanael Carpenter and Bernhard Varenius, for which see the
biographical articles. The next century (1650–1760) saw little worth
mentioning in geographical theory or method. Then, with the sudden burst
of activity that so often follows scientific hibernation, came the
important work of Torbern Bergman, a Swedish chemist and a pupil of the
great botanist Linnaeus, and the lectures delivered at Königsberg after
1765 by the German philosopher Kant. They both put new stress on
physical geography—see the articles on BERGMAN (Vol. 3, p. 774) and KANT
(Vol. 15, p. 662). Alexander von Humboldt and Karl Ritter (see the
articles on both) in the first half of the 19th century supported, the
one the unity of nature, and the other the comparative method, thus
preparing the way for Darwin’s evolutionary theory, which “has become
the unifying principle in geography.” Since the adoption of this theory,
some of the more important names in geographical theory—each the subject
of an article in the Britannica which the student should read—are: Baron
von Richthofen, Hermann Wagner, Elisée Reclus and A. de Lapparent.

[Sidenote: Geographical Discovery]

Early travel and exploration is a story of varied interest even when we
approach it from the only side on which we have material—that is to say
“geographical exploration from the Mediterranean centre.”

Early conquest of outlying peoples by the warlike kings of Egypt and
Assyria may have momentarily increased geographical knowledge, but it is
unimportant in the large story. The first great explorers were the
earliest traders, the Phoenicians and their African colonists, the
Carthaginians, who traded throughout the Mediterranean, possibly on the
east coast of Africa and in the northern seas, and almost certainly on
the west coast of Africa. For details supplementing the outline in the
article GEOGRAPHY (p. 623, Vol. 11), see the articles PHOENICIA (Vol.
21, pp. 454–455), SIDON, TYRE, OPHIR, CARTHAGE, and HANNO, the African
explorer. On the only Greek explorer of eminence see the article on
PYTHEAS of Marseilles (Vol. 22, p. 703), who, about 330 B.C., explored
the British coast and the Baltic, and may have gone as far north as
Iceland. Alexander the Great (see the biographical article) and his
successors explored the East, “thus opening direct intercourse between
Grecian and Hindu civilization.”

The Romans were poor seamen and accomplished little as explorers. It has
often been pointed out that the Greeks spoke of the “watery ways” of the
sea, considering it a highway, but that the Romans, centuries later too,
called the sea “dissociable,” that is “preventing and hindering
intercourse.”

[Sidenote: The Arabs and Northmen]

The Arabs were the leading geographers of the Middle Ages, and among
their great travelers on whom there are separate articles in the
Britannica are MASUDI, IBN HAUKAL, IDRISI, and in the 14th century IBN
BATUTA. In the 9th and 10th centuries, the Norseman Ohthere rounded the
North Cape and saw the midnight sun; Iceland was colonized from Norway;
Eric the Red discovered Greenland; and his son Leif Ericsson sailed
along a part of the North American coast: see the articles ICELAND,
GREENLAND, VINLAND, LEIF ERICSSON and THORFINN KARLSEFNI.

The crusades made Europe a little more familiar with the East and opened
the way for travel and pilgrimage. In general see the summary _Results
of the Crusades_ (p. 546, Vol. 7) at the close of the article CRUSADES;
and particularly see BENJAMIN OF TUDELA (Vol. 3, p. 739) for a Jewish
traveler of the 12th century who went as far east as the frontiers of
China.

[Sidenote: 13th Century]

Before the new age of real exploration began, in the 15th century, there
was an age of travel, especially in Asia during the 13th century, which
did much to rouse popular curiosity about the ends of the earth. Though
these travelers were not scientifically trained, modern research shows a
remarkable proportion of fact in their stories. The great names of this
era: Joannes de Plano Carpini, a friend of St. Francis of Assisi and
head of a Catholic mission to Mongolia; William of Rubruquis, a Fleming
who went to Tartary under orders from Louis IX of France; Hayton, King
of Armenia, who traveled in Mongolia about the middle of the century;
Odoric, a Catholic friar of the 14th century; and Marco Polo,

  the first to trace a route across the whole longitude of Asia, naming
  and describing kingdom after kingdom which he had seen; the first to
  speak of the new and brilliant court which had been established at
  Peking; the first to reveal China in all its wealth and vastness, and
  to tell of the nations on its borders; the first to tell more of Tibet
  than its name, to speak of Burma, of Laos, of Siam, of Cochin-China,
  of Japan, of Java, of Sumatra and of other islands of the archipelago,
  of the Nicobar and Andaman Islands, of Ceylon and its sacred peak, of
  India but as a country seen and partially explored; the first in
  medieval times to give any distinct account of the secluded Christian
  Empire of Abyssinia, and of the semi-Christian island of Sokotra, and
  to speak, however dimly, of Zanzibar, and of the vast and distant
  Madagascar; whilst he carries us also to the remotely opposite region
  of Siberia and the Arctic shores, to speak of dog-sledges, white bears
  and reindeer-riding Tunguses.

See the articles CARPINI, RUBRUQUIS, HAYTON, ODORIC, and POLO, by C. R.
Beazley, author of _The Dawn of Modern Geography_, and Sir Henry Yule,
author of _Cathay and the Way Thither_ and _The Book of Ser Marco Polo_.

A little later were the Spaniard Ruy Gonzalez de Clavijo who traveled to
Samarkand; the Italians Nicola de’Conti whose travels in India were
written by Poggio Bracciolini, secretary to Pope Eugene IV, and Ludovico
di Varthema, who made the pilgrimage to Mecca in 1503. See the articles
CLAVIJO, CONTI, POGGIO, himself a traveler, and VARTHEMA.

[Sidenote: Portuguese Explorers]

The construction of the mariner’s compass gave a new impulse to
navigation and discovery. “Portugal took the lead along this new path,
and foremost among her pioneers stands Prince Henry the Navigator
(1394–1460).... The great westward projection of the coast of Africa and
the islands to the north-west of that continent, were the principal
scene of the work of mariners sent out at his expense; but his object
was to push onward and reach India from the Atlantic.” The account of
Portuguese discoveries in the article GEOGRAPHY (p. 625) should be
supplemented by the articles HENRY OF PORTUGAL (Vol. 13, p. 296), by C.
R. Beazley, author of _Prince Henry the Navigator_ and _The Dawn of
Modern Geography_: DIOGO GOMEZ and BARTOLOMEU DIAZ DE NOVAES (Vol. 8, p.
172), also by C. R. Beazley, PERO DE COVILHAM, VASCO DA GAMA, PRESTER
JOHN, by Sir Henry Yule, and FERNÃO MENDES PINTO, by Edgar Prestage,
lecturer in Portuguese, University of Manchester.

[Sidenote: Columbus and America]

We have now come to a point in the story where it begins to be more
familiar to us all. “The Portuguese, following the lead of Prince Henry,
continued to look for the road to India by the Cape of Good Hope. The
same end was sought by Christopher Columbus, following the suggestion of
Toscanelli, and under-estimating the diameter of the globe, by sailing
due west.” The discovery and early exploration of America are told in
the following articles, selected from a long list—see also the chapter
in this Guide on _American History_:—

COLUMBUS and VESPUCCI, both by C. R. Beazley; PINZON, dealing with the
three members of the family; CABOT, by H. P. Biggar, author of _The
Voyages of the Cabots to Greenland_; PIZARRO; BALBOA; CORTEZ; SOTO;
AVILES; CARTIER, by H. P. Biggar; RIBAULT; HAKLUYT, by C. R. Beazley and
C. H. Coote, formerly of the map department, British Museum; and for
exploration in the Pacific, MAGELLAN, by C. R. Beazley, DRAKE, THOMAS
CAVENDISH, JOHN DAVIS, SIR RICHARD HAWKINS, etc.

[Sidenote: Recent American Exploration]

Exploration in the United States, particularly as connected with
westward expansion may be studied to advantage in the Britannica. See
especially the articles DANIEL BOONE, RUFUS PUTNAM, GEORGE ROGERS CLARK,
WILLIAM CLARK, MERIWETHER LEWIS, ZEBULON M. PIKE, STEPHEN AUSTIN, MARCUS
WHITMAN, JOHN C. FREMONT, F. V. HAYDEN, J. W. POWELL, and B. L. E.
BONNEVILLE; and also the earlier part of the historical section in each
article on a state of the Union.

[Sidenote: The Far East]

In the Orient the principal explorers mentioned in the article GEOGRAPHY
and treated each in a separate article are: the Englishmen, SIR JAMES
LANCASTER, THOMAS CORYATE, SIR ANTHONY SHIRLEY, SIR THOMAS HERBERT and
SIR THOMAS ROE; the German ENGELBRECHT KAEMPFER; and, among many great
Dutch navigators, ABEL JANSZOON TASMAN. On this period see also INDIA
(especially pp. 404–406, Vol. 14); JAPAN, _Foreign Intercourse_ (p. 224,
et seqq., Vol. 15); FRANCISCO DE XAVIER; MALAY ARCHIPELAGO (p. 469, Vol.
17); TASMANIA; NEW GUINEA, etc.

[Sidenote: Missionaries]

The geographical work of missionaries has been remarkable—perhaps none
of it more so than the survey of China by Jesuit missionaries. “They
first prepared a map of the country round Peking, which was submitted to
the emperor Kang-hi, and, being satisfied with the accuracy of the
European method of surveying, he resolved to have a survey made of the
whole empire on the same principles. This great work was begun in July,
1708, and the completed maps were presented to the emperor in 1718. The
records preserved in each city were examined, topographical information
was diligently collected, and the Jesuit fathers checked their
triangulation by meridian altitudes of the sun and pole star and by a
system of remeasurements. _The result was a more accurate map of China
than existed, at that time, of any country in Europe_.”

There was some 18th century exploration of importance in Arabia: see the
article KARSTEN NIEBUHR; in Africa: see the articles JAMES BRUCE; JOHN
LEDYARD, an American; and MUNGO PARK; and in South America: see C. M. DE
LA CONDAMINE, PIERRE BOUGUER, etc. But the Pacific was the great field
of exploration in this century and “the three voyages of Captain James
Cook form an era in the history of geographical discovery.” See the
articles JAMES COOK, COMTE DE LA PEROUSE, JOSEPH-ANTOINE BRUNI
D’ENTRECASTEUX, WILLIAM BLIGH, GEORGE VANCOUVER, and local articles like
HAWAII, TAHITI, etc.

[Sidenote: Arctic Exploration]

The story of Polar exploration is told in brief in the article GEOGRAPHY
(p. 629) but there are more detailed accounts in the article POLAR
REGIONS, by H. R. Mill and Fridtjof Nansen, the polar explorer, which is
illustrated with maps of the North Polar and South Polar regions. This
should be further supplemented by the following biographical sketches:
PYTHEAS, CABOT, CORTE-REAL, WILLOUGHBY, STEVEN BOROUGH, FROBISHER, JOHN
DAVIS, BARENTS, HUDSON, BAFFIN, SCORESBY, BERING, JAMES COOK, JOHN
FRANKLIN, SIR W. E. PARRY, SIR JOHN ROSS, JOHN RAE, SIR R. J. L. M.
MCCLURE, SIR F. L. MCCLINTOCK, SIR E. A. INGLEFIELD, E. K. KANE, CHARLES
HALL, NORDENSKIÖLD, NARES; SIR C. R. MARKHAM, DELONG, A. W. GREELY,
NANSEN, PEARY, etc., and on antarctic exploration the articles DUMONT
D’URVILLE, CHARLES WILKES, SIR JAMES C. ROSS, etc. The article POLAR
REGIONS includes an elaborate account of the physiography of the Arctic
region (p. 954, Vol. 21) and of the Antarctic (p. 969 of same Vol.),
dealing with geology, climate, pressure, flora, fauna, people, ocean
depths, temperature and salinity, and marine biological conditions, etc.

[Sidenote: Maps]

The student of geography should read with great care the article MAP
(Vol. 17, p. 629), equivalent to 110 pages of this Guide, written by
Lieut. Col. Charles Frederick Close, author of _Text-Book of
Topographical Surveying_, Alexander Ross Clark, lately in charge of the
trigonometrical operations of the British Ordnance Survey, and Dr.
Ernest George Ravenstein, author of _A Systematic Atlas_, etc. The
article has 59 illustrations and it deals with: classification, scale,
delineation of ground, contours, selection of names and orthography;
measurement on maps; relief maps; globe; map printing; history of
cartography (equivalent to 55 pages of this Guide), with reproductions
of many early maps; topographical surveys, summarizing the work done in
different parts of the world; and map projections.

The maps in the Britannica are of the utmost value. They include nearly
150 full-page maps, many of them in colours, all prepared especially for
this edition, and in accordance with the principles laid down in the
article MAP.

[Sidenote: Physiographic Articles]

Of articles on physiographic topics possibly the most important are
those on the several continents, each accompanied by a map in colours
from the great German cartographic establishment of Justus Perthes,
Gotha. Of particular importance to the American reader are the
contributions of Prof. W. M. Davis of Harvard on physiography in the
articles AMERICA and NORTH AMERICA, and of J. C. Branner, now president
of Leland Stanford University, on SOUTH AMERICA. Then read the article
OCEAN AND OCEANOGRAPHY, by Dr. Otto Krümmel, professor of geography at
Kiel and author of _Handbuch der Ozeanographie_, and H. R. Mill, editor
of _The International Geography_. This single article is equivalent to
65 pages of this Guide. Then study the articles on the different
seas—for instance, ATLANTIC OCEAN, by H. N. Dickson, author of _Papers
on Oceanography_, etc.; PACIFIC OCEAN, by the same author, with a
section on its islands, and with a map in colours; Dr. Dickson’s article
on the MEDITERRANEAN SEA; the article GREAT LAKES, the separate article
on each of these lakes, GREAT SALT LAKE, etc., and the article LAKE, by
Sir John Murray, the famous British geographer, which contains
statistical tables of the important lakes.

Two important general articles are: CLIMATE AND CLIMATOLOGY, with 2
plates, 13 figures and several tables, by R. DeCourcy Ward, professor of
climatology, Harvard; and METEOROLOGY, by Dr. Cleveland Abbe, professor
of meteorology, U. S. Weather Bureau. These articles, both by Americans,
deal with these subjects with particular attention to American
conditions. They should be supplemented by a study of the articles: SKY;
ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY; CLOUDS, illustrated with remarkably fine
pictures of the different cloud-types; and the separate articles on
meteorological instruments.

[Sidenote: The Britannica Gazetteer]

What has already been said, although it suggests rather than exhausts
the subject of geography in the Britannica, will show that the student
will find in it a text-book of geography which is unparalleled elsewhere
in size, scope, authority and interest. Besides, the Britannica contains
the equivalent of a great gazetteer and atlas. Place-names are so
entered in the Index (Vol. 29) that their location on maps may be
discovered immediately and the articles on towns, villages, cities,
states, etc., are full and authoritative. The reader who turns to an
article in the Britannica on some small town or city with a population
of 5,000 or less finds there within the limits of a few lines of print
the results of elaborate research and laborious correspondence with
local authorities. Such articles give not merely location, population,
railway service, commercial and manufacturing information, description
of buildings, etc., but a historical sketch of the place, in which every
date and detail has been verified with no sparing of expense or pains.

[Sidenote: The Britannica as a Guide Book]

The Encyclopaedia Britannica is not merely a geographical text-book and
gazetteer, however. It is an excellent guide book. The same care in
details that makes it valuable as a gazetteer makes it a wonderful
companion for the traveler, full of literary charm and readableness.
Such articles as NEW YORK, PHILADELPHIA, BOSTON, SAN FRANCISCO and ST.
LOUIS contain valuable sketches of the culture, literary and artistic,
of these cities. The world’s “show” and vacation spots have elaborate
treatment—for instance the English LAKE DISTRICT, RIVIERA, CATSKILLS,
LAKE GEORGE, YOSEMITE, GRAND CANYON, etc.

Besides the student can turn immediately in the Britannica, as he could
in no book purely geographical, from the description of a locality, say
Mount Vernon, Stockbridge, Cooperstown, Tarrytown or Salem, to the
biographies that these articles make him need,—Washington, Jonathan
Edwards, Cooper, Irving and Hawthorne. See the last chapter in this
Guide for an illustration of this use of the Britannica.

The following list of _general_ articles on geography will give the
reader an idea of the great scope of the Britannica in geographical
literature. If this list included all the geographical articles in the
Britannica it would be nearly 60 times as long. For a complete list
classified by different continents and countries see the Index Volume,
beginning on p. 895.

 Afterglow
 Aiguille
 Alp
 Anemometer
 Antarctic
 Anthelion
 Anticyclone
 Antilia
 Antipodes
 Antonini Itinerarium
 Aquae
 Archipelago
 Arctic
 Arete
 Arroyo
 Atlantis
 Atmosphere
 Atoll
 Aurora Polaris
 Avalanche
 Bahr
 Bar
 Bayou
 Beach
 Beaufort Scale
 Bench-mark
 Bergschrund
 Berm
 Bight
 Blizzard
 Bog
 Bora
 Bore
 Brazil
 Breeze
 Brickfielder
 British Empire
 Brocken, Spectre of
 Butte
 Buys Ballot’s Law
 Canyon
 “Challenger” Expedition
 Chart
 Chinook
 Cirque
 Climate and Climatology
 Cloud
 Cloudburst
 Coast
 Col
 Combe
 Continent
 Continental Shelf
 Contour, Contour-line
 Coral-reefs
 Cordillera
 Corrie
 Crag
 Creek
 Crevasse
 Cuesta
 Cyclone
 Dalle
 Dawn
 Delta
 Desert
 Dew
 Dip
 Divide
 Doldrums
 Donga
 Down
 Dust
 Eagre
 Earth, Figure of the
 Earth Pillar
 El Dorado
 Esker
 Estuary
 Etesian Wind
 Euroclydon
 Fell
 Ferrel’s Law
 Fjord
 Floe
 Flood Plain
 Fog
 Föhn
 Frost
 Geodesy
 Geography
 Geoid
 Giant’s Kettle
 Glacier
 Great Circle
 Gromatici
 Ground Ice
 Gulf Stream
 Hachure
 Hail
 Halo
 Harmattan
 Helm Wind
 Hill
 Horse Latitudes
 Horst
 Hummock
 Hurricane
 Hydrography
 Hygrometer
 Iceberg
 Isabnormal (or Isanomalous) Lines
 Island
 Isles of the Blest
 Isobar
 Isoclinic Lines
 Isodynamic Lines
 Isogonic Lines
 Isotherm
 Isthmus
 Itinerarium
 Jebel
 Jungle
 Kame
 Khamsin
 Kuro Siwo
 Lagoon
 Lake
 Latitude
 Leste
 Levée
 Leveche
 Lightning
 Lithosphere
 Longitude
 Lowland
 Loxodrome
 Maelstrom
 Maestro
 Maidan
 Map
 Marsh
 Massif
 Meridian
 Mesa
 Meteorology
 Mirage
 Mistral
 Monadnock
 Monsoon
 Moor
 Moraine
 Moulin
 Mountain
 Névé
 Norther
 Nullah
 Nunatak
 Nyanza
 Oasis
 Ocean and Oceanography
 Ophir
 Orography
 Pampero
 Peninsula
 Plain
 Plateau
 Playa
 Polder
 Pond
 Prairie
 Quagmire
 Rain
 Rainbow
 Rand
 Ras
 Reef
 River
 Roaring Forties
 Sahel
 St. Elmo’s Fire
 Sargasso Sea
 Savanna
 Sea
 Seiche
 Simoom
 Sirocco
 Sleet
 Snow
 Snow-Line
 Sounding
 Squall
 Steppe
 Storm
 Sudd
 Sunshine
 Surge
 Surveying
 Swallow-hole
 Tacheometry
 Tarn
 Thalweg
 Theodolite
 Thule
 Thunder
 Timber-line
 Topography
 Tornado
 Trade Winds
 Tundra
 Twilight
 Typhoon
 V-shaped Depression
 Volcano
 Wadi
 Waterfall
 Watershed
 Waterspout
 Weather
 Wedge
 Wind
 World
 Zone




                               CHAPTER LI
                       ANTHROPOLOGY AND ETHNOLOGY


These two sciences are devoted to the study of mankind before written
history began; and they have an interest for every reader who has asked,
when he was a child and had a story told him: “What happened _before_
that?” In the chapter in this Guide on _Language and Writing_, we have
told the story of those two great inventions which made civilization
possible. The present chapter is devoted to the story of man before
writing was commonly used—that is, before historical documents could
exist.

Just as the study of children and their habits is something new and
peculiarly characteristic of the last generation, so these sciences of
anthropology and ethnology which deal with the childhood of the human
race are of recent origin. But in comparison with child-psychology these
two sciences are at a disadvantage in a very important respect: there
are always children to be studied, but the childhood of the race is long
past and remote from the student of it, save for the primitive tribes
which can still be observed, and even these tribes are now scattered and
few, and by contact with civilization they are rapidly losing the
characteristics which invite scientific study. A hundred years ago, the
opportunities for experiment and observation were far greater, but at
that time savages were not seriously studied. There could, indeed, be no
“science of man” before the evolutionary theory of Darwin, Wallace and
Huxley had been generally accepted. Throughout this Guide we see how
this theory has affected all our modern thought, modified our sciences,
and even created new sciences. The Eleventh Edition of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica may, indeed, be described as the authoritative and
interesting story of the human activities, critically studied from the
point of view of evolution. The trustworthy material is chiefly derived
from observations in Australia, in the South Seas, among the North
American Indians and among the still savage tribes of Africa, and from
studies of the tools and other remains of early peoples. All broad
conclusions must be based upon the similarity of customs among races
widely separated by time and place, and upon the fact that some traces
of such customs are still found among more highly civilized peoples.

The first article in a course of reading on the “science of man” in the
Britannica is ANTHROPOLOGY (Vol. 2, p. 108), equivalent to 40 pages in
this Guide, illustrated, by Prof. Tylor, of Oxford University, one of
the founders of the science, and author of _Researches into the Early
History of Mankind_, _Primitive Culture_, etc.

[Sidenote: Man’s Origin]

This great article deals first with “man’s place in Nature,” the most
interesting branch of the theory of evolution. Prof. Tylor traces back
the recognition of man’s structural similarity to the higher apes to
Linnaeus (1735) and to the less scientific Lord Monboddo (1774 and
1778), whose simple literary style as well as his theory of the descent
of man aroused the amusement and scorn of Dr. Samuel Johnson, who said
that Monboddo was “as jealous of his tail as a squirrel.”

Dr. Tylor remarks that:

  There are few ideas more ingrained in ancient and low civilization
  than that of relationship by descent between the lower animals and
  man. Savage and barbaric religions recognize it, and the mythology of
  the world has hardly a more universal theme. But in educated Europe
  such ideas had long been superseded by the influence of theology and
  philosophy, with which they seemed too incompatible.

But in 1843 Dr. J. C. Prichard, to whom Tylor gives the title that many
would give to Tylor himself, “founder of modern anthropology,” insisted
that

  man is but an animal ... composed of the same materials, and framed on
  the same principles, as the creatures which he has tamed to be the
  servile instruments of his will, or slays for his daily food.

Dr. Tylor shows how Wallace and Darwin established a theory of human
descent, and sums up the similarities and dissimilarities in anatomical
construction between man and the man-like apes. Even more interesting is
what the article says (p. 110) about “assigning to man his place in
nature on psychological grounds.”

  Huxley acknowledged an immeasurable and practically infinite
  divergence, ending in the present enormous psychological gulf between
  ape and man. It is difficult to account for this intellectual chasm as
  due to some minor structural difference.... Beyond a doubt, man
  possesses, and in some way possesses by virtue of his superior brain,
  a power of co-ordinating the impressions of his senses, which enables
  him to understand the world he lives in, and by understanding to use,
  resist, and even in a measure rule it. No human art shows the nature
  of this human attribute more clearly than does language

—although other animals have a sort of language. The article quotes Dr.
A. Russel Wallace’s conclusion that man stands “apart, as not only the
head and culminating point of the grand series of organic nature, but as
in some degree a new and distinct order of being.” And another great
anatomist, Prof. St. George Mivart, says “Man’s animal body must have
had a different source from that of the spiritual soul which informs it,
owing to the distinctness of the two orders to which these existences
severally belong.” Dr. Tylor, in citing these authorities, adds that
“man embodies an immaterial and immortal, spiritual principle which no
lower creature possesses, and which makes the resemblance of the apes to
him but a mocking simulance.”

The answer to the question “How did man originate?” depends on the
answer to the question “How did species originate?” The main points are
summed up in the article ANTHROPOLOGY (on p. 112), which also deals with
the fossil remains of man, especially skulls, and their bearing on the
question. A more detailed discussion will be found in the articles
EVOLUTION (Vol. 10, p. 22) and SPECIES (Vol. 25, p. 616).

[Sidenote: Races of Man]

The classification of man into different races is the topic next taken
up by Dr. Tylor in the article ANTHROPOLOGY, and he deals particularly
with classification by the “facial angle” (on which see also the article
CRANIOMETRY, Vol. 7, p. 372). Different classifications are criticized
and the article decides that “Huxley’s division probably approaches more
nearly than any other to such a tentative classification as may be
accepted.... He distinguishes four principal types of mankind, the
Australioid, Negroid, Mongoloid and Xanthochroic (fair whites), adding a
fifth variety, the Melanchroic (dark whites).” That races are not
species, zoologically, is made plain by the fact that the offspring of
parents of different races are fertile—those of different species being
infertile.

[Sidenote: Antiquity of Man]

One of the questions connected with the origin of man is his antiquity.
The Biblical chronology, as commonly reckoned and interpreted, allowed a
time since the appearance of the original stock which seemed far too
short for the apparent variation from the original species (see
CHRONOLOGY, Vol. 6, p. 305). The natural sciences, notably geology, have
“made it manifest that our earth must have been the seat of vegetable
and animal life for an immense period of time; while the first
appearance of man, though comparatively recent, is positively so remote,
that an estimate between twenty and a hundred thousand years may fairly
be taken as a minimum.” This geological claim is supported by the
evidence of prehistoric archaeology (see the article ARCHAEOLOGY, Vol.
2, p. 344). In the caves of France and Belgium human bones have been
found with the remains of fossil species of elephant, rhinoceros, hyena,
bear, etc., and “the co-existence of man with a fauna now extinct or
confined to other districts was brought to yet clearer demonstration by
the discovery in these caves of certain drawings and carvings of the
animals done by the ancient inhabitants themselves, such as a group of
reindeer on a piece of reindeer horn, and a sketch of a mammoth, showing
the elephant’s long hair, on a piece of a mammoth’s tusk from La
Madeleine.” See Fig. 7, Plate facing p. 118, Vol. 2; the figures of the
reindeer and mammoth, hairy and with upturned tusks, in Plate II,
article ARCHAEOLOGY (following p. 348, Vol. 2); and of the reindeer in
Plate I (Vol. 19, p. 462), and the old cave paintings of wild boars and
bison from Altamira, reproduced in colour on Plate II, the next page.
These paintings, marking by their technical excellence a high stage of
art if not of civilization, are said by geologists to date back 50,000
years. The student will be repaid for turning a moment from the article
ANTHROPOLOGY and the question of the antiquity of man to the article
[Sidenote: Cave-Dwellers] CAVE (Vol. 5, p. 573), by the eminent
archaeologist, W. Boyd Dawkins, and the author of _Cave-hunting_ and
_Early Man in Britain_. He reconstructs the civilization of the
inhabitants of the pleistocene caves of the European continent (p. 576),
describes the carvings and drawings of which we have just spoken, and
says of the cave-dwellers:

  If these remains be compared with those of existing races, it will be
  found that the cave-men were in the same hunter stage of civilization
  as the Eskimos, and that they are unlike any other races of hunters.
  If they were not allied to the Eskimos by blood, there can be no doubt
  that they handed down to the latter their art and their manner of
  life. The bone needles, and many of the harpoons, as well as the flint
  spearheads, arrowheads and scrapers, are of precisely the same form as
  those now in use amongst the Eskimos. The artistic designs from the
  caves of France, Belgium and Switzerland, are identical in plan and
  workmanship with those of the Eskimos.... The reindeer, which they
  both knew, is represented in the same way by both. The practice of
  accumulating large quantities of the bones of animals round their
  dwelling-places, and the habit of splitting the bones for the sake of
  the marrow, are the same in both. The hides were prepared with the
  same sort of instruments, and the needles with which they were sewn
  together are of the same pattern. The stone lamps were used by both.
  In both there was the same disregard for sepulture. All these facts
  can hardly be mere coincidences caused by both peoples leading a
  savage life under similar conditions. The conclusion, therefore, seems
  inevitable that, so far as we have any evidence of the race to which
  the cave-dwellers belong, that evidence points only in the direction
  of the Eskimos. It is to a considerable extent confirmed by a
  consideration of the animals found in the caves. The reindeer and musk
  sheep afford food to the Eskimos now in the Arctic Circle, just as
  they afforded it to the cave-men in Europe; and both these animals
  have been traced by their remains from the Pyrenees to the north-east
  through Europe and Asia as far as the very regions in which they now
  live. The mammoth and bison also have been tracked by their remains in
  the frozen river gravels and morasses through Siberia as far as the
  American side of Bering Strait. Palaeolithic man appeared in Europe
  with the arctic mammalia, lived in Europe with them, and in all human
  probability retreated to the north-east along with them.

The antiquity of man may be estimated also by the time it must have
taken to deposit the soil that overlies traces of civilization,—for
instance in Egypt where pottery is found 60 feet deep, while inundations
from the Nile probably have not averaged more than a few inches in a
century. “The most recent work of Egyptologists proves a systematic
civilization to have existed in the valley of the Nile at least 6000 to
7000 years ago.” Similar testimony is given by examining the
lake-dwellings of Switzerland and the kitchen middens of Denmark. On
these see the articles LAKE DWELLINGS (Vol. 16, p. 91), by Joseph
Anderson, keeper of the National Museum of Antiquities, Edinburgh, and
SHELL-HEAPS (Vol. 24, p. 832). The latter article, in a description of
the middens of Denmark, says:

  Among the bones were those of the wild bull or aurochs, beaver, seal
  and great auk, all now extinct or rare in this region. Moreover, a
  striking proof of the antiquity of these shell-heaps is that they
  contain full-sized shells of the common oyster, which cannot live at
  present in the brackish waters of the Baltic except near its entrance,
  the inference being that the shores where the oyster at that time
  flourished were open to the salt sea.

The article on LAKE DWELLINGS brings out very clearly the fact that
this, like other early stages of development, is to be found at widely
different periods of time: in Switzerland, thousands of years ago; in
Scotland and Ireland (see also the article CRANNOG, Vol. 7, p. 377)
during the Christian era; and in New Guinea and Central Africa within
the last few years. This is in accordance with the fact that the human
race has not “matured” with equal rapidity all over the earth—that even
now one race is in infancy, another in childhood, another in a
transition stage like adolescence, and another in the prime of
civilization.

[Sidenote: Language]

Returning to the article ANTHROPOLOGY, the next topic treated is
Language. The more important points on this subject are stated in
another chapter of this part of the Guide, on _Language and Writing_.
Dr. Tylor says:

  For all that known dialects prove to the contrary, on the one hand,
  there may have been one primitive language, from which the descendant
  languages have varied so widely, that neither their words nor their
  formation now indicate their unity in long past ages, while, on the
  other hand, the primitive tongues of mankind may have been numerous,
  and the extreme unlikeness of such languages as Basque, Chinese,
  Peruvian, Hottentot and Sanskrit may arise from absolute independence
  of origin. The language spoken by any tribe or nation is not of itself
  absolute evidence as to its race-affinities. This is clearly shown in
  extreme cases. Thus the Jews in Europe have almost lost the use of
  Hebrew, but speak as their vernacular the language of their adopted
  nation, whatever it may be.... In most or all nations of mankind,
  crossing or intermarriage of races has taken place between the
  conquering invader and the conquered native, so that the language
  spoken by the nation may represent the results of conquest as much or
  more than of ancestry.... On the other hand, the language of the
  warlike invader or peaceful immigrant may yield, in a few generations,
  to the tongue of the mass of the population, as the Northman’s was
  replaced by the French, and modern German gives way to English in the
  United States.

[Sidenote: Development of Civilization]

The last general topic in the article ANTHROPOLOGY is Development of
Civilization. In connection with it the student should read the article
CIVILIZATION (Vol. 6, p. 403), by Dr. H. S. Williams, editor-in-chief of
_The Historian’s History of the World_, and particularly the first part
of it dealing with early times.

[Sidenote: Ethnology]

The comparatively brief article ETHNOLOGY AND ETHNOGRAPHY (Vol. 9, p.
849) takes up the story of man’s progress at the point where
ANTHROPOLOGY stops, and deals particularly with the division of mankind
into separate races. Was pleistocene man specifically one? The evidence
to supply an answer to this question is of three kinds: anatomical,
physiological and cultural and psychical. Human bones from this early
period “show differences so slight as to admit of pathological or other
explanation,” and do not prove that there were separate species. The
physiological answer, that there was only one species, is given and
explained in the article ANTHROPOLOGY: species cannot breed with
species, and hybrids are infertile. The third answer is also in the
negative. “The works of early man everywhere present the most startling
resemblance.” Dr. J. C. Prichard is quoted in the article as saying that

  the same inward and mental nature is to be recognized in all races of
  men. When we compare this fact with the observations, fully
  established, as to the specific instincts and separate psychical
  endowments of all the distinct tribes of sentient beings in the
  universe we are entitled to draw confidently the conclusion that all
  human races are of one species and one family.

If man was specifically one, where did he originate and how did he
spread over the world? “As to man’s cradle-land there have been many
theories, but the weight of evidence is in favour of Indo-Malaysia.” The
problem of distribution “has been met by geology, which proves that the
earth’s surface has undergone great changes since man’s appearance, and
that continents, long since submerged, once existed, making a complete
land communication from Indo-Malaysia.... Proofs no less cogent are
available of the former existence of an Eurafrican continent, while the
extension of Australia in the direction of New Guinea is more than
probable.... The western hemisphere was probably connected with Europe
and Asia, in Tertiary times.” The article ETHNOLOGY closes with a
description of the four divisions of the human race proposed by Huxley,
which have already been enumerated.

Separate articles supplementing these two main articles, ANTHROPOLOGY
and ETHNOLOGY, especially in the field of comparative anatomy, are:
ANTHROPOMETRY (Vol. 2, p. 119) for physical measurements, including the
Bertillon system used to identify criminals; BRACHYCEPHALIC (Vol. 4, p.
366), or short-headed, a term applied to Indo-Chinese, Savoyards,
Croatians, Lapps, etc.; DOLICHOCEPHALIC (Vol. 8, p. 388), or
long-headed, like Eskimos, negroes, etc.; MESOCEPHALIC (Vol. 18, p.
179), for the type between the two; PROGNATHISM (Vol. 22, p. 424), for
jaw protrusion; CRANIOMETRY (Vol. 7, p. 372) and CEPHALIC INDEX (Vol. 5,
p. 684), for the measurement of skulls and heads; STEATOPYGIA (Vol. 25,
p. 860), for a peculiar heaviness of hips found in some negro and other
savage peoples; MONOGENISTS (Vol. 18, p. 730), on the theory that all
men are descended from a common original stock; and POLYGENISTS (Vol.
22, p. 24) on the opposite theory.

[Sidenote: North American Indians]

One of the most elaborate ethnological articles in the Britannica is of
particular interest to Americans, that on INDIANS, NORTH AMERICAN (Vol.
14, p. 452), by Dr. A. F. Chamberlain, professor of anthropology, Clark
University, Worcester, Mass. It is equivalent to more than 100 pages of
this Guide, and there are also scores of brief articles on different
North American Indian tribes. A few, only, of the many interesting
topics treated in it may be mentioned:

  The name “American Indians”—due to the mistaken early belief that the
  New World was a part of Asia. “Amerind” a suggested substitute.
  Various uses of “Indian.” French “sauvage” the original of “Siwash.”

  Popular fallacies of the origin of the Indians—Welsh, “lost Ten
  Tribes,” etc.

  Linguistic stocks. Table of languages. General description;
  varied character; enormous compound words, like
  _deyeknonhsedehrihadasterasterahetakwa_ for “stove-polish.”
  Indian literature.

  Migrations of Indian stocks. Tabular conspectus of 180
  tribes—situation and population, degree of intermixture, condition and
  progress, and authorities on each.

  Population, physical characteristics, race mixture.

  Culture, arts, industries, religion, mythology and games.

  Social organization, contact of Indians and whites, Indian wars,
  missions, Indian talent and capacity, syllabaries invented by Indians.

In addition to the articles on Indian tribes there are many on Indian
notables—for example, PONTIAC, TECUMSEH, KING PHILIP, BLACK HAWK, BRANT,
and SITTING BULL.

[Sidenote: Central America]

Interest in the Indians of Central America, popularly called Aztecs, is
rather archaeological than ethnological. See in the Britannica the
article CENTRAL AMERICA (Vol. 5, p. 677), by Dr. Walter Lehmann,
directorial assistant of the Royal Ethnological Museum, Munich; and the
article AMERICA, _Ethnology and Archaeology_ (Vol. 1, p. 810), by O. T.
Mason, late curator, Department of Anthropology, National Museum,
Washington, dealing with the Indians of North, Central and South America
in general. The other principal articles on races or tribes of unusual
ethnographic importance are:

NEGRO (Vol. 14, p. 344), by Thomas Athol Joyce, assistant in the
Department of Ethnography, British Museum,—with a section on the negro
in the United States, by Walter F. Willcox, late chief statistician,
United States Census Bureau; supplemented by AFRICA, _Ethnology_ (Vol.
1, p. 325), by Mr. T. A. Joyce, with a particularly valuable classified
list (p. 329) of African tribal distribution, which may be made the
basis for further study by reference to articles on the separate tribes,
such as BERBERS, KABYLES, MZABITES, TUAREG, etc.

POLYNESIA (Vol. 22, p. 33) for the Polynesian race; and also SAMOA (Vol.
24, p. 115) and HAWAII (Vol. 13, p. 83)

AUSTRALIA, _Aborigines_ (Vol. 2, p. 954) and _Maori_. The following is a
list in alphabetical order of articles on races or tribes:

 Ababda
 Abipones
 Abnaki
 Aborigines
 Acholi
 Afars (Danakil)
 Agaiambo
 Ahom
 Aht
 Ahtena
 Aimak, or Eimak
 Ainu
 Akka
 Alfuros
 Algonquin
 Alur
 Amarar
 Anti, or Campa
 Apache
 Apalachee
 Arabs
 Arapaho
 Araucanians
 Arawak
 Areoi
 Arikara, or Aricara
 Artega
 Ashraf (Shurefa)
 Assiniboin
 Athapascan
 Attacapa
 Awadia and Fadnia
 Aymara
 Aztecs
 Babu
 Badagas
 Baggára
 Bakalai
 Bakhtiári
 Ba-Kwiri
 Ba-Luba
 Bambute
 Banate
 Bangash
 Barabra
 Bari
 Bashkirs
 Basques
 Battakhin
 Battanni
 Battas
 Batwa
 Bazigars
 Bechuana
 Bedouins
 Beja, or Bija
 Bellabella
 Bellacoola, or Bilqula
 Beni-Amer
 Beni-Israel
 Beothuk
 Berbers
 Bertat
 Bhattiana
 Bhils, or Bheels
 Bimana
 Bisharin
 Blackfoot
 Boer
 Bogos (Bilens)
 Bois Brûlés
 Bongo
 Botocudos
 Bozdar
 Brahui
 Bugis
 Bugti
 Buriats
 Bushmen
 Caddo
 Cagots
 Cahita
 Cahokia
 Cakchiquel
 Calchaqui
 Caribs
 Cashibo, or Carapache
 Catauxi
 Catawbas
 Celt
 Chamkanni
 Changos
 Charrua
 Chechenzes
 Chellian
 Cheremisses
 Cherokee
 Cheyenne
 Chickasaws
 Chimesyan
 Chinook
 Chiquitos
 Choctaws
 Cholones
 Chude
 Chukchi
 Chuncho
 Chuvashes
 Circassia
 Cocoma, or Cucamas
 Coeur d’Alêne
 Comanches
 Conestoga
 Conibos
 Copts
 Cree
 Creek Indians
 Crow Indians
 Cunas
 Curetus
 Czech
 Dawari; or Dauri
 Delaware Indians
 Dinka
 Dogra
 Dravidian
 Dualla
 Duk-Duk
 Durani
 Dyaks
 Engis
 Eskimo
 Ewe
 Falashas
 Fang
 Fanti
 Fellah
 Fiji
 Fingo, or Fengu
 Finno-Ugrian
 Flatheads
 Fox Indians
 Fula
 Funj
 Furfooz
 Galchas
 Gallas
 Gararish
 Ghilzai
 Gilyaks
 Gipsies
 Golds
 Gonaguas
 Gros Ventres
 Guanches
 Guaranis
 Guatos
 Guatusos
 Guaycurus
 Gumus
 Hababs
 Hadendoa
 Haida
 Hakkas
 Hamitic Races
 Harratin
 Hassania
 Hausa
 Hawawir
 Hazara
 Heroro, or Ovaherero
 Hindki
 Hipurnias
 Hiung-nu
 Hopi
 Hottentots
 Hova
 Huambisas
 Huastecs
 Huichol
 Huron
 Indians, North American
 Iquitos
 Iroquois
 Irulas
 Itza
 Ja’alin
 Jakuns
 Jats
 Jeveros
 Jibitos
 Jicarilla
 Juangs
 Jur (Diur)
 Juris
 Kabbabish
 Kabyles
 Kaffirs
 Kakar
 Kalapuya
 Kalispel
 Kalkas
 Kanaka
 Kanuri (Beriberi)
 Kara-Kalpaks
 Karen
 Kashubes
 Kavirondo
 Kaw (Kansa)
 Kayasth
 Khamtis
 Khattak
 Khazars
 Khevsurs
 Khonds
 Kickapoo
 Kiowas
 Kirghiz
 Klamath
 Koch
 Kolis
 Kols
 Korkus
 Koryaks
 Kotas
 Krumen
 Kubus
 Kumyks
 Kunbis
 Kurumbas
 Kusan
 Kutenai
 Kwakiutl
 Laos
 Lascar
 Latuka
 Legas
 Lepcha
 Lipan
 Lolos
 Madi
 Mahar
 Mahrattas
 Makalaka
 Makaraka
 Malays
 Mandan
 Mandingo
 Maneteneris
 Mangbettu
 Manyema
 Maori
 Marianas
 Mariposan
 Maroons
 Marri
 Masai
 Mashona
 Metabele
 Maya
 Mayoruna
 Menangkabos
 Mensa and Marea
 Meshcheryaks
 Meyrifab
 Miami
 Miaotsze
 Micmac
 Mikirs
 Mishmi (tribe)
 Modoc
 Mohave
 Mohawk
 Mohican
 Mohmand
 Monassir
 Montagnais
 Moors
 Moplah
 Mordvinians
 Moxos
 Mpongwe (Pongos)
 Mundas
 Mundrucus
 Muras
 Musa Khel
 Muskhogean Stock
 Mzabites, or Beni-Mzab
 Nahuatlan Stock
 Namasudra
 Nandi
 Navaho, or Navajo
 Nayar, or Nair
 Negritos
 Negro
 Nez Percés
 Niam-Niam
 Nuer
 Oerlams
 Ojibway
 Omaguas
 Omahas
 Oneida
 Onondaga
 Opata
 Orakzai
 Oraons
 Ostiaks
 Ottawa
 Papuans
 Pariah (caste)
 Parsees
 Pathan (people)
 Pawnee
 Penobscot
 Pequot
 Petchenegs
 Pima
 Polabs
 Ponca
 Pondo
 Potawatami
 Povindah
 Prabhu (caste)
 Pueblo Indians
 Puelche
 Pygmy
 Quiché, or Kichés
 Quichua
 Rajput
 Riffians
 Ruthenians
 Sahos
 Sakai
 Salishan
 Samoyedes
 Santals
 Semang
 Seminole
 Seneca
 Serers
 Shagia
 Shangalla
 Shans
 Shawnee
 Sherani, or Shirani
 Shilluh
 Shilluk
 Shinwari
 Shukria
 Sienetjo
 Sikh
 Sioux
 Slavs
 Slovaks
 Slovenes
 Songhoi
 Sorbs
 Swahili
 Syryenians
 Tajik
 Talaing
 Tamils
 Tarkani
 Tatars
 Tehuelche
 Tembu
 Tibbu, or Tebu
 Todas
 Toltecs
 Troglodytes
 Tshi
 Tuareg
 Tukulor (Tuculers)
 Tunguses
 Tupis
 Turi
 Turki
 Turkoman
 Turks
 Tuscarora
 Uighur
 Unyamwezi
 Ustarana
 Ute (Utah)
 Utman Khel
 Vaalpens
 Veddahs
 Wa
 Wichita
 Wochua
 Wolof (Woloff, Jolof)
 Wyandot (Huron)
 Yaos
 Yusafzai
 Zaimukht
 Zaparos
 Zenaga
 Zenata

[Sidenote: Terminology]

The technical terms of nearly every science are words coined from Latin
and Greek roots, so that the student of these languages is at an
advantage in learning any science—its terms have some meaning to him no
matter how strange the science itself. But in anthropology and ethnology
we come across such terms as _taboo_, _totem_, _shaman_ and _manitou_.
For their comprehension Latin and Greek give no aid. Each of these terms
comes into English from the language of a primitive people to convey an
idea at once too primitive and too complex to be expressed by any
English word or by a Greek or Latin compound. “Taboo” is a Malay word
meaning both “unclean” (as that word is used in the Old Testament) and
“sacred”; and the idea it conveys is characteristic of the religious and
social system found among the Polynesians and nearly all other peoples
in a comparatively low stage of civilization, which sets persons or
things apart as sacred or accursed. “Totem” is a Chippewa (North
American Indian) word denoting an animal, plant, or other object chosen
as the name of a whole family or tribal division. The word “shaman”
comes from the Ural-Altaic (Tungus), and means “medicine-man,” a
combination of priest, magician and exorcist. “Manitou” is another North
American word meaning “spirit” or “genius.”

[Sidenote: Taboo and Totem]

The practice of taboo and totemism, although one word comes to us from
the South Seas and the other from the American Indians, is found all
over the less civilized world, and—even more important—it explains many
things in the social and religious life of more civilized communities.
For instance, the account by modern students of Greek and Roman religion
has had to be largely rewritten in the light of what we have learned in
the last two generations about taboo and totemism.

The articles TABOO (Vol. 26, p. 337) and TOTEMISM (Vol. 27, p. 79) are
both by Andrew Lang, author of _Custom and Myth_ and other standard
works on folk-lore. It is unnecessary to outline these two articles
here, as the two words have been defined, and the importance of the
subject suggested. The reader should refer to the article on ANDREW LANG
(Vol. 16, p. 171), in which it is said that “he explained the irrational
elements of mythology as survivals from earlier savagery....” idealized
“savage animism ... maintained the existence of high spiritual ideas
among savage races, and instituted comparisons between savage practices
and the occult phenomena among civilized races.” His appreciation of the
culture of the savage and his remarkably interesting style should induce
the student to read Lang’s other and related articles in the Britannica,
especially:

FAMILY (Vol. 10, p. 158), (equivalent to 27 pages of this Guide),
dealing particularly with the question of marriage as related to
totemism, and the practices of marrying only _out_ of the tribe or
totem, and of marrying only _within_ the totem (see the articles
ENDOGAMY and EXOGAMY, MATRIARCHATE, POLYANDRY, POLYGAMY, LEVIRATE and
COUVADE).

NAME (Vol. 19, p. 157), which discusses the relation of the name to the
totem, the strange primitive custom of the individual’s having many
names and concealing his true name, etc.; and also the articles FAIRY
(Vol. 10, p. 134) and MYTHOLOGY (Vol. 19, p. 128).

[Sidenote: Religion]

For special forms of superstition, read the articles MAGIC, SHAMANISM,
WITCHCRAFT, DEMONOLOGY and LYCANTHROPY, and in the field of religion,
RELIGION, _Primitive_ (Vol. 23, p. 63), by R. R. Marett, of Oxford
University, author of _The Threshold of Religion_, etc. This article
puts particular stress on the importance of ritual in early religion.
Compare also the matter, already mentioned, on religion in the article
on North American Indians with the short articles MANITOU (Vol. 17, p.
568) and GHOST DANCE (Vol. 11, p. 925). Besides, the student should road
ORDEAL (Vol. 20, p. 173), PRAYER (Vol. 22, p. 256), RITUAL (Vol. 23, p.
370), SACRIFICE (Vol. 23, p. 980), ANIMISM (Vol. 2, p. 53), on the
attempt to explain religion as due to the fear and worship of ghosts—and
FETISHISM (Vol. 10, p. 295), by N. W. Thomas, government anthropologist
to Southern Nigeria; ANCESTOR-WORSHIP (Vol. 1, p. 945), FUNERAL RITES
(Vol. 11, p. 329) and PURIFICATION (Vol. 22, p. 660), all by Dr. F. C.
Conybeare, author of _Myth, Magic and Morals_, etc.; TREE-WORSHIP (Vol.
27, p. 235) and SERPENT-WORSHIP (Vol. 24, p. 676), both bearing on
totemism, by S. A. Cook, author of _Religion of Ancient Palestine_, etc.

[Sidenote: Biographical Study]

A course of reading on anthropology may well close with the study in the
Britannica of the lives of some leaders in this science. The student
will thus be familiarized with the theories of each great
anthropologist—and will notice the manifold appeal of the science by
seeing from what point each approached it—one from his interest in
geology, another from travel, a third because of his studies in surgery
or biology, another as a psychologist.

 Avebury, 1st Baron
 Bandelier, Adolph F. A.
 Bastian, Adolf
 Brasseur de Bourbourg, C. E.
 Brinton, D. G.
 Broca, Paul
 Catlin, George
 Christy, Henry
 Dawkins, William Boyd
 Deniker, Joseph
 Fletcher, Alice C.
 Hale, Horatio
 Hodgson, B. H.
 Lartet, Edouard
 M’Lennan, John F.
 Mantegazza, Paolo
 Morgan, Lewis Henry
 Mortillet, L. L. G. de
 Prichard, James Cowles
 Schoolcraft, H. R.
 Tylor, Edward B.
 Wagner, Rudolf
 Waltz, Theodor




                              CHAPTER LII
                              MATHEMATICS


There is no single book in the English language, save the Britannica, in
which the whole body of mathematical knowledge is examined and
classified with special reference to the inter-relation of its various
parts and to the results obtained in the neighboring domains of physics,
chemistry, and engineering. Text-books necessarily have a somewhat
narrow purpose, namely to teach the student how to solve problems in a
single given field; wide views over the surrounding country can,
therefore, seldom be afforded. The Britannica, however, does for English
readers, what the _Encyclopädie der Mathematischen Wissenchaften_ does
for German, and more, in that in the Britannica the shadowy borderlands
are illuminated and the roads cleared which connect the mathematical and
the experimental sciences. In fact if anyone possessed every
mathematical text-book that had ever been published, he would still find
the articles full of suggestion to him, for in them the whole subject
has been presented, in all its complex bearings, logically and as a
whole.

[Sidenote: History]

It is nearly 4,000 years since a mathematician was last deified in the
person of Amenophis, and as far as can be ascertained only one other of
his calling ever received this honour, and he also was an Egyptian who
had entered into his godship a full thousand years earlier (Vol. 9, p.
46). To the ancient Egyptians mathematics owes the first fragmentary
ideas of arithmetic and mensuration, but little else, for despite their
amazing mechanical achievements very little record of purely
mathematical knowledge has come down from them. It was the Greeks,
starting with Thales (600 B.C.), who really created the sciences of
geometry and numbers. To them we owe the great abstract ideas which
dominate the science. The Greek period lasted till the capture of
Alexandria by the Mohammedans, A.D. 640, at which time the Arabian
school took shape, and to it we owe the development of algebra
(_al-jebr-wa’l-muqubala_, which means the transposition and removal [of
terms of an equation]). With the Renaissance the centre of scientific
research shifted to Western Europe and from then on the boundaries of
mathematical knowledge were rapidly extended, till to-day the subject is
the common ground on which all the physical sciences meet. The student
is referred to the article MATHEMATICS (Vol. 17, p. 878), by A. N.
Whitehead, fellow and senior lecturer in mathematics, Trinity College,
Cambridge, for a brilliant exposition of the foundations of the subject.

The professed mathematician will, of course, not need any set guide to
his reading, but it may be well to point out one or two articles which
he will find especially worthy of his attention.

[Sidenote: Leading Articles]

The article PROBABILITY, (Vol. 22, p. 376), by Professor Edgeworth,
author of _Mathematical Psychics_, and numerous papers on the calculus
of probabilities, gives, to the best of our belief, the only statement
of the whole problem in the English language. That on ALGEBRAIC FORMS
(Vol. 1, p. 620), by Major Macmahon, former president of the London
Mathematical Society, includes a number of results not previously
published. The article ELASTICITY (Vol. 9, p. 141), by A. E. H. Love,
professor of natural philosophy in the University of Oxford, embodies
the experience of a distinguished mathematician who has made this
subject the object of his special study for years. Sir George Darwin
(son of Charles Darwin) in the article TIDE (Vol. 26, p. 938) summed up
the results of his life’s work. The new electrical theory of the
properties of MATTER (Vol. 17, p. 891) is discussed by Sir J. J.
Thomson, professor of physics, Cambridge, who has done more than anyone
else to develop it. There are many other valuable articles, e.g.,
GEOMETRY, _Axioms_ (Vol. 11, p. 730), and GEOMETRY, _Non-Euclidean_
(Vol. 11, p. 724), by A. N. Whitehead; UNITS, DIMENSIONS OF (Vol. 27, p.
736), by Professor J. A. Fleming; ENERGY and ENERGETICS (Vol. 9, p. 398
and p. 390), by Sir Joseph Larmor; GROUPS, by Prof. Burnside, author of
_Theory of Groups of Finite Order_. Articles which will be found highly
useful to the engineer are MENSURATION (Vol. 18, p. 134); EARTH, FIGURE
OF (Vol. 8, p. 801); GEODESY (Vol. 11, p. 607); STRENGTH OF MATERIALS
(Vol. 25, p. 1007).

[Sidenote: Leading Contributors]

The mathematician will at once recognize the peculiar fitness of the
contributors to deal with the subjects allotted to them, and this
fitness is the more noticeable in the following list, arranged in
alphabetical order, which names and briefly describes the distinguished
mathematicians who have collaborated in the Britannica, and indicates
the principal articles written by each.

  H. F. Baker, Fellow and Lecturer of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
  Cayley Lecturer in Mathematics in the University. Author of _Abel’s
  Theory and the Allied Theory_, etc.:

    DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION; _Function_, _Functions of Complex Variables_.

  Ludwig Boltzmann, formerly Professor of Theoretical Physics in the
  Universities of Munich, Vienna, and Leipzig. Author of _Lectures on
  the Theory of Gas_; _Lectures on Maxwell’s Theory of Electricity and
  Light_:

    MODEL.

  W. Burnside, Professor of Mathematics, Royal Naval College, Greenwich.
  Hon. Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge. Author of the _Theory of
  Groups of Finite Order_, etc.:

    GROUPS, THEORY OF

  Arthur Cayley, formerly Professor of Pure Mathematics in the
  University of Cambridge. See the biographical article (Vol. 5, p.
  589):

    CURVE (in part); DETERMINANT; EQUATION; NUMBERS, PARTITION OF;
    SURFACE (in part); GAUSS, K. F.; MONGE, G.

  George Chrystal, Professor of Mathematics and Dean of the Faculty of
  Arts, Edinburgh University, Hon. Fellow and formerly Fellow and
  Lecturer, Corpus Christi College, Cambridge:

    PERPETUAL MOTION; PASCAL (in part); RIEMANN, GEORG.

  Col. A. R. Clarke, Royal Medal of Royal Society 1887; in charge of
  trigonometrical operations of the Ordnance Survey 1854–1881:

    EARTH, FIGURE OF THE (in part); GEODESY (in part); MAP,
    _Projections_ (in part).

  Agnes Mary Clerke, Author of _History of Astronomy in the 19th
  Century_; _The System of the Stars_; _Problems in Astrophysics_; and
  many other astronomical books. See the biographical article (Vol. 6,
  p. 497):

    ASTRONOMY, _History_: ZODIAC; BRAHE, TYCHO; COPERNICUS; FLAMSTEED;
    HALLEY; HUYGENS; KEPLER, etc.

  Lt. Col. C. F. Close, head of the Geographical Section, British
  General Staff, formerly British Representative on the Nyasa-Tanganyika
  Boundary Commission. Author of _Text-Book of Topographical Surveying_,
  etc.:

    MAPS, _Projections_ (in part).

  W. E. Dalby, Professor of Civil and Mechanical Engineering at the City
  and Guilds of London Institute, Central Technical College, South
  Kensington. Author of _The Balancing of Engines_, etc.:

    MECHANICS, _Applied_ (in part); and several engineering subjects.

  Sir George H. Darwin, late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and
  Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy in the
  University. President of the British Association, 1905. Author of _The
  Tides and Kindred Phenomena in the Solar System_, etc.:

    TIDE.

  F. Y. Edgeworth, Professor of Political Economy in the University of
  Oxford, etc. Author of _Mathematical Psychics_, and numerous papers on
  the Calculus of Probabilities in the _Philosophical Magazine_, etc.:

    PROBABILITY.

  E. B. Elliott, Waynflete Professor of Pure Mathematics, and Fellow of
  Magdalen College, Oxford. Formerly Fellow of Queen’s College, Oxford.
  President of the London Mathematical Society, 1896–1898. Author of
  _Algebra of Quantics_, etc.:

    CURVE, (in part); GEOMETRY, IV _Analytical Geometry_.

  C. Everitt, Magdalen College, Oxford:

    ALGEBRA, _History_: DENSITY; LIGHT, _Introduction_, _History_, etc.

  J. A. Ewing, Director of (British) Naval Education. Hon. Fellow of
  King’s College, Cambridge. Formerly Professor of Mechanism and Applied
  Mechanics in the University of Cambridge. Author of the _Strength of
  Materials_, etc.:

    STRENGTH OF MATERIALS, and several engineering subjects.

  J. A. Fleming, Pender Professor of Electrical Engineering in the
  University of London. Fellow of University College, London. Formerly
  Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge, and Lecturer on Applied
  Mechanics in the University. Author of _Magnets and Electric
  Currents_, etc.:

    UNITS, PHYSICAL; and many articles on Electrical Science.

  Rev. A. H. Frost:

    MAGIC SQUARE.

  W. Garnett, Educational Adviser to the London County Council; formerly
  Fellow and Lecturer of St. John’s College, Cambridge. Principal and
  Professor of Mathematics, Durham College of Science. Author of
  _Elementary Dynamics_, etc.:

    ENERGY (in part); HYDROMETER; KELVIN, LORD.

  J. W. L. Glaisher, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Formerly
  President of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and the Royal
  Astronomical Society, Editor of _Messenger of Mathematics_ and the
  _Quarterly Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics_:

    LOGARITHM; TABLE, MATHEMATICAL; LEGENDRE, A. M.; NAPIER, JOHN.

  J. H. Grace, Lecturer in Mathematics at Peterhouse and Pembroke
  College, Cambridge. Fellow of Peterhouse:

    GEOMETRY, _Line Geometry_.

  Sir A. G. Greenhill, formerly Professor of Mathematics in the Ordnance
  College, Woolwich. Author of _Differential and Integral Calculus with
  Applications_; _Hydrostatics_; _Notes on Dynamics_, etc.:

    BALLISTICS; GYROSCOPE AND GYROSTAT; HYDROMECHANICS.

  Sir Thomas Little Heath, Assistant-Secretary to the Treasury, London.
  Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Author of _Apollonius of Perga_;
  _Treatise on Conic Sections_; _The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s
  Elements_, etc.:

    ANTHEMIUS; APOLLONIUS OF PERGA; ARCHIMEDES; HERO OF ALEXANDRIA;
    PAPPUS OF ALEXANDRIA; PORISM, etc.

  F. R. Helmert, Professor of Geodesy in the University of Berlin:

    EARTH, FIGURE OF THE (in part); GEODESY (in part).

  O. M. F. Henrici, Professor of Mechanics and Mathematics in the
  Central Technical College of the City and Guilds of London Institute.
  Author of _Vectors and Rotors_; _Congruent Figures_, etc.:

    CALCULATING MACHINES; GEOMETRY, I. _Euclidean_; II. _Projective_;
    III. _Descriptive_; PERSPECTIVE; PROJECTION.

  E. W. Hobson, Fellow and Tutor in Mathematics, Christ’s College,
  Cambridge. Stokes Lecturer in Mathematics in the University:

    FOURIER’S SERIES; SPHERICAL HARMONICS; TRIGONOMETRY.

  A. E. Jolliffe, Fellow, Tutor and Mathematical Lecturer, Corpus
  Christi College, Oxford. Senior Mathematical Scholar, 1892:

    CONTINUED FRACTIONS; MAXIMA AND MINIMA; SERIES.

  H. Lamb, Professor of Mathematics, University of Manchester, formerly
  Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge; Member of
  Council of Royal Society, 1894–1896. Royal Medallist, 1902. President
  of London Mathematical Society 1902–1904. Author of HYDRODYNAMICS,
  etc.:

    DYNAMICS; HARMONIC ANALYSIS; MECHANICS, I. _Theoretical_; VECTOR
    ANALYSIS; WAVE.

  A. E. H. Love, Sedleian Professor of Natural Philosophy in the
  University of Oxford. Hon. Fellow of Queen’s College; formerly Fellow
  of St. John’s College, Cambridge; Secretary to the London Mathematical
  Society:

    ELASTICITY; VARIATIONS, CALCULUS OF; FUNCTION, _Functions of Real
    Variables_; INFINITESIMAL CALCULUS.

  W. H. Macaulay, Fellow and Tutor of King’s College, Cambridge:

    MOTION, LAWS OF.

  Major P. A. Macmahon, Deputy Warden of the Standards, Board of Trade.
  Joint General Secretary, British Association. Formerly Professor of
  Physics, Ordnance College. President of London Mathematical Society,
  1894–1896:

    ALGEBRAIC FORMS; COMBINATORIAL ANALYSIS; CAYLEY, ARTHUR.

  G. B. Mathews, formerly Professor of Mathematics, University College
  of N. Wales, sometime Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge:

    ALGEBRA, _Special Kinds of Algebra_; NUMBER.

  J. Clerk Maxwell, former Professor of Experimental Physics in the
  University of Cambridge. See biographical article (Vol. 17, p. 929):

    CAPILLARY ACTION (in part); DIAGRAM.

  Simon Newcomb, former Professor of Mathematics and Astronomy, Johns
  Hopkins University, etc. See the biographical article (Vol. 19, p.
  474):

    ASTRONOMY, _Descriptive_; and many other astronomical subjects.

  J. H. Poynting, Professor of Physics and Dean of the Faculty of
  Science in the University of Birmingham. Formerly Fellow of Trinity
  College, Cambridge. Joint-author of _Text-Book of Physics_:

    ACOUSTICS; GRAVITATION (in part); SOUND.

  F. Purser, formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin; Professor of
  Natural Philosophy in the University of Dublin; Member of the Royal
  Irish Academy:

    SURFACE (in part).

  J. Purser, formerly Professor of Mathematics in Queen’s College,
  Belfast. Member of the Royal Irish Academy:

    SURFACE (in part).

  W. J. M. Rankine, former Professor of Civil Engineering at Glasgow
  University. See the biographical article (Vol. 22, p. 894):

    MECHANICS, _Applied_ (in part).

  Hon. B. A. W. Russell, formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
  Author of _Foundations of Geometry_; _Principles of Mathematics_,
  etc.:

    GEOMETRY, VI. _Non-Euclidean_ (in part).

  W. F. Sheppard, Senior Examiner in the Board of Education; formerly
  Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge; Senior Wrangler, 1884:

    ALGEBRA, _Principles of Ordinary Algebra_; ARITHMETIC; DIFFERENCES,
    CALCULUS OF; INTERPOLATION; MENSURATION.

  P. G. Tait, late professor of Natural Philosophy, Edinburgh
  University. Author of _Elementary Treatise on Quaternions_. Joint
  author with Lord Kelvin of _Treatise on Natural Philosophy_:

    KNOT; QUATERNIONS (in part); HAMILTON, SIR WILLIAM; MAXWELL, JAMES
    CLERK.

  Rev. Charles Taylor, formerly Master of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
  Vice-Chancellor, Cambridge University, 1887–1888. Author of
  _Geometrical Conics_, etc.:

    GEOMETRICAL CONTINUITY.

  H. M. Taylor, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge; formerly Tutor and
  Lecturer. Smith’s Prizeman, 1865. Editor of the Pitt Press _Euclid_:

    NEWTON, SIR ISAAC.

  Sir J. J. Thomson, Cavendish Professor of Experimental Physics and
  Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. President of the British
  Association, 1909–1910. Author of _A Treatise on the Motion of Vortex
  Rings_; _Application of Dynamics to Physics and Chemistry_:

    MATTER; and several articles on Electrical Science.

  J. Walker, Christ Church, Oxford. Demonstrator in the Clarendon
  laboratory. Formerly Vice-President of the Physical Society. Author of
  _The Analytical Theory of Light_, etc.:

    POLARIZATION OF LIGHT; REFRACTION, _Double Refraction_.

  A. N. Whitehead, Fellow and Lecturer in Mathematics, Trinity College,
  Cambridge. Author of _A Treatise on Universal Algebra_, etc.:

    GEOMETRY VI. _Non-Euclidean Geometry_ (in part); GEOMETRY VII.
    _Axioms on Geometry_; MATHEMATICS.

These are the men who are responsible for the mathematical sections of
the Britannica. A fuller list of articles on mathematical subjects is
given below.

 Abel, Niels Henrik
 Abscissa
 Acceleration
 Agnesi, Maria Gaetana
 Aguillon, F. D.
 Algebra
 Algebraic Forms
 Aliquot
 Allen, or Alleyn T.
 Amicable Numbers
 Anderson, Alexander
 Angle
 Anthemius
 Apollonius of Perga
 Archimedes
 Argument
 Arithmetic
 Autolycus of Pitane
 Axis
 Babbage, Charles
 Baldi, Bernardino
 Ballistics
 Barlow, Peter
 Barrow, Isaac
 Bernoulli (family)
 Bessel Function
 Binomial
 Biquadratic
 Bisectrix
 Boole, George
 Borda, Jean Charles
 Boscovich, Roger J.
 Bouguer, Pierre
 Bowditch, Nathaniel
 Brachistochrone
 Briggs, Henry
 Buxton, Jedediah
 Calculating Machines
 Camus, Charles E. L.
 Cardan, Girolamo
 Cardioid
 Castel, Louis Bertrand
 Catenary
 Cauchy, A. L., baron
 Cayley, Arthur
 Charles, J. A. C.
 Chebichev, P. L.
 Circle
 Cissoid
 Clairault, A. C.
 Clifford, William K.
 Cocker, Edward
 Colburn, Z.
 Combinatorial Analysis
 Conchoid
 Cone
 Conic Section
 Conoid
 Continued Fractions
 Cotes, Roger
 Cremona, Luigi
 Cube
 Curve
 Cycloid
 Cylinder
 Demoivre, Abraham
 De Morgan, Augustus
 Determinant
 Diagonal
 Diagram
 Diameter
 Differences, Calculus of
 Differential Equation
 Dimension
 Diophantus of Alexandria
 Ditton, Humphry
 Dodecahedron
 Dynamics
 Earth, Figure of the
 Elasticity
 Ellipse
 Ellipsoid
 Emerson, William
 Energetics
 Energy
 Epicycloid
 Equation
 Euclid
 Euler, Leonhard
 Fermat, Pierre de
 Figurate Numbers
 Focus
 Folium
 Fourier, J. B. J.
 Fourier’s Series
 Frisi, Paolo
 Frustum
 Function
 Galloway, Thomas
 Galois, Evariste
 Gauss, Karl Friedrich
 Geodesy
 Geometrical Continuity
 Geometry
 Gnomon
 Graphical Methods
 Gravitation
 Greaves, John
 Gregory (family)
 Gregory, Olinthus G.
 Groups, Theory of
 Gunter, Edmund
 Gyroscope and Gyrostat
 Hachette, J. N. P.
 Hamilton, Sir W. R.
 Harmonic
 Harmonic Analysis
 Harriot, T.
 Hero of Alexandria
 Hodograph
 Hutton, Charles
 Huygens, Christiaan
 Hydrodynamics
 Hydromechanics
 Hydrostatics
 Hyperbola
 Icosahedron
 Inaudi, Jacques
 Infinite
 Infinitesimal Calculus
 Interpolation
 Inversion
 Involution
 Ivory, Sir James
 Jacobi, Karl G. J.
 Kelvin, William Thomson, 1st baron
 Kinematics
 Kinetics
 Kircher, Athanasius
 Knot
 Kovalevsky, Sophie
 Lagrange, Joseph L.
 Landen, John
 Laplace, P. S., de
 Lardner, Dionysius
 Legendre, Adrien Marie
 Lemniscate
 Leonardo of Pisa
 Leslie, Sir John
 Lever
 Lie, Marius Sophus
 Limaçon
 Line
 Lobachevskiy, N. I.
 Locus
 Logarithm
 Logocyclic Curve, Strophoid or Foliate
 MacCullagh, James
 Maclaurin, Colin
 Magic Square
 Map
 Mascheroni, Lorenzo
 Mathematics
 Matter
 Maupertuis, Pierre de
 Maxima and Minima
 Maxwell, J. Clerk
 Mechanics
 Mensuration
 Mersenne, Marin
 Monge, Gaspard
 Montucia, Jean-Étienne
 Motion, Laws of
 Murphy, Robert
 Napier, John
 Newton, Sir Isaac
 Nicomachus of Gerasa
 Number
 Numbers, Partition of
 Numeral
 Octahedron
 Ordinate
 Oughtred, William
 Oval
 Pantograph
 Pappus of Alexandria
 Parabola
 Peacock, George
 Peirce, Benjamin
 Pell, John
 Perpetual Motion
 Perspective
 Pfaff, J. F.
 Playfair, John
 Plücker, Julius
 Poinsot, Louis
 Poisson, Siméon Denis
 Polygon
 Polygonal Numbers
 Polyhedral Numbers
 Polyhedron
 Poncelet, Jean Victor
 Porism
 Price, Bartholomew
 Prism
 Probability
 Projection
 Quadratrix
 Quaternions
 Recorde, Robert
 Riccati, J. F., count
 Riemann, G. F. B.
 Roberval, G. P. de
 Robins, Benjamin
 Roulette
 Routh, Edward John
 Russell, John Scott
 Salmon, George
 Saunderson, N.
 Serenus of Antissa
 Series
 Serpentine
 Simpson, Thomas
 Simson, Robert
 Smith, H. J. S.
 Smith, Robert
 Snell, Willebrord
 Sphere
 Spherical Harmonics
 Spheroid
 Spiral
 Spottiswoode, W.
 Statics
 Steiner, Jakob
 Stevinus, Simon
 Stirling, James
 Stokes, Sir George G.
 Strength of Materials
 Sturm, J. C. F.
 Surface
 Sylvester, J. J.
 Table, Mathematical
 Tait, Peter G.
 Tartaglia, Niccolo
 Taylor, Brook
 Tetrahedron
 Theodosius of Tripolis
 Thompson, T. P.
 Tide
 Todhunter, Isaac
 Triangle
 Trigonometry
 Trisectrix
 Units, Dimensions of
 Units, Physical
 Variations, Calculus of
 Vector Analysis
 Vernier, Pierre
 Vieta (or Viète), F.
 Wallace, William
 Wallis, John
 Wave
 Witch of Agnesi
 Zero




                              CHAPTER LIII
                               ASTRONOMY


No greater homage has ever been paid to the progress of American science
than when the planning and supervision of the astronomical section of
the new Encyclopaedia Britannica was entrusted to the late Prof. Simon
Newcomb, who was also the only American save Benjamin Franklin ever
elected an associate of the French Institute. His death occurred some
time before the Britannica was completed, but he had already finished
the articles which he had undertaken personally to contribute, and read
a great number of the other articles which had, at his suggestion, been
assigned to eminent astronomers in various parts of the world. His
famous hand-book, _Popular Astronomy_, has been translated into all the
European languages, and into Japanese as well; but the unlimited
resources in the way of collaboration which the editorial organization
of the Britannica put at his disposal, enabled him to assemble in these
volumes a complete body of astronomical knowledge which is the greatest
of his educational achievements.

The making of a lens for a great telescope is the most difficult
undertaking in all craftsmanship, and the mounting of the telescope
itself a triumph of mechanical ingenuity. Yet the stars and planets have
been guide-posts for the shepherd and the sailor throughout the ages,
and have told the farmer when to sow and when to reap, and, even in our
day, observations made by an amateur, through a common field-glass, have
in more than one instance yielded results of serious value.

[Sidenote: A Few Facts]

Progress is from one point of view so slow that astronomers are now
compiling data regarding fixed stars of which the motion cannot be
deduced for centuries to come; yet some of the changes to be observed
are so swift that solar prominences often rise at the rate of 350,000
miles an hour, and have been seen to rise to that height. The
temperature of the sun’s envelope, 6000° C., greatly exceeds any that we
can artificially create, and would convert into gas any substance we
know; and for every unit of heat it sends to the earth, a hundred
million other units, poured into space, are absolutely lost for any
purposes of mechanical effect.

Astronomy deals with objects so minute that even a shooting star
evolving, as it passes through our atmosphere, so much light that we can
trace its course with the naked eye, may be no larger than a grain of
sand; deals, too, with objects of so shadowy a nature that the white
clouds in our sky are, in comparison, solid blocks; and deals, again,
with distances and surfaces so vast that numerical description fails to
convey any impression but one of confusion.

It is not easy to conceive, when we see a balloon in the air, the
remainder that would exist if the bag, the car, and the cordage were all
subtracted. There would be, until the gas mixed with the atmosphere, a
sphere of gas. The stars, our sun included, seem to be masses of
incandescent gas, possessing fairly definite boundaries, and not far
from spherical in shape; the nebulae seem also to be masses of
incandescent gas, irregular in form and having no clearly marked limits;
even the nucleus of a comet is apparently not solid enough to be opaque;
and as the four great planets also seem to be gaseous, it is probable
that only the smaller bodies, like our earth, the moon, and Mars, are
solid.

To the rule that we can handle none of the matter that originates beyond
the limits of our atmosphere, the meteorites supply an exception.
Seventy years ago, a mass of stone, cold and invisible, flying through
the aether of space at the rate of some hundred thousand miles an hour,
entered our atmosphere, became so hot, as the air’s friction checked its
speed, that bits of its surface, fused to crust, flicked off and floated
in the air, leaving a shining trail; then as its speed was reduced to
some three hundred miles an hour, cooled until it was no hotter than a
laundress likes her iron to be. At Mhow, in India, as it made a dent in
the earth, it killed a man—the only man known to history who has died so
uncanny a death. But near Wold Cottage, in Yorkshire, England, thirty
years before, another meteorite had fallen only ten yards from a
labourer; and only thirty years ago another arrived on a Yorkshire
railway line, forty yards from a gang of platelayers. The largest
meteoric mass known weighs about fifty tons, but most of them seem to
have split in the course of their journey; and at Hessle, a hundred
thousand fragments spread, like grapeshot from a giant gun, over an area
of some thirty square miles. See METEORITE (Vol. 18, p. 262).

[Sidenote: Life on Mars]

Although the closest scrutiny has not discovered in any meteorite a
shred of life, even the lowest, we obtain, from another source, and by a
different method of observation, evidence—as yet inconclusive,—that not
only life, but intelligent life exists beyond our planet. As in respect
of other astronomical problems, the Britannica is singularly clear,
impartial and authoritative in its treatment of this question. The
article MARS (Vol. 17, p. 761) was written by Professor Newcomb, but
Professor Percival Lowell contributes a summary of the recent
investigations and deductions relating to Mars with which his name is
associated. In 1877, Schiaparelli, adopting the old belief now abandoned
by all astronomers, that oceans occupied the darker-coloured regions of
Mars, observed dark streaks connecting these dark patches, and,
believing them to be strips of water, described them by the Italian word
“canale,” by which he meant channels, or natural bodies of water. An
absurd misconception of his meaning gave wide currency to the idea that
these strips were artificial _canals_, a manifest impossibility, as they
are many miles in width. No canal, properly so called, could be so wide,
and no reservoir could conceivably be so extensive. There is, in the
existence of such patches, even if they were bodies of water, as no one
now believes them to be, not the slightest indication of excavation. In
1894, Professor Lowell, an American astronomer of great authority,
established, for the special purpose of observing Mars, the Lowell
Observatory at Flagstaff, in Arizona, 7,250 feet above sea level, in
singularly clear, dry air, equipped with a twenty-four-inch telescope.
This observatory unquestionably commands greater penetration than any
other, and Professor Newcomb says that the work there upon Mars “has
been continued with such care and assiduity that its results must take
precedence of all others.” Professor Lowell’s first announcement that he
had detected evidences of the existence of extensive artificial canals,
which would of course absolutely prove Mars to be inhabited by
intelligent creatures, was received with derision by many critics who
jumped to the conclusion that he meant artificial canals many miles in
width. Fuller statements from Professor Lowell showed that he believed
Schiaparelli’s wide strips to be not water, _but areas of vegetation
lying on each side of artificial irrigating canals of no extraordinary
width_, by a network of which water is brought to, and distributed
throughout, the temperate and equatorial zones of Mars from the extreme
North and South, as the polar snow caps melt; and that this irrigation
gives the rainless area a seasonal fertility, just as the melting of
Abyssinian snows fecundates the distant valley of the lower Nile. These
strips, according to Professor Lowell and other observers, are at one
season of a bluish-green colour suggesting prosperous vegetation, then
fade to a paler shade or in some places to a tawny brown. The strips are
thousands of miles in length, perfectly straight. No one claims to have
seen the artificial canals, but if there are areas of vegetation, they
must be due to irrigation performed by waterways. If continued
observations confirm the existence of these strips, it will become
certain that they are not telescopic illusions, but the results of
engineering operations on a scale unknown to our planet. The readings
indicated in this chapter will yield a survey of this special field, as
of all other fields of current research in astronomy, and give new
interest to current investigations.

A brief account of some of the principal astronomical articles is
printed here in tabular form, and a fuller list, alphabetically
arranged, follows this topical outline.

 _Topics for Reading_                _Article and Contributor_

 Early Interest in the Sky.

 Astral theology—the “assumption of  ASTROLOGY (Vol. 2, p. 795), and
   a close link between the            BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN RELIGION
   movements going on in the heavens   (Vol. 3, p. 114), by Dr. Morris
   and occurrences on the earth.”      Jastrow, author of _Religion of
   The history of astrology traced     the Babylonians and Assyrians_.
   to ancient Babylonia (about 3000
   B.C.).

 Story of the Constellations. A Map  CONSTELLATION—with star-maps and
   of the Heavens.                     tables (Vol. 7, p. 11), by
                                       Charles Everitt, fellow Royal
                                       Astronomical Society. See also
                                       separate articles on the
                                       principal constellations and
                                       stars.

 Development of Astronomy.

 Scientific knowledge of the ancient ASTRONOMY, _History_ (Vol. 2, p.
   Chinese, Egyptians and              808), by Agnes M. Clerke, author
   Babylonians. Revolutionary cycle    of _A Popular History of
   of the planets.                     Astronomy_.

 First conception of the earth as a  PYTHAGORAS (Vol. 22, p. 699), by
   globe. “The harmony of the          Dr. A. S. Pringle-Pattison,
   spheres.” Identification of         author of _Man’s Place in the
   morning and evening stars (about    Cosmos_, etc.
   520 B.C.).

 The Greeks measure the earth by     ERATOSTHENES OF ALEXANDRIA (Vol. 9,
   astronomical means (about 200       p. 733), by Sir Thomas Little
   B.C.).                              Heath, author of _Treatise on
                                       Conic Sections_.

 The first observatory.              OBSERVATORY (Vol. 19, p. 954), by
                                       J. L. E. Dreyer, Director of
                                       Armagh Observatory.

 The first systematic astronomer,    PTOLEMY, _Mathematics_ (Vol. 22, p.
   Ptolemy and his System (A.D.        620), by Prof. George J. Allman,
   150).                               Queen’s, Galway; COPERNICUS (Vol.
                                       7, p. 100), by Agnes M. Clerke.

 Revival of heliocentric theory      KEPLER, JOHANN (Vol. 15, p. 749),
   (A.D. 1506–1512).                   by Agnes M. Clerke.

 Plan of Solar System realized. The  GALILEO GALILEI (Vol. 11, p. 406),
   founder of descriptive astronomy    by Agnes M. Clerke.
   (1564–1642).

 Newton’s contributions to astronomy NEWTON, SIR ISAAC (Vol. 19, p.
   and astronomical physics            586), by Henry M. Taylor, Fellow
   (1585–1586).                        of Trinity College, Cambridge.

 Continuation of Newton’s work.      EULER, LEONHARD (Vol. 9, p. 887).

 Nebular hypothesis of Laplace       NEBULAR THEORY (Vol. 19, p. 333),
   (1796).                             by Sir Robert S. Ball, author of
                                       _The Story of the Heavens_, etc.

 The New Astronomy.

 Work of Wollaston, Fraunhofer,      ASTROPHYSICS (Vol. 2, p. 819), by
   Kirchoff, and Rowland in spectrum   Dr. Simon Newcomb, late director
   analysis.                           National Observatory, Washington.

 Discoveries during recent eclipses. PHOTOGRAPHY, CELESTIAL (Vol. 21, p.
   Photographing the Heavens,          523), by Prof. H. H. Turner,
   Star-charts, etc.                   Oxford, author of _Modern
                                       Astronomy_, etc.

 Measuring light and heat from the   PHOTOMETRY, _Celestial, or Stellar
   stars,—radio-micrometer.            Photometry_ (Vol. 21, p. 530), by
                                       Dr. H. H. Turner, Oxford.

 New method of photographing the sun SPECTROHELIOGRAPH, illustrated
   and the results of this mode of     (Vol. 25, p. 618), by Dr. George
   study.                              E. Hale, inventor of the
                                       spectroheliograph.

 Principles of Astronomy.

 How the positions and motions of    ASTRONOMY, _Spherical or
   the heavenly bodies are defined.    Geometrical Astronomy_ (Vol. 2,
   System of co-ordinates.             p. 801), by Dr. Simon Newcomb.

 Distance of sun from earth the      PARALLAX (Vol. 20, p. 760), by Dr.
   fundamental celestial               Simon Newcomb.
   measurement.

 Methods of determining distances of STAR, _Distances and Parallaxes of
   stars.                              the Stars_ (Vol. 25, p. 789), by
                                       Arthur S. Eddington, Royal
                                       Observatory, Greenwich.

 Apparent motion of the heavenly     ABERRATION, _Aberration of Light_
   bodies.                             (Vol. 1, p. 54), by Dr. S. Otto
                                       Eppenstein, Zeiss Optical Works,
                                       Jena, Germany.

 Eclipses and their recurrence. List ECLIPSE (Vol. 8, p. 887), by Dr.
   of solar eclipses. Methods of       Simon Newcomb.
   computing eclipses.

 Diameter of earth as an             EARTH, FIGURE OF THE (Vol. 8, p.
   astronomical unit. Determination    801), by Alexander R. Clarke,
   of diameter and figure of earth.    Ordnance Survey, and Prof. F. R.
                                       Helmert, University of Berlin.

 The Stars. The two Star-Streams.    STAR (Vol. 25, p. 785), by Arthur
   Milky Way. Distribution of stars.   S. Eddington, Royal Observatory,
                                       Greenwich.

 True nebulae. Constitution. How     NEBULA, illustrated (Vol. 19, p.
   they differ from star-clusters.     332), by Arthur S. Eddington.

 Comets—origins and orbits. Physical COMET, illustrated (Vol. 6, p.
   constitution. List of periodic      759), by Dr. Simon Newcomb.
   comets.

 Shooting Stars. History of meteoric METEOR (Vol. 18, p. 260), by W. F.
   showers.                            Denning, formerly president,
                                       Liverpool Astronomical Society.

 Constitution of Shooting Stars.     METEORITE (Vol. 18, p. 262), by
                                       Lazarus Fletcher, author of
                                       _Introduction to the Study of
                                       Meteorites_.

 General description of the Solar    SOLAR SYSTEM (Vol. 25, p. 357), by
   System.                             Dr. Simon Newcomb.

 The photosphere, chromosphere and   SUN, illustrated (Vol. 26, p. 85),
   corona, dimensions, temperature,    by Dr. Ralph A. Sampson,
   and age of the sun, sun-spots.      Astronomer Royal for Scotland.

 The vast envelope which surrounds   ZODIACAL LIGHT (Vol. 28, p. 998),
   the sun.                            by Dr. Simon Newcomb.

 Are Northern Lights due to          AURORA POLARIS, illustrated (Vol.
   emanations from the sun?            2, p. 934), by Dr. Charles Chree,
                                       president Physical Society of
                                       London.

 Opaque Bodies, members of the Solar PLANET, illustrated (Vol. 21, p.
   System. Their relation to each      714), and PLANETS, MINOR (Vol.
   other. Their spectra, atmosphere,   21, p. 717), both by Dr. Simon
   temperatures. First planetoid       Newcomb.
   discovered (Jan. 1, 1801).
   Groupings of the planetoids.

 The smallest major planet. How it   MERCURY (Vol. 18, p. 154), by Dr.
   presents the same face always to    Simon Newcomb.
   the sun.

 Venus: Its peculiar rotation and    VENUS (Vol. 27, p. 1013), by Dr.
   cloudy atmosphere. Has Venus a      Simon Newcomb.
   satellite?

 The earth as a member of the solar  EARTH (Vol. 8, p. 799).
   system.

 Our nearest neighbour. Is it        MARS, illustrated (Vol. 17, p.
   inhabited? Similarity of physical   761), by Dr. Simon Newcomb, with
   conditions to those of the earth.   a summary by Professor Lowell, of
                                       the observations at Flagstaff.

 The largest planet. Its belts,      JUPITER, illustrated (Vol. 15, p.
   spots, markings and surface. Is     562), by W. F. Denning, formerly
   the great red spot a floating       president, Liverpool Astronomical
   island?                             Society.

 The ringed planet. Physical         SATURN (Vol. 24, p. 232), by Dr.
   constitution of rings.              Simon Newcomb.

 Uranus: Its discovery, physical     URANUS (Vol. 27, p. 788), by Dr.
   characteristics and satellites.     Simon Newcomb.

 The outermost known planet.         NEPTUNE (Vol. 19, p. 385), by Dr.
   Dimensions. Resemblance to          Simon Newcomb.
   Uranus.

 Wonderful story of its discovery    ADAMS, JOHN COUCH (Vol. 1, p. 177).
   (1845).                             LEVERRIER, U. J. J. (Vol. 16, p.
                                       510), by Agnes M. Clerke, author
                                       of _A Popular History of
                                       Astronomy_.

 The moon. Its aspects, phases and   MOON, illustrated (Vol. 18, p.
   constitution. Its mountains and     802), by Dr. Simon Newcomb.
   atmosphere.

 Development of Practical and
   Observational Astronomy.

 Current mode of star nomenclature   ASTRONOMY, _History of Astronomy_
   adopted (1603). First planetary     (Vol. 2, p. 813), by Agnes M.
   transit observed by Gassendi        Clerke, author of _A Popular
   (1631).                             History of Astronomy_.

 Astronomical Instruments.

 How co-ordinates used in            ASTRONOMY, _Practical Astronomy_
   astronomical research are           (Vol. 2 p. 807), by Dr. Simon
   determined.                         Newcomb.

 Telescope: Discovery and history.   TELESCOPE, illustrated (Vol. 26, p.
   Parts and mounting. Great           557), by Sir David Gill, formerly
   telescopes of the world.            Astronomer Royal at the Cape of
                                       Good Hope, and H. Dennis Taylor,
                                       inventor of the Cooke
                                       Photographic Lens.

 The Transit Circle due to Tycho     TRANSIT CIRCLE, illustrated (Vol.
   Brahe. Description and use.         27, p. 181), by J. L. E. Dreyer,
                                       Armagh Observatory, author of
                                       _Planetary Systems from Thales to
                                       Kepler_, etc.

 Measuring machines. Importance and  MICROMETER, illustrated (Vol. 18,
   use in astronomy.                   p. 381), by Sir David Gill.

 Measuring the sun’s diameter.       HELIOMETER, illustrated (Vol. 13,
                                       p. 224), by Sir David Gill.

 Old time instruments. “Nearly every ASTROLABE, illustrated (Vol. 2, p.
   one of the modern instruments       795), by Lady Huggins, author of
   used for the observatories of       _Life and Work of G. P. Mazzini_.
   practical astronomy is part of
   the perfected astrolabe.”

 Complete list of observatories      OBSERVATORY (Vol. 19, p. 953), by
   throughout the world, date of       J. L. E. Dreyer, director Armagh
   foundation, their equipment and     Observatory, author of _Planetary
   their specialized work.             Systems from Thales to Kepler_.


     LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA ON ASTRONOMY

 Aberration
 Ablatitious
 Adams, John Couch
 Airy, Sir George B.
 Albategnius
 Albedo
 Albumazar (Abu-Maaschar)
 Algol
 Alidade
 Almacantar
 Altitude
 Amici, Giovanni B.
 Amplitude
 Andromeda
 Andronicus of Cyrrhus
 Anomaly
 Ansa
 Aphelion
 Apse and Apsides
 Aquarius
 Aquila
 Arcturus
 Argelander, F. W. A.
 Aries
 Aristarchus, of Samos
 Armilla
 Astrolabe
 Astrology
 Astronomy
 Astrophysics
 Auriga
 Azimuth
 Bailly, Jean S.
 Baily, Francis
 Bainbridge, John
 Bessel, Friedrich W.
 Bianchini, Francesco
 Binary System
 Biquintile
 Black Drop
 Bode, Johann Elert
 Boötes
 Bradley, James
 Brahe, Tycho
 Brisbane, Sir Thomas M.
 Brünnow, F. F. E.
 Calvisius, Sethus
 Campani-Alimenis, M.
 Cancer
 Canes Venatici
 Canis Major
 Capricornus
 Carrington, R. C.
 Cassini (family)
 Cassiopeia
 Celsius, Anders
 Centaurus
 Cepheus
 Cetus
 Chromosphere
 Clerke, Agnes Mary
 Colure
 Coma Berenices
 Comet
 Comet-Seeker
 Compression
 Conjunction
 Conon
 Constellation
 Copernicus, Nicolaus
 Corona
 Coronium
 Cosmic
 Culmination
 Cunitz, Maria
 Cycle
 Cygnus
 Cynosure
 Declination
 Dee, John
 Deferent
 Delambre, J. B. J.
 De la Rue, Warren
 Delisle, Joseph N.
 Delphinus
 Dial and Dialling
 Dick, Thomas
 Direct Motion
 Diurnal Motion
 Donati, Giovanni B.
 Draco
 Dupuis, Charles F.
 Earth
 Eccentric
 Eclipse
 Ecliptic
 Egress
 Ellipticity
 Elongation
 Encke, Johann Franz
 Ephemeris
 Epicycle
 Epoch
 Equation of the Centre
 Equation of Time
 Equator
 Equinox
 Eratosthenes of Alexandria
 Eridanus
 Eros
 Establishment of a Port
 Evection
 Facula
 Firmament
 Flamsteed, John
 Galileo, Galilei
 Gegenschein
 Gemini
 Geocentric
 Gould, B. A.
 Grant, Robert
 Halley, Edmund
 Hansen, Peter Andreas
 Hansteen, Christopher
 Heliacal
 Heliocentric
 Heliometer
 Hercules
 Herschel, Caroline L.
 Herschel, Sir F. W.
 Herschel, Sir J. F. W.
 Hevelius, Johann
 Hipparchus
 Horizon
 Horrocks, Jeremiah
 Hour Angle
 Huggins, Sir William
 Hydra
 Ideler, C. L.
 Immersion
 Inghirami, G.
 Ingress
 Invariable Plane
 Janssen, Pierre Jules C.
 Jupiter
 Kepler, Johann
 Lacaille, N. L. de
 Lalande, J. J. L. de
 Lamont, Johann von
 Latitude
 Lemonnier, Pierre C.
 Leo
 Leverrier, U. J. J.
 Libra
 Libration
 Lilly, William
 Lockyer, Sir J. Norman
 Longitude
 Longomontanus, C. S.
 Lunation
 Lyra
 Magellanic Clouds
 Mars
 Mayer, Johann Tobias
 Mercury
 Meridian
 Meteor
 Metonic Cycle
 Micrometer
 Mitcel, Ormsby M.
 Mitchell, Maria
 Möbius, August F.
 Moon
 Mouchez, A. E. B.
 Nadir
 Nebula
 Nebular Theory
 Neptune
 Newcomb, Simon
 Node
 Nostradamus
 Nutation
 Observatory
 Occultation
 Olbers, Heinrich W. M.
 Orbit
 Orion
 Parallax
 Penumbra
 Perigee
 Perihelion
 Perseus
 Phoebe
 Photography, Celestial
 Photometry, Celestial
 Piazzi, Giuseppe
 Pickering, E. C.
 Pisces
 Planet
 Planets, Minor
 Pleiades
 Pond, John
 Pons, Jean Louis
 Precession of the Equinoxes
 Prime Vertical
 Pritchard, Charles
 Proctor, Richard A.
 Ptolemy (Claudius)
 Quadrature
 Quetelet, L. A. Jacques
 Ramsden, Jesse
 Regiomontanus
 Reichenbach, G. von
 Repsold, Johann G.
 Retrograde
 Rheticus, or Rhaeticus
 Right Ascension
 Rittenhouse, David
 Robinson, J. T. R.
 Roemer, Ole
 Rosse, William Parsons, 3rd earl of
 Rümker, C. L. C.
 Sabine, Sir Edward
 Sacro Bosco, Johannes de (John Holywood)
 Sagitta
 Sagittarius
 Santini, Giovanni
 Satellite
 Saturn
 Schiaparelli, G. V.
 Schönfeld, Eduard
 Schröter, Johann H.
 Schumacher, H. C.
 Schwabe, Samuel H.
 Scorpio
 Secchi, Angelo
 Serpentarius or Ophiuchus
 Sextant
 Smyth, Charles Piazzi
 Solar System
 Solstice
 Somerville, Mary
 Sosigenes
 Spectroheliograph
 Star
 Stationary
 Stone, Edward Jones
 Struve, E. G. W.
 Sun
 Synodic Period
 Syzygy
 Taurus
 Telescope
 Terminator
 Three Bodies, Problem
 Tide
 Time, Measurement of
 Time, Standard
 Tisserand, F. F.
 Transit Circle, or Meridian Circle
 Trepidation
 Troughton, Edward
 Ulugh Beg
 Umbra
 Uranus
 Ursa Major
 Ursa Minor
 Venus
 Vertical
 Virgo
 Vulpecula et Anser
 Walker, Sears Cook
 Walther, Bernhard
 Zach, Baron von
 Zenith
 Zodiac
 Zodiacal Light
 Zöllner, J. K. F.




                              CHAPTER LIV
                                PHYSICS


[Sidenote: Early Ideas of the World]

More than two thousand years ago the poet Lucretius, reviewing the
physical knowledge and theories of the Greeks, described, as the
Britannica tells us, how “the world was formed by the conjunctions of
streams of atoms, which condensed into the earth, with its attendant
water, air, and aether, to form a self-contained whole,” and went on to
tell how in the changes of infinite time all possible forms of life
appeared, but only those fittest to survive persisted. Here we have an
unconscious anticipation of the nebular hypothesis and the theory of
natural selection, two of the most tremendous of modern speculations.
Four hundred years earlier Democritus, the greatest of the Greek natural
philosophers, had said: “According to convention there is a sweet and a
bitter, and according to convention there is colour. In truth there are
atoms and a void.” Democritus came near announcing the doctrines of the
indestructibility of matter and the conservation of energy, yet the
conventions which he assailed persisted for generations: colour, taste
and other qualities of a substance being regarded as of its essence and
as much realities as the substance itself. The theories of the Greeks in
fact held the field for centuries, until, during the Renaissance, men’s
minds attacked the secrets of nature in a more modern spirit. Yet, long
as has been its history, physical science, as we know it to-day, is but
a few years old, the result of the feverish activity which has been the
obsession of the generation now passing (Vol. 24, p. 396).

There are many entertaining touches in the historical account of the
development of the physical sciences with which this section of the
Britannica is enriched, for every branch of the subject has been treated
from the historical point of view. The articles, too, have been written
by masters who can describe clearly because they see clearly, and no
reader, desiring a sound knowledge of the general principles on which
science rests, and of the conclusions to which the latest investigations
have directed scientific thought, will go away empty handed.

The section of the Physical Sciences in the Britannica covers, of
course, an enormous field which for general purposes may be conveniently
divided into:—

 (_i_)  _Matter and Motion_

 (_ii_) _Sound_

 (_iii_) _Light_

 (_iv_) _Heat_

 (_v_)  _Electricity and Magnetism_

As a preliminary to any one of these and to the whole subject the reader
will be well advised to read the article SCIENCE (Vol. 24, p. 396), by
W. C. D. Whetham of Trinity College, Cambridge, author of _Recent
Development of Physical Science_; those on UNITS, PHYSICAL (Vol. 27, p.
738), and UNITS, DIMENSIONS OF (Vol. 27, p. 736), are also of
fundamental importance; and those on SPACE AND TIME (Vol. 25, p. 525),
and TIME, MEASUREMENT OF (Vol. 26, p. 983), may profitably be consulted.


                       (_I_) _Matter and Motion_

[Sidenote: Matter]

Since all physical phenomena are manifestations, in one form or other,
of matter in motion, this first division of the subject is introductory
to all the rest, and should preferably be studied first. The latest
theories in connection with the properties of MATTER (Vol. 17, p. 891)
are discussed by Sir J. J. Thomson, professor of experimental physics,
Cambridge University, who has led the way in the investigation of the
electrical theory of matter. The article is directed to the
establishment of the electronic theory, and in view of the vast amount
of original work which the author has carried out in this field, his
treatment in the Britannica should be welcome to all students of
physical science. Supplementing this are the following: ELEMENT, by
Wilhelm Ostwald (Nobel Prizeman in Chemistry, 1909), especially the
concluding remarks (Vol. 9, p. 253); ATOM (Vol. 2, p. 870); ELECTRICITY,
_Electronic Theory_ (Vol. 9, p. 192). Early hypotheses are described
under SCIENCE (Vol. 24, p. 397); MOLECULES (Vol. 18, p. 654); ALCHEMY
(Vol. 1, p. 521); and modern conceptions are discussed under LIQUID
GASES, _Cohesion_ (Vol. 16, p. 756); and SPECTROSCOPY (Vol. 25, p. 625).
Reference should also be made to the articles DENSITY (Vol. 8, p. 46);
DIFFUSION (Vol. 8, p. 255); and especially GRAVITATION (Vol. 12, p.
384), by Professor Poynting of the University of Birmingham, and AETHER
(Vol. 1, p. 292), by Sir Joseph Larmor, secretary of the Royal Society.

[Sidenote: Motion]

The principal articles dealing with motion are: MOTION, LAWS OF (Vol.
18, p. 906), which deals mainly with Newton’s Laws; and ENERGY (Vol. 9,
p. 398), and ENERGETICS (Vol. 9, p. 390), both by Sir Joseph Larmor. Of
as great importance from the physical point of view are WAVE (Vol. 28,
p. 424), the part of the article MECHANICS dealing with simple harmonic
motion (Vol. 17, p. 975) and elliptic harmonic motion (p. 978), and
HARMONIC ANALYSIS (Vol. 12, p. 956), all by Professor Lamb of the
University of Manchester. Other articles which should be consulted are
CAPILLARY ACTION (Vol. 5, p. 256), and PERPETUAL MOTION (Vol. 21, p.
180).


                             (_II_) _Sound_

The main article SOUND (Vol. 25, p. 437) is by Prof. J. H. Poynting of
the University of Birmingham, and very completely covers the subject;
the reader will, however, wish to refer to several other articles for
supplementary information. Thus in the article HEARING (Vol. 13, p.
124), the range of audibility is discussed (see also TARTINI, Vol. 26,
p. 436, for an account of Tartini’s tones), while with regard to quality
of tone the reader will find suggestive matter under VIOLIN (Vol. 28, p.
104). An account of experiments in balloons on the propagation of sound,
will be found (Vol. 1, p. 267) under AERONAUTICS. Reference should also
be made to the articles WAVE (Vol. 28, p. 425), ELASTICITY, _Vibrations
and Waves_ (Vol. 9, p. 158), and HARMONIC ANALYSIS (Vol. 12, p. 956) for
a discussion of the form of sound waves. For applications of the
principles of sound production, see also the articles PHONOGRAPH (Vol.
21, p. 467), GRAMOPHONE (Vol. 12, p. 333), and especially STRINGED
INSTRUMENTS (Vol. 25, p. 1038), WIND INSTRUMENTS (Vol. 28, p. 709), and
other articles on musical instruments (see the chapter on _Music_ in
this Guide). For accounts of the researches of KUNDT (Vol. 15, p. 946),
LAGRANGE (Vol. 16, p. 75) and STOKES (Vol. 25, p. 951), see those
articles.


                            (_III_) _Light_

The main article LIGHT (Vol. 16, p. 608) is in four parts. The
_Introductory_ and _Historical_ sections are by C. Everitt; that on the
_Nature_ of Light by Professor Lorentz of the University of Leiden; that
on its _Velocity_ by the late Simon Newcomb, the eminent American
astronomer. The different phenomena connected with the subject may
conveniently be grouped and studied as follows:—

(a) COLOUR (Vol. 6, p. 728); Intensity, see PHOTOMETRY (Vol. 21, p.
525), a brilliant article by Prof. H. H. Turner, of Oxford University;
ILLUMINATION (Vol. 14, p. 320).

(b) REFLECTION OF LIGHT (Vol. 23, p. 2); ABSORPTION (Vol. 1, p. 76);
REFRACTION (Vol. 23, p. 25); DISPERSION (Vol. 8, p. 315); INTERFERENCE
(Vol. 14, p. 685); POLARIZATION OF LIGHT (Vol. 21, p. 932).

(c) SHADOW (Vol. 24, p. 738); DIFFRACTION (Vol. 8, p. 238); CALORESCENCE
(Vol. 5, p. 60); FLUORESCENCE (Vol. 10, p. 375); PHOSPHORESCENCE (Vol.
21, p. 476).

(d) MIRROR (Vol. 18, p. 575); LENS (Vol. 16, p. 421); CAUSTIC (Vol. 5,
p. 558); ABERRATION (Vol. 1, p. 54).

(e) CORONA (Vol. 7, p. 184); HALO (Vol. 12, p. 864); MIRAGE (Vol. 18, p.
573); RAINBOW (Vol. 22, p. 861); SKY (Vol. 25, p. 202); TWILIGHT (Vol.
26, p. 492)—see also DUST (Vol. 8, p. 713).

(f) TELESCOPE (Vol. 26, p. 557); MICROSCOPE (Vol. 18, p. 392); OBJECTIVE
(Vol. 19, p. 948); CAMERA LUCIDA (Vol. 5, p. 104); CAMERA OBSCURA (Vol.
5, p. 104); BINOCULAR INSTRUMENT (Vol. 3, p. 949); STEREOSCOPE (Vol. 25,
p. 895).

(g) VISION (Vol. 28, p. 130).

Far reaching developments are described in PHOTOGRAPHY (Vol. 21, p. 485)
and SPECTROSCOPY (Vol. 25, p. 619). In the former article Sir W. de W.
Abney describes in great detail photographic _Processes_; Major-General
Waterhouse, _Apparatus_ and _Lenses_, while A. H. Hinton discusses the
_Pictorial_ aspect of the subject. There are also valuable articles on
CELESTIAL PHOTOGRAPHY (Vol. 21, p. 523), by Professor Turner, and on the
SPECTROHELIOGRAPH (Vol. 25, p. 618), by the inventor, G. E. Hale,
director of the Solar Observatory of the Carnegie Institution at Mount
Wilson, Cal. The relation between magnetism and light is discussed in an
article MAGNETO-OPTICS (Vol. 17, p. 388), by Sir J. J. Thomson.


                             (_IV_) _Heat_

The treatment of this subject in the Encyclopaedia Britannica has been
generally organized by Prof. H. L. Callendar, of the Royal College of
Science, London, who was designated by Lord Kelvin as his successor in
this department of the work. In pursuing the subject the following order
may conveniently be followed:

(a) HEAT (Vol. 13, p. 135), THERMOMETRY (Vol. 26, p. 821), CALORIMETRY
(Vol. 5, p. 60), and THERMODYNAMICS (Vol. 26, p. 808), all by Professor
Callendar; COLD (Vol. 6, p. 663).

(b) CONDUCTION OF HEAT (Vol. 6, p. 890); RADIATION, THEORY OF (Vol. 22,
p. 785); RADIOMETER (Vol. 22, p. 806).

(c) FUSION (Vol. 11, p. 369); VAPORIZATION (Vol. 27, p. 897);
CONDENSATION OF GASES (Vol. 6, p. 844); LIQUID GASES (Vol. 16, p. 744);
THERMOELECTRICITY (Vol. 26, p. 814).


                   (_V_) _Electricity and Magnetism_

[Sidenote: Historical]

We are so accustomed to think of electricity as the peculiar possession
of our own age (the first crude attempts at an electric light were only
two score years ago) that we are apt to forget that the first
experiments in the science were made at least 2500 years ago. The first
effort to place it on a true experimental and inductive basis dates back
more than three centuries to the publication of the researches of
WILLIAM GILBERT (see Vol. 12, p. 9), the most distinguished man of
science of his time, whom Queen Elizabeth appointed her private
physician at the “usual” salary of £100. A hundred years later, VOLTA
(Vol. 28, p. 198), who might be called the patron saint of electricity,
produced the first electric current with the pile which bears his name.
Meanwhile BENJAMIN FRANKLIN (Vol. 11, p. 30) had been experimenting with
his famous kite, and CAVENDISH (Vol. 5, p. 580) and COULOMB (Vol. 7, p.
508) had been paving the way for the startling developments which
resulted from Volta’s invention. In the 19th century FARADAY (Vol. 10,
p. 173), AMPÈRE (Vol. 1, p. 878), OHM (Vol. 20, p. 34), LORD KELVIN
(Vol. 15, p. 721), JAMES CLERK MAXWELL (Vol. 17, p. 929) and other
brilliant investigators in rapid succession developed the field, until
the science and application of electricity have attained a position
absolutely dominating our daily life.

[Sidenote: Analysis of the Subject]

The section of the Britannica treating this great subject is therefore
one of the most important in the whole work, and it was in the fullest
recognition of the fact that the editor asked Prof. J. A. Fleming, of
the University of London, famous for his original work in both the
mathematical and the experimental branches of the science, to organize
the sections for the new edition. The ground is generally covered in the
four articles, on electricity, electrostatics, electrokinetics, and
electromagnetism, all contributed by Prof. Fleming himself. The article
ELECTRICITY (Vol. 9, p. 179) is the key article to the subject, and
should be read first. The two great branches of electrical theory then
follow: (a) ELECTROSTATICS (Vol. 9, p. 240), in connection with which
the article ELECTRICAL MACHINE (Vol. 9, p. 176) should also be studied,
with reference to ELECTROSCOPE (Vol. 9, p. 239) and ELECTROPHORUS (Vol.
9, p. 237). (b) ELECTROKINETICS (Vol. 9, p. 210) and, supplementing it,
CONDUCTION, ELECTRIC (Vol. 6, p. 855). The latter is divided into three
parts: (i.) _Conduction in Solids_, by Prof. Fleming; (ii.) _Conduction
in Liquids_ by W. C. D. Whetham; (iii.) _Conduction in Gases_, by Sir J.
J. Thomson. In connection with (ii.) should be read ELECTROLYSIS (Vol.
9, p. 217), by W. C. D. Whetham, and with (iii.) RÖNTGEN RAYS (Vol. 23,
p. 694) and VACUUM TUBE (Vol. 27, p. 834), both by Sir J. J. Thomson,
whose article ELECTRIC WAVES (Vol. 9, p. 203) is of fundamental
importance. The general principles of electrical engineering are set out
in the article ELECTRIC SUPPLY (Vol. 9, p. 193) with reference to DYNAMO
(Vol. 8, p. 764); MOTORS, ELECTRIC (Vol. 18, p. 910); TRANSFORMERS (Vol.
27, p. 173); ACCUMULATOR (Vol. 1, p. 126); POWER TRANSMISSION,
_Electric_ (Vol. 22, p. 233); TRACTION, _Electric Traction_ (Vol. 27, p.
120); LIGHTING, _Electric_ (Vol. 16, p. 659); see also ELECTROCHEMISTRY
(Vol. 9, p. 208) and ELECTROMETALLURGY (Vol. 9, p. 232); TELEGRAPH (Vol.
26, p. 510); TELEPHONE (Vol. 26, p. 547).

A bridge to MAGNETISM (Vol. 17, p. 321), an article by Shelford Bidwell,
former president of the Physical Society, is the article
ELECTROMAGNETISM (Vol. 9, p. 226), by Prof. Fleming. This article leads
also to the study of manifestations in nature of electricity and
magnetism: see the articles ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY (Vol. 2, p. 860);
AURORA POLARIS (Vol. 2, p. 927); EARTH CURRENTS (Vol. 8, p. 813); and
MAGNETISM, TERRESTRIAL (Vol. 17, p. 353); and to the applications of its
principles in the COMPASS (Vol. 6, p. 804).

An alphabetical list of the articles in the Britannica on the subjects
treated in this chapter is given below. The biographies of distinguished
physicists, included in the list, are valuable as containing accounts of
their contributions to science, and are full of human interest.


ARTICLES ON THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES IN THE BRITANNICA, INCLUDING THOSE ON
                           FAMOUS PHYSICISTS

 Aberration
 Absorption of Light
 Accumulator
 Achromatism
 Acoustics
 Acre
 Actinometer
 Adhesion
 Aepinus, F. U. T.
 Aether, or Ether
 Aggregation
 Agonic Lines
 Aldini, Giovanni
 Alhazen
 Amontons, Guillaume
 Ampère, A. M.
 Amperemeter or Ammeter
 Anderson, John
 Angström, A. J. and K. J.
 Aperture
 Arago, D. F. J.
 Armature
 Arnaldus de Villa Nova
 Arrhenius, S. A.
 As
 Atmospheric Electricity
 Atwood, George
 Auncel
 Avogadro, Amedeo
 Avoirdupois
 Ayrton, W. E.
 Bache, Alexander D.
 Baker, Henry
 Balance
 Barleycorn
 Barometer
 Barometric Light
 Barrel
 Battery
 Beccaria, G. B.
 Becquerel (family)
 Bell, A. Graham
 Binocular Instrument
 Biot, Jean Baptiste
 Boyle, Robert
 Brewster, Sir David
 Bushel
 Cagniard de la Tour, C.
 Calibration
 Calorescence
 Calorimetry
 Camera Lucida
 Camera Obscura
 Canton, John
 Capillary Action
 Carat
 Carnot, Sadi N. L.
 Carucate
 Caustic
 Cavallo, Tiberius
 Cinematograph
 Claudet, A. F. J.
 Clausius, Rudolf J. E.
 Cold
 Colour
 Compass
 Condensation of Gases
 Conduction, Electric
 Conduction of Heat
 Cornu, Marie Alfred
 Coulomb, C. A.
 Curie, Pierre
 Cyclometer
 Daguerre, L. J. M.
 Dallmeyer, John Henry
 De la Rive, A. A.
 Della Porta, G. Battista
 Demijohn
 Density
 Diamagnetism
 Dielectric
 Diffraction of Light
 Diffusion
 Dimension
 Dispersion
 Dolland, John
 Duhamel, J. B.
 Dynamo
 Earth Currents
 Edison, T. A.
 Electrical or Electrostatic Machine
 Electricity
 Electricity Supply
 Electric Waves
 Electrochemistry
 Electrokinetics
 Electrolysis
 Electromagnetism
 Electrometallurgy
 Electrometer
 Electron
 Electrophorus
 Electroplating
 Electroscope
 Electrostatics
 Electrotyping
 Energetics
 Energy
 Erman, Paul
 Fahrenheit, G. D.
 Fathom
 Fizeau, A. H. L.
 Fluorescence
 Forbes, James David
 Forman, Simon
 Foucault, J. B. L.
 Fraunhofer, J. von
 Fresnel, Augustin J.
 Furlong
 Fusion
 Fuze, or Fuse
 Gallon
 Galvanometer
 Geissler, Heinrich
 Gibbs, J. W.
 Gilbert, or Gylberde, W.
 Glaisher, James
 Graduation
 Gramophone
 Gravitation
 Gray, Elisha
 Grove, Sir William R.
 Guericke, Otto von
 Harris, Sir W. S.
 Hearing
 Heat
 Heliostat
 Helmholtz, H. L. F. von
 Henry, Joseph
 Hertz, Heinrich R.
 Hogshead
 Hooke, Robert
 Hopkinson, John
 Hour-glass
 Hughes, D. E.
 Hydrometer
 Hypsometer
 Hysteresis
 Illumination
 Inch
 Inclinometer
 Induction Coil
 Interference of Light
 Jablochkov, Paul
 Joule, J. P.
 Kaleidoscope
 Kater, Henry
 Kelvin, 1st baron
 Kirchhoff, G. R.
 König, K. R.
 Kundt, A. A. E. E.
 Lambert, J. H.
 Langley, S. P.
 Lantern
 Lens
 Leyden Jar, or Condenser
 Lichtenberg, G. C.
 Light
 Lighting
 Lightning Conductor
 Liquid Gases
 Lodge, Sir Oliver J.
 Magnetism
 Magnetism, Terrestrial
 Magnetograph
 Magnetometer
 Magneto-Optics
 Malus, E. L.
 Manometer
 Mariotte, Edme
 Marum, Martin van
 Matter
 Matteucci, Carlo
 Maxwell, J. Clerk
 Mayer, Julius R.
 Melloni, Macedonio
 Meter, Electric
 Metric System
 Michell, John
 Microscope
 Mirror
 Model
 Molecule
 Morgen
 Morse, S. F. B.
 Motion, Laws of
 Motors, Electric
 Musschenbroek, P. van
 Neckam, A.
 Nicholson, W.
 Nicol, William
 Niepce, J. Nicéphore
 Nobili, Leopoldo
 Nollet, Jean Antoine
 Objective, or Object Glass
 Ohm, Georg Simon
 Ohmmeter
 Olmsted, Denison
 Optics
 Oscillograph
 Ounce
 Papin, Denis
 Peck
 Peltier, J. C. A.
 Permeability, Magnetic
 Permeameter
 Perpetual Motion
 Phonograph
 Phosphorescence
 Photography
 Photometry
 Pint
 Plateau, J. A. F.
 Pneumatics
 Poggendorff, J. C.
 Polarity
 Polarization of Light
 Pood
 Potentiometer
 Pound
 Power Transmission
 Prévost, Pierre
 Pyrometer
 Radiation, Theory of
 Radiometer
 Rayleigh, Lord
 Reflection of Light
 Refraction
 Rod
 Röntgen Rays
 Röntgen, W. K.
 Rowland, Henry A.
 Rumford, Count
 Saussure, H. B. de
 Science
 Shadow
 Siemens, E. Werner von
 Sky
 Sound
 Space and Time
 Spectacles
 Spectroscopy
 Speculum
 Spherometer
 Standard
 Stereoscope
 Stewart, Balfour
 Sun or Photo Copying
 Swan, Sir Joseph W.
 Tait, Peter G.
 Talbot, W. H. Fox
 Talent
 Tartini, G.
 Telegraph
 Telephone
 Thermodynamics
 Thermoelectricity
 Thermometry
 Thomson, James
 Torricelli, E.
 Transformers
 Trumpet, Speaking and Hearing
 Tyndall, John
 Units, Dimensions of
 Units, Physical
 Vacuum Tube
 Vaporization
 Vision
 Volta, Alessandro
 Voltmeter
 Wattmeter
 Wave
 Weber, W. E.
 Weighing Machines
 Weights and Measures
 Wheatstone’s Bridge
 Wheatstone, Sir Chas.
 Wiedemann, G. H.
 Young, Thomas




                               CHAPTER LV
                               CHEMISTRY


We have traveled far since Chemistry had as its simple basis four
elements: fire, air, water, and earth, regarded as perfect and complete
since they embody every essence of which a body was supposedly capable:
for fire was hot and dry; air, hot and wet; water, cold and wet; earth,
cold and dry. We have outlived the belief in the philosopher’s stone
which animated the Middle Ages. Yet these fallacies are but
manifestations of the effort—old as thought—to reduce the manifoldness
of matter to primordial elements, from which, in one form or other,
every substance should be capable of being built up. The ultimate
problem of chemistry is, therefore, the constitution of matter, and the
fight around this is waged on the marches of the physical and chemical
sciences.

[Sidenote: Triumphs of Chemistry]

The great commercial triumphs of chemistry are, of course, those due to
the conquest of waste, to the utilization of by-products which for
thousands of years had been regarded as useless. We are all familiar
with the uses to which the by-products of coal-tar are put; we swallow
one derivative to relieve headache, we may sugar our tea and flavour our
ice-cream with others; with one derivative we clean our clothes which
have been dyed with others; and we disinfect them with yet another.
Phenacetin, saccharin, synthetic vanilla, benzine, naphthaline, analine
dyes, carbolic acid, are only a few of the many substances won to the
consumer by the chemist in his laboratory; and this is only one field of
research. The chemist is always busy (as now with rubber, camphor,
etc.), working at the synthesis of natural products in the hope that he
will be able to find a means of manufacturing them in quantities at a
cost which will make them, commercially possible, and thus lessen the
drain on the world’s natural supply. In almost every detail of our lives
this science enters so familiarly that we forget that the many things
made possible by the chemist do not simply “happen,” but are the result
of laborious research in the laboratory.

It is not possible to attain proficiency in any experimental science
without laboratory work; but to the student of chemistry the lucid and
original articles in the Britannica will provide a most useful
commentary on his work with test-tube and burner. The general reader
will find in these articles an admirable survey of the subject, and of
its bearings on problems of daily life. The main article CHEMISTRY (Vol.
6, p. 33) generally covers the ground, and serves as an introduction to
separate articles on important divisions of the subject. Following its
arrangement the scheme outlined below suggests a useful course of
reading.

(i.) Chemistry, _History_ (Vol. 6, p. 33). Supplementary to this section
are the articles ALCHEMY (Vol. 1, p. 519), ELEMENT (Vol. 9, p. 253),
MOLECULE (Vol. 18, p. 654), ATOM (Vol. 2, p. 870); and reference may
also be made to MEDICINE, _Iatro-chemical School_ (Vol. 18, p. 50).

(ii.) Chemistry, _General Principles_ (Vol. 6, p. 39), with reference to
VALENCY (Vol. 27, p. 847), CHEMICAL ACTION (Vol. 6, p. 26), CATALYSIS
(Vol. 5, p. 501), ISOMERISM (Vol. 14, p. 881), STEREO-ISOMERISM (Vol.
25, p. 890), RADIOACTIVITY (Vol. 22, p. 793).

(iii.) _Inorganic Chemistry_ (Vol. 6, p. 44). See also ACID (Vol. 1, p.
145), ALKALI (Vol. 1, p. 674), and the list of 138 elements and
compounds under this heading below.

(iv.) _Organic Chemistry_ (Vol. 6, p. 47), with all the 240 articles
enumerated under this heading below, especially that on POLYMETHYLENES
(Vol. 22, p. 29); see also EXPLOSIVES (Vol. 10, p. 81).

(v.) _Analytical Chemistry_ (Vol. 6, p. 60), with which may be
consulted, BLOW PIPE (Vol. 4, p. 89), DISTILLATION (Vol. 8, p. 318),
ELECTROLYSIS (Vol. 9, p. 217), INDICATOR (Vol. 14, p. 482), SOLUTION
(Vol. 25, p. 368), STOICHIOMETRY (Vol. 25, p. 939).

(vi.) _Physical Chemistry_ (Vol. 6, p. 65) supplemented by ENERGETICS
(Vol. 9, p. 390), CHEMICAL ACTION (Vol. 6, p. 26), THERMOCHEMISTRY (Vol.
26, p. 804), SOLUTION (Vol. 25, p. 368), DISTILLATION (Vol. 8, p. 318),
CONDENSATION OF GASES (Vol. 6, p. 844), with the important articles
PHOTOCHEMISTRY (Vol. 21, p. 484), ELECTROCHEMISTRY (Vol. 9, p. 208),
METALLURGY (Vol. 18, p. 203), ELECTROMETALLURGY (Vol. 9, p. 232),
ASSAYING (Vol. 2, p. 776).

Among the contributors to the chemical department of the Britannica are:
Professor Ernest Rutherford, of the University of Manchester; Walter
Nernst, professor of physical chemistry in the University of Berlin; W.
C. D. Whetham, author of _Theory of Solution_, etc.; Prof. James Walker
of the University of Edinburgh; Johannes Diderik van der Waals,
professor of physics, University of Amsterdam; W. R. E. Hodgkinson,
professor of chemistry and physics, Ordnance College, Woolwich, perhaps
the greatest living authority on explosives.

The following is a classified list of the articles on Chemistry which
are contained in the Britannica. For discussions of the application of
chemistry to photography, the reader should consult the article
PHOTOGRAPHY (Vol. 21, p. 485), of which the chemical section is by Sir
W. de W. Abney, adviser in Science to the English Board of Education.


                           CHEMISTRY—GENERAL

 Affinity, Chemical
 Alchemy
 Alembic
 Allotropy
 Amorphism
 Analysis
 Assaying
 Atmolysis
 Atom
 Blowpipe
 Catalysis
 Chemical Action
 Chemistry
 Combustion
 Condenser
 Crystallization
 Decolourizing
 Desiccation
 Dialysis
 Dissociation
 Distillation
 Electrochemistry
 Electrolysis
 Element
 Elixir
 Equivalent
 Explosives
 Flame
 Formula
 Gas
 Hydrolysis
 Iatrochemistry
 Indicator
 Isomerism
 Matrass
 Molecule
 Photochemistry
 Pigments
 Pyrophorus
 Radioactivity
 Solution
 Stereochemistry
 Stereo-isomerism
 Stoichiometry
 Thermochemistry
 Valency


                          INORGANIC CHEMISTRY

 Acid
 Algaroth, Powder of
 Alkali
 Alkali Manufacture
 Alkaline Earths
 Alum
 Aluminium
 Amalgam
 Ammonia
 Antimony
 Argon
 Arsenic
 Azoimide, or Hydrazoic Acid
 Azoth
 Barium
 Base
 Beryllium, or Glucinum
 Bichromates and Chromates
 Bismuth
 Bittern
 Borax
 Boric Acid, or Boracic Acid
 Boron
 Brimstone
 Bromine
 Cadmium
 Caesium
 Calcium
 Calomel
 Carbide
 Carbon
 Carbonates
 Carbon Bisulphide
 Carbonic Acid
 Carborundum
 Caustic
 Cerium
 Charcoal
 Chlorates
 Chlorine
 Chromium
 Cobalt
 Colcothar
 Columbium, or Niobium
 Copper
 Copperas
 Corrosive Sublimate
 Didymium
 Earth
 Epsom Salts
 Erbium
 Europium
 Fluorine
 Gadolinium
 Gallium
 Germanium
 Glauber’s Salt
 Glucinum
 Gold
 Gunpowder
 Halogens
 Hartshorn, Spirits of
 Helium
 Hydrate
 Hydrazine
 Hydrochloric Acid
 Hydrogen
 Hydroxylamine
 Hyposulphite of Soda
 Ice
 Indium
 Iodine
 Iron
 Kelp
 Kermes
 Lamp-black
 Lanthanum
 Lead
 Lime
 Lithium
 Magnesium
 Manganese
 Mercury
 Microcosmic Salt
 Molybdenum
 Nickel
 Niobium
 Nitre
 Nitric Acid
 Nitrogen
 Ochres
 Orpiment
 Osmium
 Oxide
 Oxygen
 Oxyhydrogen Flame
 Ozone
 Palladium
 Phosphates
 Phosphorus
 Plaster of Paris
 Platinum
 Potashes
 Potassium
 Radium
 Rare Earths
 Rhodium
 Rouge
 Rubidium
 Rust
 Ruthenium
 Sal Ammoniac
 Salt
 Saltpetre
 Samarium
 Scandium
 Schlippe’s Salt
 Selenium
 Silica
 Silicon
 Silver
 Sodium
 Steam
 Strontium
 Sulphur
 Sulphuric Acid
 Tantalum
 Tellurium
 Terbium
 Thallium
 Thorium
 Tin
 Titanium
 Tungsten
 Ultramarine
 Umber
 Uranium
 Vanadium
 Vermilion
 Vitriol
 Ytterbium (Neo-ytterbium)
 Yttrium
 Zinc
 Zirconium


                           ORGANIC CHEMISTRY

 Acenaphthene
 Acetic Acid
 Aceto-acetic Ester
 Acetone
 Acetophenone
 Acetylene
 Acid Amides
 Acridine
 Adenine
 Adipocere
 Albumin, or Albumen
 Alcohol
 Alcohols
 Aldehydes
 Alizarin
 Alkahest
 Alkaloid
 Alkanet
 Allantoin
 Alloxan
 Alloxantin
 Allyl Alcohol
 Amidines
 Amines
 Amygdalin
 Amyl Alcohols
 Amyl Nitrate
 Aniline
 Anthracene
 Anthraquinone
 Antipyrine
 Argol
 Asparagine
 Azo Compounds
 Azoximes
 Benzaldehyde
 Benzene
 Benzidine
 Benzoic Acid
 Benzoin
 Benzophenone
 Benzyl Alcohol
 Berberine
 Betaïne
 Brucine
 Butyl Alcohols
 Butyric Acid
 Caffeine
 Camphors
 Carbazol
 Carbohydrate
 Carbolic Acid, or Phenol
 Carvacrol
 Cellulose
 Chloral
 Chloroform
 Chlorophyll
 Chlorpicrin
 Chrysene
 Cinnamic Acid
 Cinnolin
 Citric Acid
 Coal-tar
 Cocaine
 Collodion
 Conine
 Coumarin
 Coumarones
 Creosote
 Cresols
 Crotonic Acid
 Cyanamide
 Cyanic Acid and Cyanates
 Cyanide
 Cyanogen
 Cytisine
 Dextrine
 Diazo Compounds
 Diphenyl
 Durene
 Dynamite
 Ecgonine
 Erythrite
 Esters
 Ether
 Ethers
 Ethyl
 Ethyl chloride
 Ethylene
 Eugenol
 Eupion
 Flavin
 Fluoranthene
 Fluorene
 Fluorescein
 Formalin, or Formaldehyde
 Formic Acid
 Fructose, or Fruit-sugar
 Fuchsine
 Fulminic Acid
 Fumaric and Maleic Acids
 Furazanes
 Furfurane, or Furane
 Fusel Oil
 Gallic Acid
 Gelatin or Gelatine
 Glucose
 Glucoside
 Glutaric Acid
 Glycerin
 Glycols
 Guanidine
 Guncotton
 Hippuric Acid
 Hydantoin
 Hydracrylic Acid
 Hydrastine
 Hydrazone
 Hydrocarbon
 Imidazoles or Glyoxalines
 Indazoles, or Glyoxalines
 Indazoles
 Indene
 Indigo
 Indole
 Indulines
 Inulin
 Iodoform
 Isatin
 Isoxazoles
 Ketenes
 Ketones
 Lactic Acid
 Lactones
 Laevulinic Acid
 Litmus
 Malic Acid
 Malonic Acid
 Mandelic Acid
 Marsh Gas
 Mellitic Acid
 Mercaptans
 Mesoxalic Acid
 Methyl Alcohol
 Mucic Acid
 Murexide
 Mustard Oils
 Naphtha
 Naphthalene
 Naphthols
 Naphthylamines
 Nicotine
 Nitrobenzene
 Nitro Compounds
 Nitroglycerin
 Olefine
 Oleic Acid
 Orcin
 Oxalic Acid
 Oxazoles
 Oximes
 Palmitic Acid
 Paraffin
 Paraldehyde
 Phenacetin
 Phenanthrene
 Phenazine
 Phenolphthalein
 Phthalazines
 Phthalic Acids
 Picene
 Picric Acid
 Pilocarpine
 Piperazin
 Piperine
 Piperonal
 Polymethylenes
 Primuline
 Propiolic Acid
 Propyl Alcohols
 Prussic Acid
 Purin
 Pyrazines
 Pyrazoles
 Pyrene
 Pyridine
 Pyrimidines
 Pyrocatechin
 Pyrogallol
 Pyrones
 Pyrrol
 Pyruvic Acid
 Quercitron
 Quinazolines
 Quinoline
 Quinones
 Quinoxalines
 Resorcin
 Retene
 Saccharic Acid
 Saccharin
 Safranine
 Salicylic Acid
 Stearic Acid
 Styrolene
 Succinic Acid
 Sugar
 Sulphonal
 Sulphonic Acids
 Tannin or Tannic Acid
 Tar
 Tartar
 Tartaric Acid
 Terpenes
 Tetrazines
 Tetrazoles
 Thiazines
 Thiazoles
 Thiophen
 Thymol
 Toluene
 Triazines
 Triazoles
 Triphenylmethane
 Tropine
 Urea, or Carbamide
 Urethane
 Uric Acid
 Urotropin
 Valeric Acid
 Verdigris
 Veronal
 Xanthic Acid
 Xanthone
 Xylene


                              BIOGRAPHIES

 Abel, Sir Frederick A.
 Achard, F. C.
 Andrews, Thomas
 Baeyer, Adolf von
 Balard, Antoine J.
 Baumé, Antoine
 Becher, J. J.
 Bell, Jacob
 Bergman, Torbern Olof
 Berthelot, M. P. E.
 Berthollet, C. L.
 Berzelius, J. J.
 Black, Joseph
 Boussingault
 Brande, William Thomas
 Brown, S. M.
 Bunsen, R. W. von
 Calvert, F. Crace
 Cannizzaro, Stanislao
 Cavendish, Henry
 Chevreul, M. E.
 Clark, Thomas
 Crookes, Sir William
 Dalton, John
 Daniell, John F.
 Davy, Sir Humphry
 Dewar, Sir James
 Döbereiner, J. W.
 Dulong, Pierre Louis
 Dumas, J. B. A.
 Erdmann, Otto Linné
 Fehling, Hermann von
 Fischer, Emil
 Fittig, Rudolf
 Flamel, Nicolas
 Fourcroy, A. F., de
 Frankland, Sir Edward
 Frémy, Edmond
 Fresenius, Karl R.
 Friedel, Charles
 Fuchs, Johann N. von
 Gannal, J. N.
 Gay-Lussac, J. L.
 Geber
 Geoffroy, E. F.
 Gerhardt, Charles F.
 Gibbs, Oliver Wolcott
 Gilbert, Sir Joseph H.
 Gladstone, John Hall
 Glaser, Christopher
 Glauber, Johann R.
 Gmelin (family)
 Graham, Thomas
 Guimet, Jean B.
 Guyton de Morveau
 Harcourt, W. Vernon
 Helmont, Jean B. van
 Henry, William
 Hofmann, A. W. von
 Homberg, William
 Kekulé, F. August
 Klaproth, M. H.
 Kolbe, A. W. Hermann
 Kopp, Hermann F. M.
 Kunkel von Lowenstjern
 Lavoisier, A. L.
 LeBlanc, Nicolas
 Lemery, Nicolas
 Liebig, J. von, baron
 Lunge, Georg
 Magnus, H. G.
 Marggraf, Andreas S.
 Marignac, J. C. G. de
 Mayow, John
 Mendeléeff, Dmitri I.
 Meyer, J. Lothar
 Meyer, Victor
 Mitscherlich, E.
 Mohr, K. Friedrich
 Moissan, Henri
 Mond, Ludwig
 Murray, John
 Muspratt, J. and J. S.
 Newlands, John A. R.
 Nobel, Alfred B.
 Pasteur, Louis
 Pelouze, T. Jules
 Perkin, Sir W. H.
 Pettenkofer, M. J. von
 Plattner, K. F.
 Priestley, Joseph
 Proust, Joseph Louis
 Prout, William
 Ramsay, Sir William
 Raoult, François M.
 Regnault, H. V.
 Richter, J. B.
 Roebuck, John
 Roscoe, Sir H. E.
 Rose (family)
 Rouelle, G. F.
 Sainte-Claire Deville
 Scheele, K. W.
 Schönbein, C. F.
 Schützenberger, P.
 Silliman, Benjamin
 Stahl, G. E.
 Stas, J. S.
 Tennant, Charles
 Tennant, Smithson
 Thénard, L. J.
 Thomsen, Julius
 Thomson, Thomas
 Van’t Hoff, J. H.
 Vauquelin, L. N.
 Weldon, Walter
 Wenzel, K. F.
 Williamson, A. W.
 Wislicenus, J.
 Wöhler, Friedrich
 Wollaston, W. H.
 Wurtz, C. A.
 Young, James




                              CHAPTER LVI
                                GEOLOGY


[Sidenote: The Province Geology or Sermons in Stones]

Shakespeare tells us that “there are sermons in stones.” No science,
except possibly astronomy, appeals more to the imagination or carries
one further away from our present workaday world than geology. While
geology “claims as its peculiar territory the rocky framework of the
globe,” its object is, says the Encyclopaedia Britannica (Vol. 11, p.
638) “to trace the structural progress of our planet from the earliest
beginnings of its separate existence through its various stages of
growth down to the present condition of things.” It goes back millions
and hundreds of millions of years to the first beginnings of things and
unravels complicated processes by which the earth and each of the
continents on it has been built up.

“It follows, even into detail, the varied sculpture of mountain and
valley, crag and ravine.” It shows “that the present races of plants and
animals are the descendants of other and very different races which once
peopled the earth. It teaches that there has been a progressive
development of the inhabitants.” Dead and cold though the rocks seem,
they are filled, to one who can read their secret, with the tragedy of
past life. Parts of Florida are but the graves where millions of corals,
now crushed into massive limestone, once lived and died; the coal of
Pennsylvania tells of ferns and other terrestrial plants matted together
into a bed whence they originally grew; “the snails and lizards which
lived and died within a hollow tree, the insects which have been
imprisoned within the exuding resin of old forests, the footprints of
birds and quadrupeds, the trails of worms left upon former shores—these
and innumerable other pieces of evidence” tell of the tragedies of
former times and “enable the geologist to realize in some measure what
the faunas and floras of successive periods have been.”

The foundation for the study of the whole subject in the Britannica is
the article GEOLOGY (Vol. 11, p. 638), equivalent to 125 pages of this
Guide. It is by the highest authority in the world, Sir Archibald
Geikie, long director general of the Geological Survey of the United
Kingdom, and director of the Museum of Practical Geology, London. It
deals with the general principles and gives an outline of the subject
matter of the science. In particular it treats of,

_The historical development of geological science_;

 _The cosmical aspects of geology_;
 _Geognosy_;
 _Dynamical Geology_;
 _Geotectonic or Structural Geology_;
 _Palaeontological Geology_;
 _Stratigraphical Geology_;
 _Physiographical Geology_.

[Sidenote: Age of the Earth]

While the student will doubtless be interested equally in each of these
departments, the general reader will be especially interested in the
historical development which—it is worthy of note—is almost the only
concise account of geological history hitherto published in English.
Especially interesting is the question, fully discussed, of the age of
the earth. Lord Kelvin (Vol. 11, p. 653) declared some few years ago
that the time “was more than twenty and less than forty millions of
years and probably much nearer twenty than forty.” But the trend of
later investigations, and especially the study of radio-activity, has
led to the belief that the period must have been much longer. Sir
Archibald Geikie sums up the evidence as follows (Vol. 11, p. 653): “In
the present state of science it is out of our power to state positively
what must be the lowest limit of the age of the earth, but we cannot
assume it to be less, and it may possibly have been much more than one
hundred millions of years.”

[Sidenote: Geological Formations]

The general reader will find of interest, too, the table (Vol. 11, p.
670) representing the geological record or order of succession of the
formations of the earth’s crusts from the earliest Archean, through
Cambrian, Silurian, Devonian and Carboniferous to the Post-glacial or
Human of to-day. A separate article is to be found on each of these
different formations, namely: ARCHEAN (Vol. 2, p. 360); CAMBRIAN (Vol.
5, p. 86); SILURIAN (Vol. 25, p. 109); DEVONIAN (Vol. 8, p. 124);
CARBONIFEROUS (Vol. 5, p. 309); PERMIAN (Vol. 21, p. 176); TRIASSIC
(Vol. 27, p. 258); JURASSIC (Vol. 15, p. 567); CRETACEOUS (Vol. 7, p.
414); EOCENE (Vol. 9, p. 661); OLIGOCENE (Vol. 20, p. 81); MIOCENE (Vol.
18, p. 565); PLIOCENE (Vol. 21, p. 846); PLEISTOCENE (Vol. 21, p. 835);
Recent, Post-glacial or Human under article QUATERNARY (Vol. 22, p.
718).

Full local geological information is found in geographical articles.
See, for instance, in the article UNITED STATES, the section on
_Geology_ (Vol. 27, pp. 624–632), by Professors R. D. Salisbury and T.
C. Chamberlin of the University of Chicago; the section _Geology_ in the
article ENGLAND (Vol. 9, pp. 415–416), by H. R. Mill, editor of _The
International Geography_; the section _Geology_ in the article AFRICA
(Vol. 1, pp. 323–325), by Walcot Gibson, author of _Mineral Wealth of
Africa_, etc. These special treatments are accompanied by sketch maps.
Similarly, the articles on each of the different states of the Union has
a section giving information on the geology, the flora and fauna, the
climate, and the geography of the state. And in such articles on
geographic topics as GREAT SALT LAKE, NIAGARA, by G. Karl Gilbert, and
GRAND CANYON, by R. S. Tarr, there is valuable geological information.

Other important articles which the reader should consult are PETROLOGY
(Vol. 21, p 323), equivalent to 40 pages of this Guide, largely
illustrated, by Dr. J. S. Fleet, petrographer to the Geological Survey
of Great Britain; MINERALOGY (Vol. 18, p. 509), equivalent to 25 pages
of this Guide, by L. J. Spencer, editor of the _Mineralogical Magazine_;
MINERAL DEPOSITS (Vol. 18, p. 504), equivalent to 15 pages of this
Guide, by James F. Kemp, professor of geology of Columbia University,
and geologist to the United States and New York Geological Surveys;
CRYSTALLOGRAPHY (Vol. 7, p. 569), equivalent to 60 pages of this Guide,
also by L. J. Spencer; MINING (Vol. 18, p. 528), equivalent to 40 pages
of this Guide, by Henry Smith Munroe, professor of mining, Columbia
University, New York; PALAEONTOLOGY (Vol. 20, p. 579), profusely
illustrated, equivalent to 35 pages of this Guide, by Prof. Henry
Fairfield Osborn of Columbia University, and president of the American
Museum of Natural History of New York; PALAEOBOTANY (Vol. 20, p. 524),
profusely illustrated, equivalent to 100 pages of this Guide, written by
three of the leading geological writers of the day: Dr. D. H. Scott,
president of the Linnean Society, author of _Studies in Fossil Botany_;
A. E. Steward, professor of botany of the University of Cambridge; and
Clement Reid, author of _Fossil Flora of Tegelen_.

Of more popular interest are the three articles, Earthquake, Seismometer
and Volcano. The article EARTHQUAKE is in two parts. The first (Vol. 8,
p. 817) is an historical account telling of the extent and damage done
by many earthquakes, including the terrible San Francisco earthquake of
April 18, 1906, and that of Calabria and Sicily, December 28, 1908, by
F. W. Rudler, president of the Geologists’ Association; the other part
(Vol. 8, p. 820), by Dr. J. Milne, late professor of geology in the
Imperial University of Tokio, deals with the physical theory of
earthquakes. The article VOLCANO (Vol. 28, p. 178), equivalent to 45
pages of this Guide, is by F. W. Rudler, and gives us the reasons for
and the history of volcanic disturbances. It is of interest both to the
scholar and to the casual reader. Thus we learn that “while Herculaneum
was buried beneath a flood of mud swept down from Vesuvius” in 79 A.D.,
Pompeii “was overwhelmed in great measure by loose ashes, capable of
removal with comparative ease.” Nearly everyone of middle age remembers
the famous eruption of Krakatoa in 1883 and the famous sunsets of that
year. Concerning this the Britannica article tells us (p. 180):

  Enormous quantities of dust ejected from Krakatoa in 1883 were carried
  to prodigious distances, samples having been collected at more than a
  thousand miles from the volcano; whilst the very fine material in
  ultramicroscopic grains which remained suspended for months in the
  higher regions of the atmosphere seems to have enjoyed an almost
  world-wide distribution, and to have been responsible for the
  remarkable sunsets at that period.

The article DUST (Vol. 8, p. 713), by John Aitken, inventor of the
machine for counting particles of dust, explains the mechanical causes
of this suspension. Besides there is much concrete information about
volcanoes in articles on volcanic regions: for instance, on volcanoes in
the possessions of the United States, see articles HAWAII, ALASKA,
PHILIPPINES.

The student should read also the articles on the different minerals,
many of them long and important and all by well-known authorities. Thus
the article DIAMOND (Vol. 8, p. 158), illustrated, equivalent to 20
pages of this Guide, is by Henry Alexander Miers, editor of the
_Mineralogical Magazine_. Besides dealing with the general character of
this stone, the article pays particular attention to diamond mining in
South Africa, the text being illustrated by plates showing the Kimberley
and DeBeers workings. The article GEM (Vol. 11, p. 560), is equivalent
to 25 pages of this Guide. The article GEM, ARTIFICIAL (Vol. 11, p. 569)
is by the well-known chemist and physicist, Sir William Crookes. It
tells of the changes induced by radioactive emanations and of the
artificial production of the diamond, ruby, sapphire, Oriental emerald,
amethyst and topaz. The reader will be interested, too, in the article
LAPIDARY AND GEM CUTTING (Vol. 16, p. 195), by Dr. George F. Kunz, gem
expert for Messrs. Tiffany & Co., New York.

There are special biographical articles in the Britannica on all the
well-known geologists, and in these articles special stress has been
laid on the part played by the subject of the memoirs in promoting the
science. This is well shown, for instance, in the articles AGASSIZ (Vol.
1, p. 367); HUTTON (Vol. 14, p. 16) and LYELL (Vol. 17, p. 158).

Geology, by its study of earth deposits, age of rocks, etc., and by its
estimate of the date of certain extinct animals like the mammoth and
hairy elephant, or of the time when certain animals, e.g., the elephant
and reindeer, were found in parts of the world where they no longer
occur, is an important adjunct to the science of anthropology,
especially in the question of the antiquity of man. On this see the
section of antiquity of man in the article ANTHROPOLOGY (Vol. 2, p.
114), and, in general, the chapter in this Guide on _Anthropology and
Ethnology_.

From one point of view geology is only a branch of geography and the
student of geology should consult the elaborate article on GEOGRAPHY in
the Britannica, especially all parts dealing with physical geography or
physiography. For a clue to this part of the book see the chapter in
this Guide on _Geography_.

The following is a list of the more important articles on Geology in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica:


LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO
                          STUDENTS OF GEOLOGY

 Abich, O. W. H. von
 Abraum salts
 Acadian
 Acmite, or Aegirite
 Agalmatolite
 Agate
 Agglomerate
 Agricola, Georg
 Aikin, Arthur
 Alabaster
 Albertite
 Albian
 Albite
 Alexandrite
 Allophane
 Allport, Samuel
 Alluvium
 Almandine
 Alquifou
 Alunite, or Alumstone
 Amazon Stone, or Amazonite
 Amber
 Amblygonite
 Amethyst
 Amianthus
 Amphibole
 Amphibolite
 Amygdaloid
 Analcite
 Anatase
 Andalusite
 Andesine
 Andesite
 Anglesite
 Anhydrite
 Ankerite
 Annabergite
 Anning, Mary
 Anorthite
 Ansted, David Thomas
 Anthracite
 Apatite
 Aphanite
 Aplite
 Apophyllite
 Aptian
 Aquamarine
 Aragonite
 Archean System
 Archiac, vicomte d’
 Arenig Group
 Argentite
 Argyrodite
 Asbestos
 Assise
 Asteria, or Star-stone
 Atacamite
 Atherstone, W. G.
 Augite
 Autunite
 Aventurine, or Avanturine
 Avonian
 Axinite
 Aymestry Limestone
 Azurite, or Chessylite
 Bagshot Beds
 Baily, William Hellier
 Bain, Andrew Geddes
 Bajocian
 Bakewell, Robert
 Bala Series
 Barrande, Joachim
 Barrett, Lucas
 Barrois, Charles
 Barton Beds
 Barytes
 Barytocalcite
 Basalt
 Basin
 Batholite
 Bathonian Series
 Bathvillite
 Bauxite
 Bed
 Beecher, C. E.
 Belt, Thomas
 Bembridge Beds
 Benett, Etheldred
 Benitoite
 Bernician Series
 Beryl
 Beryllonite
 Beudant, François S.
 Beyrich, H. E. von
 Bigsby, J. J.
 Binney, E. W.
 Biotite
 Bismuthite
 Bitumen
 Blanford, W. T.
 Blende, or Sphalerite
 Bloodstone
 Boase, Henry Samuel
 Bole
 Bomb
 Bone Bed
 Bonney, Thomas George
 Boracite
 Born, I. von
 Borolanite
 Bort, or Boart
 Bostonite
 Boucher de Crévecoeur de Perthes, J.
 Boué, Ami
 Boulder
 Boulder Clay
 Bournonite
 Bovey Beds
 Bowerbank, J. S.
 Bracklesham Beds
 Bradford Clay
 Brander, Gustavus
 Breccia
 Breislak, Scipione
 Bristow, H. W.
 Brocchi, G. B.
 Brochant de Villiers, A. J. F. M.
 Brochantite
 Brodie, P. B.
 Brogger, W. C.
 Bromlite
 Brongniart, Alexandre
 Bronn, Heinrich Georg
 Bronzite
 Brookite
 Brucite
 Brückmann, Franz Ernst
 Buch, Baron von
 Buckland, William
 Bunter
 Bytownite
 Cainozoic
 Cairngorm
 Calamine (Smithsonite)
 Calcite
 Callovian
 Cambrian System
 Cancrin, F. L. von
 Caradoc Series
 Carbonado
 Carboniferous System
 Carnelian
 Cassiterite
 Cat’s-eye
 Cave
 Celestine
 Cerargyrite
 Cerussite
 Chabazite
 Chalcedony
 Chalk
 Chalybite
 Charnockite
 Childrenite
 Chlorite
 Chromite
 Chrysoberyl
 Chrysocolla
 Chrysolite
 Chrysoprase
 Cinnabar
 Cinnamon Stone
 Clarke, William B.
 Clay
 Clay-with-Flints
 Clinoclastite
 Clintonite
 Close, Maxwell H.
 Cobaltite
 Colemanite
 Columbite
 Concretion
 Conglomerate
 Connellite
 Conybeare, W. D.
 Copalite, or Copaline
 Cope, Edward D.
 Copper-glance
 Copper-pyrites, or Chalcopyrite
 Coprolites
 Corallian
 Cornbrash
 Corundum
 Cotta, Bernard von
 Covellite
 Crater
 Credner, C. F. H.
 Cretaceous System
 Crocidolite
 Crocoite
 Croll, James
 Crosskey, Henry W.
 Cryolite
 Crystallite
 Crystallography
 Culm
 Cumming, Joseph G.
 Cuprite
 Cyanite
 Dacite
 Dalradian
 Dana, James D.
 Danburite
 Datolite
 Daubeny, Charles G. B.
 Daubree, G. A.
 Davidson, Thomas
 Dawson, Sir John W.
 Dechen, E. H. K. von
 De la Beche, Sir H. T.
 Delesse, A. E. O. J.
 Deluc, Jean Andre
 Demantoid
 Des Cloizeaux, Alfred
 Descloizite
 Deshayes, G. P.
 Deslongchamps, J. A. E.
 Desmarest, Nicolas
 Desnoyers, J. P. F. S.
 Desor, P. J. E.
 Devonian System
 Diabase
 Diallage
 Diamond
 Diaspore
 Dick, Robert
 Diluvium
 Diopside
 Dioptase
 Diorite
 Dolerite
 Dolomieu
 Dolomite
 Dopplerite
 Drift
 Dufrenoy, O. P. A. P.
 Dumont, André Hubert
 Dumortierite
 Duncan, Peter Martin
 Durocher, J. M. E.
 Earth pillar
 Earthquake
 Eclogite
 Egerton, Sir P. de M.
 Ehrenberg, C. G.
 Eichwald, K. E. von
 Elaterite
 Elie De Beaumont
 Emerald
 Emery
 Emmons, Ebenezer
 Enniskillen, 3rd earl of
 Enstatite
 Eocene
 Epidiorite
 Epidosite
 Epidote
 Erubescite
 Erythrite
 Escher von der Linth
 Esker
 Etheridge, Robert
 Ettingshausen, Baron
 Euclase
 Fall-line
 Farey, John
 Faujas de Saint-Fond
 Fault
 Favre, Jean Alphonse
 Felsite
 Felspar
 Fitton, William Henry
 Flint
 Fluor-spar
 Flysch
 Fold
 Forbes, David
 Forchhammer, J. G.
 Foster, Sir C. le Neve
 Fouque, F. A.
 Fournet, J. J. B. X.
 Fox, Robert Were
 Franklinite
 Freestone
 Freieslebenite
 Fulgurite
 Fuller’s Earth
 Fumarole
 Gabbro
 Galena
 Garnet
 Gaudry, Jean Albert
 Gault
 Geikie, Sir Archibald
 Geikie, James
 Geinitz, H. B.
 Gem
 Geology
 Gesner, Abraham
 Geyser
 Giebel, C. G. A.
 Gilbert, Grove K.
 Gilsonite
 Glacial Period
 Glauconite
 Gneiss
 Godwin-Austen, R. A. C.
 Goldfuss, G. A.
 Goniometer
 Göthite, or Goethite
 Granite
 Granulite
 Graphite
 Gravel, or Pebble Beds
 Green, A. H.
 Greenockite
 Greenough, G. B.
 Greensand
 Greisen
 Greywacke
 Griffith, Sir Richard J.
 Groth, P. H. von
 Guettard, J. E.
 Gumbel, K. W. von
 Guyot, A. H.
 Gypsum
 Haast, Sir J. F. J. von
 Haematite
 Haidinger, W. K. von
 Hall, James
 Hall, Sir James
 Halleflinta
 Harkness, Robert
 Harmotome
 Hatchettite
 Hauer, F. von
 Haughton, Samuel
 Hausmann, J. F. L.
 Hayden, F. V.
 Hebert, Edmond
 Heddle, M. F.
 Heer, Oswald
 Heim, A. von St. Gallen
 Helmersen, Gregor von
 Hemimorphite
 Henslow, John Stevens
 Henwood, William Jory
 Heulandite
 Hicks, Henry
 Hiddenite
 Hitchcock, Edward
 Hochstetter, F. C. von
 Holocene
 Hone
 Hopkins, William
 Hornblende
 Horner, Leonard
 Hornes, Moritz
 Hornfels
 Hulke, J. W.
 Humite
 Hunt, Robert
 Hunt, T. Sterry
 Hutton, James
 Hyacinth
 Hypersthene
 Idrialin
 Ijolite
 Ilmenite
 Iolite
 Itacolumite
 Jade
 Jameson, Robert
 Jargoon
 Jarosite
 Jasper
 Jet
 Joints
 Jones, T. Rupert
 Jukes, J. B.
 Jurassic System
 Kaolin
 Karrer, Felix
 Karsten, K. J. B.
 Kayser, F. H. E.
 Kenngott, G. A.
 Keuper
 Kidd, John
 Kimeridgian
 King, Clarence
 Kirwan, Richard
 Kjerulf, Theodor
 Kobell, W. X. F. von
 Koenig, K. D. E.
 Koksharov, N. I. von
 Koninck, L. G. de
 Kunzite
 Labradorite
 Laccolite
 Lacroix, A. F. A.
 Lamprophyres
 Lapilli
 Lapis Lazuli
 Lapparent, A. A. C. de
 Lapworth, Charles
 Lasaulx, A. C. P. F. von
 Laterite
 Laumont, F. P. N. G. de
 Lava
 Leadhillite
 Le Conte, Joseph
 Lehmann, J. G.
 Lepidolite, or Lithia-Mica
 Lesley, J. Peter
 Leucite
 Lévy, A. M.
 Lewis, Henry Corvill
 Lias
 Lignite
 Limburgite
 Limestone
 Limonite
 Lindstróm, Gustaf
 Liroconite
 Lister, Martin
 Llandeilo Group
 Llandovery Group
 Llwyd, Edward
 Loess
 Logan, Sir William E.
 London Clay
 Lonsdale, William
 Lory, Charles
 Ludlow Group
 Lyell, Sir Charles
 McCoy, Sir Frederick
 Macculloch, John
 Maclure, William
 Magnesite
 Magnetite
 Malachite
 Mallet, Robert
 Manganite
 Mantell, G. A.
 Marble
 Marcasite
 Marcou, J. B.
 Marl
 Martin, William
 Meek, F. B.
 Meerschaum
 Melaconite
 Mesozoic
 Metamorphism
 Metasomatism
 Meteorite
 Meyer, C. E. H. von
 Mica
 Mica-schist
 Microcline
 Micropegmatite
 Miller, Hugh
 Miller, W. H.
 Millerite
 Millstone Grit
 Mimetite
 Mineral deposits
 Mineralogy
 Miocene System
 Mispickel
 Mocha Stone
 Mofetta
 Mohs, Friedrich
 Mojsisovics von Mojsvar, J. A. G. E.
 Moldavite
 Molybdenite
 Monazite
 Monzonite
 Moonstone
 Morris, John
 Münster, Georg, count zu
 Murchison, Sir R. I.
 Muschelkalk
 Muscovite
 Mylonite
 Napoleonite
 Natrolite
 Naumann, G. A. C. F.
 Neck
 Neocomian
 Nepheline
 Nepheline-syenite
 Nephelinites
 Neumayr, Melchior
 Newberry, J. S.
 Niccolite
 Nicholson, H. A.
 Nicol, James
 Nitre
 Noeggerath, J. J.
 Obsidian
 Oldham, Thomas
 Oligocene System
 Oligoclase
 Olivenite
 Olivine
 Omalius d’Halloy, J. d’
 Onyx
 Oolite
 Opal
 Oppel, C. A.
 Orbigny, A. D. d’
 Ordovician System
 Orthoclase
 Osborn, H. F.
 Oxfordian
 Ozokerite, or Ozocerite
 Palaeozoic
 Parisite
 Parkinson, James
 Peach, C. W.
 Pegmatite
 Pendleside Series
 Pengelly, William
 Peperino
 Peridot
 Peridotite
 Perlite
 Permian System
 Perovskite
 Petalite
 Petrology
 Pharmacosiderite
 Phenacite
 Phillips, John
 Phillips, William
 Phillipsite
 Phlogopite
 Phonolite
 Phosgenite
 Phosphates
 Phosphorite
 Phyllite
 Picrite
 Pictet, de la Rive, F. J.
 Pitchblende, or Uraninite
 Pitchstone
 Plagioclase
 Pleistocene System
 Pliocene System
 Plot, Robert
 Plumbago
 Pneumatolysis
 Pollux, or Pollucite
 Porphyry
 Portlandian
 Portlock, J. E.
 Powell, J. W.
 Pre-Cambrian
 Prehnite
 Prestwick, Sir Joseph
 Prévost, Constant
 Proustite
 Psilomelane
 Pumice
 Purbeckian
 Puy
 Pyrargyrite
 Pyrites
 Pyrolusite
 Pyromorphite
 Pyrope
 Pyrophyllite
 Pyroxene
 Pyroxenite
 Pyrrhotite
 Quartz
 Quartzite
 Quartz-porphyry
 Quarternary
 Quenstedt, F. A. von
 Rammelsberg, K. F. A.
 Ramsay, Sir Andrew C.
 Rath, Gerhard von
 Reading Beds
 Realgar
 Renard, A. F.
 Renevier, Eugène
 Retinite
 Reusch, Hans Henrik
 Reuss, A. E. von
 Rhaetic
 Rhodochrosite
 Rhodonite
 Rhyolite
 Rock
 Rock-crystal
 Roemer, F. A.
 Rogers, H. D.
 Rome de l’Isle, J. B. L.
 Roth, J. L. A.
 Rubellite
 Ruby
 Russell, Israel Cook
 Rutile
 Rutley, Frank
 Salt
 Salter, John William
 Sand
 Sandberger, K. L. F. von
 Sandstone
 Sapphire
 Sard
 Sardonyx
 Satin-spar
 Savi, Paolo
 Scapolite
 Scheelite
 Schists
 Schlotheim, Baron von
 Schorl
 Scolecite
 Scoria
 Scrope, G. J. Poulett
 Sedgwick, Adam
 Seismometer
 Selwyn, A. R. C.
 Sénarmont, H. H. de
 Serpentine
 Sharpe, Daniel
 Sill
 Sillimanite
 Silurian System
 Sinter
 Slate
 Smaltite
 Smith, William
 Smithson, James
 Smyth, Sir W. W.
 Sodalite
 Soffioni
 Solfatara
 Sorby, Henry C.
 Speeton Beds
 Sphene
 Spherulites
 Spinel
 Spodumene
 Spratt, Thomas A. B.
 Stalactites
 Stannite
 Staurolite
 Steno, Nicolaus
 Stephanite
 Stibnite
 Stilbite
 Stoliczka, Ferdinand
 Stone
 Stoppani, Antonio
 Stratigraphy
 Strickland, Hugh E.
 Strontianite
 Studer, Bernhard
 Suess, Edward
 Sunstone
 Syenite
 Sylvanite
 Sylvite
 Symonds, William S.
 Szabó von Szentmiklos
 Tachylytes
 Talc
 Tate, Ralph
 Tchihatcheff, P. A. de
 Tertiary
 Tetradymite
 Tetrahedrite
 Theralite
 Thorianite
 Thorite
 Tonalite
 Topaz
 Torbernite
 Torell, Otto Martin
 Torridonian
 Tourmaline
 Trachyte
 Trass
 Tremolite
 Triassic System
 Tridymite
 Trimmer, Joshua
 Tuff
 Turquoise
 Vanadinite
 Variolite
 Variscite
 Veins
 Verneuil, P. E. P. de
 Vesuvianite
 Vivianite
 Vogt, Karl C.
 Volcano
 Waagen, W. H.
 Wachsmuth, Charles
 Wad
 Walcott, Charles D.
 Waltershausen
 Wavellite
 Wealden
 Webster, Thomas
 Wenlock Group
 Werner, A. G.
 Whiteaves, J. F.
 Whitney, J. D.
 Willemite
 Witherite
 Wolframite
 Wollastonite
 Wood, S. V.
 Woodward, John
 Woodward, Samuel
 Woolwich-and-Reading Beds
 Wright, Thomas
 Wulfenite
 Yoredale Series
 Zoelites
 Zincite
 Zircon
 Zirkel, Ferdinand
 Zittel, Karl A. von
 Zoisite




                              CHAPTER LVII
                                BIOLOGY
                        GENERAL AND INTRODUCTORY

The Britannica tells us that Sir Thomas Browne, the famous 17th century
physician and author, once ventured to doubt “whether mice may be bred
by putrefaction,” and Alexander Ross, the poet scientist of 200 years
ago, commenting on his scepticism wrote, “So may he doubt whether in
cheese and timber worms are generated; or if beetles and wasps in cows’
dung; or if butterflies, locusts, grasshoppers, shell-fish, snails,
eels, and such like, be procreated of putrefied matter, which is apt to
receive the form of that creature to which it is by formative power
disposed. To question this is to question reason, sense and experience.
If he doubts of this let him go to Egypt, and there he will find the
fields swarming with mice, begot of the mud of Nylus, to the great
calamity of the inhabitants” (Vol. 1, p. 64). To-day science gives no
offhand answer to the question of the origin of life. Abiogenesis, or
“spontaneous generation,” so-called, finds a far less simple definition
and research still in vain bends its best energies to solving this
problem of problems.

The subject is so vast, dealing as it does with all the phenomena
manifested by living matter, that in this Guide that branch of the
subject which studies the human organism is separately dealt with in the
chapter _Health and Disease_. This chapter, therefore, is confined to
the still enormous subject of biology considered as dealing with the
general problem of life; botany and zoology are treated in the following
chapters. The student of either of the two last subjects should preface,
or at least supplement, his studies, by reading the main general
articles included below.

[Sidenote: The Study of Life]

The guiding article BIOLOGY (Vol. 3, p. 954), which should be read
first, serves as a key to the discussion of the biological sciences. It
is not long, for the main divisions of the subject are treated more
conveniently and logically under their own appropriate headings. P.
Chalmers Mitchell, secretary of the Zoological Society of London, who
organized the whole subject for the new Britannica, is the contributor.
Supplementing this, the article LIFE (Vol. 16, p. 600), also by Chalmers
Mitchell, should be read, with those on PROTOPLASM (Vol. 22, p. 476),
SPECIES (Vol. 25, p. 616), ABIOGENESIS (Vol. 1, p. 64), BIOGENESIS (Vol.
3, p. 952). In the two articles last named the theory of spontaneous
generation is examined and found wanting, or at best unproved.

[Sidenote: Structure]

Living matter may be regarded under four aspects: structure,
distribution, physiology, evolution. For the first, the article
MORPHOLOGY (Vol. 18, p. 863) leads the discussion, followed by CYTOLOGY
(Vol. 7, p. 710), and EMBRYOLOGY (Vol. 9, p. 314), in which the growth
of cell structures is discussed. These articles are introductory to the
whole subject. Supplementing them reference may be made to the
Morphology sections of the articles PLANT (Vol. 21, p. 728) and ZOOLOGY
(Vol. 28, p. 1022).

[Sidenote: Distribution]

A most fascinating branch is that which is concerned with the where and
when of the existence of organisms. The articles in the Britannica are
worthy of the interest of the subject. Under PALAEONTOLOGY (Vol. 20, p.
579) H. F. Osborn, Columbia University, New York, president of the
American Museum of Natural History, New York, treats of the archaeology
of the biological sciences, of the extinct species which once inhabited
the earth; while Clement Reid, of the Geological Survey of Great
Britain, A. C. Seward, professor of botany, Cambridge University, and
Dr. D. H. Scott, president of the Linnean Society, perform the same
service for plant life in the article PALAEOBOTANY (Vol. 20, p. 524).
The distribution of present types is discussed under ZOOLOGICAL
DISTRIBUTION (Vol. 28, p. 1002), PLANTS, _Distribution_ (Vol. 21, p.
777), and PLANKTON (Vol. 21, p. 720), in which Prof. G. H. Fowler of
University College, London, describes a science which is still
young—that of tracing the drift and distribution of deep sea life. See
also ACCLIMATIZATION (Vol. 1, p. 114), by Alfred Russel Wallace and
Frank Finn, of the Indian Museum of Calcutta.

[Sidenote: Physiology]

The properties, processes, and functions of living things fall in the
province of PHYSIOLOGY (Vol. 21, p. 554), and kindred articles; among
the latter the following may profitably be consulted: ANIMAL HEAT (Vol.
2, p. 48), and PLANTS, _Physiology_ (Vol. 21, p. 744).

[Sidenote: Evolution]

The gradual development of species is considered in a number of valuable
articles such as EVOLUTION (Vol. 10, p. 22), HEREDITY (Vol. 13, p. 350),
REPRODUCTION (Vol. 23, p. 116), MENDELISM (Vol. 18, p. 115), TELEGONY
(Vol. 25, p. 509), VARIATION AND SELECTION (Vol. 27, p. 906).

Following is an alphabetical list of the _general_ biological articles
(those not dealing directly with either Botany or Zoology), which are to
be found in the Britannica:

 Abiogenesis
 Acclimatization
 Acephalous
 Acuminate
 Adaptation
 Aestivation
 Albino
 Alveolate
 Anabolism
 Anastomosis
 Aporose
 Auricle
 Autogeny
 Bathybius
 Biogenesis
 Biology
 Bipartite
 Catabolism
 Chemotaxis
 Cilia
 Cytology
 Embryology
 Enzyme
 Evolution
 Fermentation
 Habitat
 Heredity
 Hibernaculum
 Histology
 Hybridism
 Life
 Longevity
 Mendelism
 Metabolism
 Microtomy
 Monotypic
 Morphology
 Oecology, or Ecology
 Osteology
 Parasitism
 Protoplasm
 Reproduction
 Rhacis, or Rachis
 Species
 Telegony
 Variation and Selection


                       BIOGRAPHIES OF BIOLOGISTS

The life and work of the world’s great biologists may be studied in the
Britannica, and an alphabetical list of the principal articles follows.

 Acharius, Erik
 Adams, A. L.
 Adanson, Michel
 Afzelius, Adam
 Agassiz, A. E.
 Agassiz, J. L. R.
 Aiton, William
 Albinus (Weiss), B. S.
 Aldrovandi, Ulissi
 Allman, George James
 Alpini, Prospero
 Alston, Charles
 Ambrosini, Bartolomeo
 Anderson, James
 Arrenotokous, A.
 Artedi, Peter
 Audebert, J. B.
 Audouin, Jean Victor
 Audubon, John James
 Avebury, J. Lubbock, Baron
 Baer, Karl Ernst von
 Baird, S. F.
 Balfour, F. M.
 Banks, Sir Joseph
 Barton, B. S.
 Bates, Henry Walter
 Bauhin, Gaspard
 Belon, Pierre
 Bentham, George
 Berkeley, M. J.
 Blainville, H. M. Ducrotay de
 Bloch, Mark Eliezer
 Blumenbach, J. F.
 Bonpland, A. J. A.
 Bory de Saint-Vincent, J. B. G. M.
 Bose, L. A. G.
 Brisson, M. J.
 Broderip, W. J.
 Brongniart, A. T.
 Broussonet, P. M. A.
 Brown, Robert
 Buckland, F. T.
 Buffon, G. L. L. de
 Caesalpinus, Andreas
 Camerarius, Joachim
 Camerarius, R. J.
 Camper, Peter
 Candolle, A. P. de
 Carpenter, W. B.
 Cavanilles, A. J.
 Claparède, J. L. R. A. E.
 Cobbold, T. S.
 Cohn, Ferdinand Julius
 Combe, George
 Coues, E.
 Cuvier, Baron
 Darwin, Charles R.
 Darwin, Erasmus
 Daubenton, L. J. M.
 De Bary, H. A.
 Desfontaines, R. L.
 Dillen (Dillenius), J. J.
 Donovan, Edward
 Dryander, Jonas
 Duhamel de Monceau
 Dutrochet, R. J. H.
 Edwards, George
 Eschscholtz, J. F.
 Fabricius, J. C.
 Falconer, Hugh
 Flourens, M. J. P.
 Flower, Sir William H.
 Forbes, Edward
 Forskal, Peter
 Fortune, Robert
 Fraas, Karl Nikolas
 Fries, Elias Magnus
 Fuchs, Leonard
 Gall, Franz Joseph
 Gaudichaud-Beaupré
 Gegenbaur, Carl
 Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, E.
 Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, I.
 Gerard, John
 Gervais, Paul
 Gesner, K. von
 Gosse, Philip Henry
 Gould, A. A.
 Gray, Asa
 Gray, John Edward
 Grew, Nehemiah
 Haeckel, E. H.
 Hagenbeck, Carl
 Hales, Stephen
 Hasselquist, Frederik
 Hofmeister, W. F. B.
 Hooker, Sir Joseph D.
 Hooker, Sir William J.
 Huber, François
 Huxley, T. H.
 Hyatt, Alpheus
 Jäger, Gustav
 Jesse, Edward
 Jussieu, De (family)
 Kaup, Johann Jakob
 Kirby, William
 Kölliker, R. A. von
 Kühne, Willy
 Lacépède, B. G. E. de La Ville, comte de
 Lamarck
 Latreille, P. A.
 Lawes, Sir John B.
 Leeuwenhoek, A. van
 Leidy, Joseph
 Lindley, John
 Linnaeus
 Lombroso, Cesare
 Ludwig, K. F. W.
 Macgillivray, W. and J.
 Malpighi, Marcello
 Marsh, O. C.
 Martius, C. F. P. von
 Martyn, John
 Michaux, André
 Milne-Edwards, Henry
 Mivart, St. George J.
 Mohl, Hugo von
 Morgagni, G. B.
 Müller, F. von, baron
 Müller, J. P.
 Naegeli, K. W. van
 Nees von Esenbeck
 Newton, Alfred
 North, Marianne
 Nuttall, Thomas
 Oken, Lorenz
 Ormerod, Eleanor A.
 Owen, Sir Richard
 Pennant, Thomas
 Pringsheim, Nathanael
 Quatrefages de Bréau
 Ray (or Wray), John
 Réaumur, R. A. F. de
 Richardson, Sir John
 Romanes, G. J.
 Royle, John Forbes
 Sachs, Julius von
 Saint-Hilaire, A. de
 Saussure, N. T. de
 Schleiden, M. J.
 Schultze, M. J. S.
 Schwann, Theodor
 Senebier, Jean
 Sibthorp, John
 Siebold, C. T. E. vo
 Sowerby, James
 Spallanzani, Lazaro
 Sprengel, Kurt
 Spurzheim, J. C.
 Swammerdam, Jan
 Swartz, Olof
 Thomson, Sir C. W.
 Thunberg, K. P.
 Thuret, G. A.
 Tiedemann, Friedrich
 Torrey, John
 Tournefort, J. P. de
 Treviranus, G. R.
 Tylor, E. B.
 Virchow, Rudolf
 Wagner, Rudolph
 Wallace, A. Russel
 Waterton, Charles
 Weismann, August
 White, Gilbert
 Williamson, W. C.
 Willughby, Francis
 Wilson, Alexander
 Wolff, C. F.
 Wood, John George
 Yarrell, William




                             CHAPTER LVIII
                                 BOTANY


There are many gardeners and lovers of gardens, but comparatively few
have even the most elementary knowledge of botany. How many, for
instance, know or remember that in the leaves of plants are situated the
kitchens in which they prepare their food, or more than vaguely
recognize the presence of a nervous system in plant organisms (Vol. 21,
p. 747)? The majority, indeed, ignore the fact that a little study will
add a hundred-fold to their enjoyment, and that, unlike most scientific
subjects, botany can be studied with a minimum of trouble or toil, and
with the simplest apparatus. His own garden, the woods and fields, will
give the inquirer ample subjects for his investigations, and, as in
every other undertaking, the longer he pursues it the more he will see,
and the more intense will be his pleasure in the contemplation of the
garden of his cultivation.

Botany is, of course, one branch of an enormous subject. The student
will, therefore, do well to familiarize himself with the general
articles which cover the science of living matter, as outlined in the
chapter on _Biology_. In that chapter references have in fact already
been given to certain sections of the strictly botanical articles. The
general arrangement of the subject in the Britannica is as follows:—(i.)
articles dealing with the broad aspects of the science; (ii.) articles
on “systematic” botany treating of the various families of plants;
(iii.) articles describing members of their families.

[Sidenote: General Principles]

Following the most convenient and at the same time the most logical
course, the article BOTANY (Vol. 4, p. 299) gives a key to the treatment
of the whole subject in the Britannica. This is by A. B. Rendle, keeper
of the Department of Botany, British Museum, who acted as general
adviser to the editor in the arrangement of this branch of biology in
the Britannica. The main article on the subject is under the heading
PLANTS (Vol. 21, p. 728), by a number of eminent authorities. The
article is divided as follows: _Classification_, by A. B. Rendle;
_Anatomy and History and Bibliography_, by A. G. Tansley, lecturer in
botany in the University of Cambridge; _Physiology_, by J. R. Green,
formerly lecturer on plant physiology, University of Liverpool;
_Pathology_, by H. M. Ward, formerly professor of botany, University of
Cambridge; _Ecology_, which comprises the study of the relations of the
individual plant, or species, or the plant community, with its habitat,
by C. E. Moss, curator of the Cambridge University Herbarium;
_Cytology_, which treats of the cell structure of plant organisms, by H.
W. T. Wager, president of the Botanical section of the British
Association, 1905; _Morphology_, by S. H. Vines, professor of botany,
University of Oxford, and president of the Linnean Society, 1900–1904;
_Distribution_, by Sir W. T. Thiselton-Dyer, director of the Kew
Botanical Gardens. Supplementary to the article PLANTS are the
following, which should all be read carefully: ROOT (Vol. 23, p. 712),
STEM (Vol. 25, p. 875), LEAF (Vol. 16, p. 322), FLOWER (Vol. 10, p.
553), FRUIT (Vol. 11, p. 254). A very important article is that on
PALAEOBOTANY (Vol. 20, p. 524), which treats of the distribution, etc.,
of plant life in prehistoric periods. The contributor is Clement Reid of
the Geological Survey of England and Wales, an original investigator in
this important field. The advances in the study of minute plant
organisms in the past few years have been very great and they receive
treatment in the brilliant article BACTERIOLOGY (Vol. 3, p. 156), by
Prof. H. M. Ward of Cambridge University, and V. H. Blackmann, professor
of botany in the University of Leeds.

Other articles in the Britannica which refer to the general principles
of the science will be found enumerated at the end of this chapter.

[Sidenote: Divisions and Classification]

The student must, of course, make himself familiar with the primary
divisions of the vegetable kingdom. These are considered in order below.
By far the biggest and the most important is that of the Angiosperms.
They will be treated first.

[Sidenote: Angiosperms: Dicotyledons]

The division ANGIOSPERMS (Vol. 2, p. 9) includes all those flowering
plants whose seeds are enclosed in capsules. This division is again
divided into two classes: the Dicotyledons (Vol. 8, p. 185), which are
distinguished by the presence of a pair of seed-leaves or cotyledons in
the embryo contained in the seed; and the Monocotyledons (see Vol. 2, p.
13), which contain only one. The former embraces most of the
flowerbearing plants, and includes the following families:—BORAGINACEAE
(Vol. 4, p. 242) to which order belongs such plants as forget-me-nots,
borage, heliotrope, etc. CAPRIFOLIACEAE (Vol. 5, p. 290), which include
elder, honeysuckle, etc. CARYOPHYLLACEAE (Vol. 5, p. 439), with the
pinks, carnations, etc. COMPOSITAE (Vol. 6, p. 811), which is the
largest order in this division and includes one-tenth of the whole
number of flowering plants, with such varieties as lettuce, dandelion,
artichoke, sunflower, chrysanthemum, etc. CONVOLVULACEAE (Vol. 7, p.
67), among which are the convolvulus, sweet potato, bindweed.
CRASSULACEAE (Vol. 7, p. 380), which include a quantity of African
plants. CRUCIFERAE (Vol. 7, p. 521), with the wallflower, stock,
mustard, cabbage, radish, nasturtium, etc. CUCURBITACEAE (Vol. 7, p.
611), among which are the cucumber, melon, etc. CUPULIFERAE (Vol. 7, p.
635), with the hazel, oak, beech, alder. ERICACEAE (Vol. 9, p. 739),
with the rhododendron, arbutus, whortleberry, heather. EUPHORBIACEAE
(Vol. 9, p. 892), which include the castor-oil plant, box, euphorbia,
etc. GENTIANACEAE (Vol. 11, p. 601), with the gentian, yellow-wort,
bog-bean, etc. GERANIACEAE (Vol. 11, p. 762), whose name is derived from
the geranium. LABIATAE (Vol. 16, p. 3), with peppermint, marjoram,
thyme, sage, ground-ivy. LEGUMINOSAE (Vol. 16, p. 381), which embrace
gorse, furze, scarlet runner, mimosa, acacia, rest-harrow, etc.
MALVACEAE (Vol. 17, p. 517), with the mallow, hibiscus, hollyhock. The
MORACEAE (Vol. 18, p. 814), with the fig, mulberry, banyan, etc.
ONAGRACEAE (Vol. 20, p. 104), including the evening primrose, fuschia,
etc. POLYGONACEAE (Vol. 22, p. 26), with dock, rhubarb, buckwheat, etc.
PRIMULACEAE (Vol. 22, p. 341), including primrose, cowslip, pimpernel.
RANUNCULACEAE (Vol. 22, p. 895), with the varieties buttercup, clematis,
aconite, larkspur, columbine, marsh marigold, anemone. ROSACEAE (Vol.
23, p. 722), to which the rose gives the name, and which include
strawberry, raspberry, apple, pear, plum, spiraea, blackthorn, etc.
RUBIACEAE (Vol. 23, p. 808), with gardenias, chincona, coffee, madder.
SAXIFRAGACEAE (Vol. 24, p. 263), saxifrage, japonica, gooseberry,
hydrangea. SCROPHULARIACEAE (Vol. 24, p. 485), with veronica, foxglove,
snapdragon, etc. SOLANACEAE (Vol. 25, p. 356), which embrace henbane,
tobacco, deadly nightshade, cape gooseberry, capsicum. UMBELLIFERAE
(Vol. 27, p. 575), to which belong ivy, carrot, hemlock, celery,
caraway, parsley. URTICACEAE (Vol. 27, p. 805), which include the nettle
tribes.

[Sidenote: Angiosperms: Monocotyledons]

The Monocotyledons include the ALISMACEAE (Vol. 1, p. 671), to which
belong the arrow-head, the water plantain, the butomus (so called
because the leaves cut the tongues of oxen feeding on them), and other
water plants. AROIDEAE (Vol. 2, p. 640), so called from the Arum family.
The BROMELIACEAE (Vol. 4, p. 632), including pineapple, Spanish-moss.
CYPERACEAE (Vol. 7, p. 692), with bulrush, cotton grass, etc. GRASSES
(Vol. 12, p. 369), a most valuable article. HYDROCHARIDEAE (Vol. 14, p.
112), which include a number of water plants. Iridaceae (Vol. 14, p.
793), which include besides the iris, the crocus, gladiolus, etc. The
JUNCACEAE (Vol. 15, p. 555), or Rush family; and the LILIACEAE (Vol. 16,
p. 683), which include asparagus, hyacinth, star of Bethlehem,
fritillary, bluebell, etc.

[Sidenote: Other Divisions]

Another big division is that of the GYMNOSPERMS (Vol. 12, p. 754). These
have naked seed pods; that is to say, the seeds are not enclosed in
capsules. The best known and largest division of this class contains the
conifers: pines, firs, cedars, larches, etc.

PTERIDOPHYTA (Vol. 22, p. 605), or spore-producing plants, including the
fern families as the largest and most important of its members.

BRYOPHYTA (Vol. 4, p. 700), the second great sub-division of the
vegetable kingdom, comprises the mosses and liverworts.

ALGAE (Vol. 1, p. 585), plants usually devoid of differentiation into
roots, stem, and leaf, coming under the general class of Bryophyta, and
including sea-weeds as the main group.

LICHENS (Vol. 16, p. 578), compound dual organisms, part algae and part
fungus, interesting because the dual organism enables the plant to live
where neither of its compounds could live alone. Iceland moss, valuable
both for its nutritive and medicinal qualities, comes under this
division.

FUNGI (Vol. 11, p. 333), an enormous class, comprising, according to
Saccardo, 32,000 different species.

Bacteria (see BACTERIOLOGY, Vol. 3, p. 156), minute organisms, also
known as microbes, bacilli, etc., technically called Schizomycetes.

INSECTIVOROUS PLANTS (Vol. 14, p. 644), more correctly termed
Carnivorous, belong to a number of distinct natural orders, but agree in
the extraordinary habit of adding to the supplies of nitrogenous
material offered them by the soil and atmosphere by the capture and
consumption of insects and other small animals.

These are the main divisions, and from the articles describing them the
student will acquire a sound knowledge of the characteristics which
distinguish each. As a matter of fact, interest in botany as a subject
is first inspired by the particular rather than the general—that is to
say, the love of individual flowers leads to the study of their habits
and life history, thence to a comparison which leads to the recognition
of similar characteristics in plants having apparently widely different
functions, so that the following section of the subject, touching the
natural history of plants, though really placed last in a logical course
of reading in botany, will contain much that is already known to the
student who wishes to pursue the subject systematically.

[Sidenote: Natural History]

In the Britannica from the various articles concerning the natural
history of individual plants it is easy to trace back to what family and
main division each plant belongs. To the student beginning the subject
it will be most suggestive to look up the accounts of the plants which
are cultivated in his garden, or which he can find near his home, and
find out the family relationship between subjects which appear to differ
very widely both in habits and characteristics. From the outline given
above in the paragraph devoted to systematic botany an indication will
be given him of the surprises which are in store for him as he pursues
his investigation. He would not at first suspect, for example, that
asparagus and hyacinths were cousins, that roses, apples, and blackthorn
are closely related, or that chrysanthemums and artichokes have any
connection with one another, let alone cabbage and wallflowers. An
excellent scheme to arouse the interest of the young student would
therefore be to encourage him to pick out from the list below the names
of plants with which he is familiar and of which he can get specimens,
and thence work backward until the meanings of the main divisions of the
vegetable kingdom are clear to him.

In the natural history section of the following list will be found in
alphabetical order the plants which have separate articles in the
Britannica. Many plants besides these are of course described. They will
be found in the Index, where the volume and page on which a description
will be found are given.




CLASSIFIED LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE BRITANNICA ON BOTANY

 (For biographies of botanists, see the end of the chapter on Biology)

=Botany: General=

 Acaulescent
 Acerose
 Acinus
 Acorn
 Alburnum
 Angulate
 Ascus
 Autogamy
 Auxanometer
 Axile, or Axial
 Bacteriology
 Botany
 Boll
 Bur, or Burr
 Caducous
 Caespitose
 Cane
 Capsule
 Cataphyll
 Chlorosis
 Colleter
 Corn
 Cystolith
 Deciduous
 Fairy Ring
 Flower
 Fruit
 Galls
 Glaucous
 Graft
 Herb
 Herbarium
 Humus
 Idioblast
 Leaf
 Marcescent
 Meristem
 Nut
 Palaeobotany
 Pin-eyed
 Pistil
 Plants
 Pollination
 Root
 Ruderal
 Sap
 Sarcocarp
 Sarmentose
 Scion
 Secund
 Seed
 Stem
 Synanthy
 Thorn
 Thrum-eyed
 Tree
 Vegetable
 Witch brooms


                          =Botany: Systematic=

 Acotyledones
 Acrogenae
 Algae
 Alismaceae
 Amentiferae, or Amentaceae
 Angiosperms
 Aroideae (Arum family)
 Boraginaceae
 Bromeliaceae
 Bryophyta
 Caprifoliaceae
 Caryophyllaceae
 Compositae
 Convolvulaceae
 Crassulaceae
 Cruciferae
 Cucurbitaceae
 Cupuliferae
 Cyperaceae
 Diatomaceae
 Dicotyledons
 Dictyogens
 Ericaceae
 Euphorbiaceae
 Fungi
 Gentianaceae
 Geraniaceae
 Grasses
 Gymnosperms
 Hydrocharideae
 Insectivorous Plants
 Iridaceae
 Juncaceae
 Labiatae
 Leguminosae
 Lichens
 Liliaceae
 Malvaceae
 Moraceae
 Onagraceae
 Polygonaceae
 Primulaceae
 Pteridophyta
 Ranunculaceae
 Rosaceae
 Rubiaceae
 Saxifragaceae
 Scrophulariaceae
 Solanaceae
 Umbelliferae
 Urticaceae


                       =Botany: Natural History=

 Aal
 Aaron’s Rod
 Abaca
 Abutilon
 Acacia
 Acanthus
 Achimenes
 Acorus Calamus
 Adonis
 African Lily
 Agave
 Agrimony
 Ailanthus
 Alder
 Aleurites
 Alexanders
 Algum, or Almug Tree
 Allamanda
 Alliaria officinalis
 Allium
 Almond
 Aloe
 Amadou
 Amanita
 Amaranth
 Amaryllis
 Ammoniacum, or Gum Ammoniac
 Ampelopsis
 Anatto
 Anemone
 Angelica
 Animé
 Anise
 Apple
 Apricot
 Araucaria
 Arbor Vitae
 Archil
 Aristolochia
 Arrowroot
 Artichoke
 Ash
 Asparagus
 Aspen
 Asphodel
 Aspidistra
 Aster
 Aubergine
 Aucuba
 Auricula
 Avocado Pear
 Azalea
 Bael Fruit
 Balm
 Bamboo
 Banana
 Baneberry
 Banksia
 Baobab
 Barberry
 Barley
 Bdellium
 Bean
 Beech
 Beet
 Begonia
 Benzoin, or Gum Benjamin
 Betel Nut
 Bilberry
 Birch
 Bird’s Eye
 Blackberry
 Bladder-wort
 Boletus
 Borage
 Botrytis
 Bottle-brush Plants
 Bouvardia
 Boxwood
 Bracket-fungi
 Brazil Nuts
 Brazil Wood
 Bread-fruit
 Brooklime
 Broom
 Broom-rape
 Buchu, or Buka Leaves
 Buck-bean, or Bog-Bean
 Buckthorn
 Buckwheat
 Bulrush
 Burnet
 Buttercup
 Butter-nut
 Butterwort
 Cabbage
 Cactus
 Calabash
 Calabash Tree
 Calceolaria
 Camellia
 Campanula
 Candytuft
 Cannon-ball Tree
 Capers
 Caraway
 Cardamom
 Cardoon
 Carnation
 Carrot
 Cashew Nut
 Cassava
 Cassia
 Casuarina
 Catalpa
 Catha
 Cayenne Pepper
 Ceanothus
 Cecropia
 Cedar
 Celandine
 Celery
 Centaurea
 Centaury
 Chantarelle
 Chenopodium
 Cherry
 Chestnut
 Chicory
 Chive
 Chrysanthemum
 Cicely
 Cimicifuga
 Cinchona
 Cineraria
 Cinnamon
 Citron
 Cleavers
 Clematis
 Climbing Fern
 Cloudberry
 Clover
 Cloves
 Coca, or Cuca
 Cocculus Indicus
 Cock’s-comb
 Cocoa
 Coco de Mer
 Coco-nut Palm
 Codiaeum
 Coffee
 Colchicum
 Coleus
 Colocynth
 Colt’s-foot
 Columbine
 Compass Plant
 Cotton
 Copaiba, or Copaiva
 Copal
 Coriander
 Cork
 Corn-salad
 Correa
 Cotoneaster
 Cow-tree
 Cranberry
 Cress
 Crinum
 Crocus
 Crowberry
 Cryptomeria
 Cucumber
 Cumin, or Cummin
 Currant
 Custard Apple
 Cyclamen
 Cypress
 Daffodil
 Dahlia
 Daisy
 Dame’s Violet
 Dammar, or Dammer
 Dandelion
 Daphne
 Darlingtonia
 Date Palm
 Dewberry
 Dividivi
 Dock
 Dodder
 Dogwood
 Dracaena
 Dragon’s Blood
 Dropwort
 Duckweed
 Dulse
 Duramen
 Durian
 Durra
 Earth-nut
 Earth-star
 Ebony
 Edelweiss
 Eglantine
 Elder
 Elecampane
 Elephant’s Foot
 Elm
 Endive
 Entada
 Esparto, or Spanish Grass
 Eucharis
 Euonymus
 Euphorbia
 Evergreen
 Everlasting, or Immortelle
 Fennel
 Fenugreek
 Fern
 Fig
 Filmy Ferns
 Finger-and-toe
 Fir
 Flax
 Fool’s Parsley
 Forget-me-not
 Foxglove
 Freesia
 Fritillary
 Frog-bit
 Fuchsia
 Fumitory
 Funkia
 Furze, Gorse, or Whin
 Fustic
 Gale
 Gardenia
 Garlic
 Genista
 Gentian
 Geranium
 Geum
 Gillyflower
 Ginger
 Gladiolus
 Glasswort
 Gloriosa
 Gloxinia
 Golden Rod
 Gooseberry
 Gourd
 Grains of Paradise
 Gram, or Chick-pea
 Granadilla
 Grass of Parnassus
 Greenheart
 Ground Nut
 Groundsel
 Guava
 Guelder Rose
 Gulfweed
 Gum
 Gumbo, or Okra
 Gutta Percha
 Hackberry
 Harebell
 Hawthorn
 Hazel
 Heath
 Heliotrope, or Turnsole
 Hellebore
 Hemlock
 Hemp
 Henbane
 Henna
 Hickory
 Hippeastrum
 Holly
 Hollyhock
 Honey Locust
 Honeysuckle
 Hop
 Horehound
 Hornbeam
 Horseradish
 Horsetail
 Houseleek
 Huckleberry
 Huon Pine
 Hyacinth
 Hydrangea
 Hyssop
 Iceland Moss
 Ice-plant
 Impatiens
 Iris
 Irish Moss, or Carrageen
 Iron-wood
 Ivy
 Jarrah Wood
 Jasmine, or Jessamine
 Jew’s Ears
 Job’s Tears
 Judas Tree
 Jujube
 Juniper
 Jute
 Kaffir Bread
 Kauri Pine
 Kerguelen’s Land Cabbage
 Kumquat
 Labrador Tea
 Laburnum
 Lac
 Lace-bark Tree
 Lancewood
 Larch
 Larkspur
 Lattice Leaf Plant
 Laurel
 Laurustinus
 Lavender
 Leek
 Lemon
 Lentil
 Lettuce
 Lilac, or Pipe Tree
 Lily
 Lime, or Linden
 Liquidambar, or Sweet Gum
 Litchi, or Lee-Chee
 Lobelia
 Loco-weeds, or Crazy Weeds
 Locust-tree
 Loosestrife
 Loquat
 Lotus
 Lucerne
 Lupine
 Lycopodium
 Madder, or Dyer’s Madder
 Magnolia
 Mahogany
 Maidenhair
 Maize, or Indian Corn
 Mallow
 Mammee Apple
 Mandrake
 Mangel-Wurzel
 Mango
 Mangosteen
 Mangrove
 Manila Hemp
 Manna
 Maple
 Mare’s-tail
 Marguerite
 Marigold
 Marjoram
 Mastic, or Mastich
 Maté, or Paraguay Tea
 Medlar
 Melon
 Mesquite, or Honey Locust
 Mignonette
 Mildew
 Milkwort
 Millet
 Mimosa
 Mimulus
 Mint
 Mistletoe
 Moly
 Momordica
 Moonseed
 Moonwort, or Moonfern
 Moreton Bay Chestnut
 Mucuna
 Mulberry
 Mushroom
 Mustard
 Myrobalans
 Myrrh
 Myrtle
 Narcissus
 Nasturtium
 Nettle
 Nettle Tree
 Nightshade
 Nutmeg
 Oak
 Oat
 Oleander
 Oleaster
 Olive
 Onion
 Orach, or Mountain Spinach
 Orange
 Orchids
 Orris-Root
 Osier
 Oxalis
 Paeony
 Palm
 Palmetto
 Pansy, or Heartsease
 Papyrus
 Parsley
 Parsnip
 Passionflower
 Pea
 Peach
 Pear
 Pellitory
 Pennyroyal
 Pentstemon
 Pepper
 Peppermint
 Pepper Tree
 Persimmon
 Petunia
 Phlox
 Phormium, or New Zealand Flax
 Pimento
 Pine
 Pine-apple
 Pink
 Pistachio Nut
 Pitcher-plants
 Plane
 Plantain
 Plum
 Poinsettia
 Pokeberry, or Pokeweed
 Polyanthus
 Polypodium
 Pomegranate
 Pondweed
 Poplar
 Poppy
 Potato
 Potentilla
 Primrose
 Privet
 Puff-ball
 Pumpkin
 Purslane
 Pyrethrum
 Quince
 Radish
 Ramie
 Ramsons
 Ranunculus
 Rape
 Raspberry
 Reed
 Rhododendron
 Rice
 Richardia
 Robinia, or Locust-tree
 Rocambole
 Rose
 Rosemary
 Rosewood
 Rosin, or Colophony
 Royal Fern
 Rubber
 Rue
 Rush
 Rye
 Sabicu Wood
 Safflower
 Saffron
 Sago
 Sainfoin
 St. John’s Wort
 Salsafy, or Salsify
 Salvia
 Sapan Wood
 Sarracenia
 Satin Wood
 Saxifrage
 Scammony
 Scorzonera
 Screw-pine
 Sea-kale
 Seawrack
 Sedum
 Sequoia
 Service Tree
 Sesame
 Shaddock
 Shallot
 Sisal Hemp
 Skirret
 Snake-root
 Snapdragon
 Snowdrop
 Soap-bark
 Sorghum
 Sorrel
 Spanish Broom
 Spikenard, or Nard
 Spinach
 Spruce
 Stink-wood
 Strawberry
 Strophanthus
 Sudd
 Sumach
 Sundew
 Sunflower
 Sunn, or India Hemp
 Sweet Potato
 Sweet-sop
 Switch Plants
 Tallow Tree
 Tamarind
 Tamarisk
 Tea
 Teak
 Teasel
 Terebinth
 Thistle
 Thyme
 Tiger-flower
 Toadstool
 Tobacco
 Tomato
 Tonqua Bean
 Toothwort
 Traveller’s Tree
 Tree-fern
 Truffle
 Tuberose
 Tulip
 Tulip Tree
 Tumble-weed
 Turmeric
 Turnip
 Vanilla
 Vegetable Marrow
 Venus’s Fly-trap
 Venus’s Looking-glass
 Veratrum
 Verbena
 Vetch
 Vine
 Violet
 Walnut
 Water-lily
 Water-thyme
 Wax-tree
 Wheat
 Willow
 Willow-herb
 Wintergreen
 Winter’s-bark
 Witch-hazel
 Woad
 Wormwood
 Yam
 Yew
 Yucca
 Zinnia




                              CHAPTER LIX
                                ZOOLOGY


At the very outset of his zoological studies the reader will find that
the doctors still differ as to the best and most scientifically logical
system to be employed in classification. So important is it that the
connotation and denotation of every zoological designation should be
definite, that Sir Edwin Ray Lankester devotes the title article ZOOLOGY
(Vol. 28, p. 1022) mainly to a discussion of systems of classification,
and besides there is a separate article ZOOLOGICAL NOMENCLATURE (Vol.
28, p. 1021) by P. Chalmers Mitchell, Secretary of the Zoological
Society of London, university demonstrator in comparative anatomy and
assistant to the Linacre Professor at Oxford, and adviser to the editor
in the organization of the whole subject of zoology in the Britannica.

The Britannica articles may be classified in three divisions: dealing
with (i) _General Principles_, (ii) _Systematic_, (iii) _Natural
History_.

[Sidenote: General Principles]

The student should read at any rate some of the general articles
mentioned in the chapter on _Biology_; and these will prepare him for
the difficult questions involved in the articles ZOOLOGY and ZOOLOGICAL
NOMENCLATURE. Supplementary to these are the following: ANIMAL (Vol. 2,
p. 48), in connection with which should be read the article PROTISTA
(Vol. 22, p. 476) where the borderland between the animal and vegetable
kingdoms is further discussed, and the very valuable article PROTOZOA
(Vol. 22, p. 479) in which E. A. Minchin, professor of protozoology in
the University of London, discusses the minute animal organisms, which
in the last decade have proved immensely important in the study of
parasitic diseases. In LARVAL FORMS (Vol. 16, p. 224), and METAMORPHOSIS
(Vol. 18, p. 221) Prof. Adam Sedgwick, of the Imperial College of
Science and Technology in London, discusses the early history of larvae
and their change from larval to adult growth. The articles METAMERISM
(Vol. 18, p. 215), by Sir Edwin Ray Lankester, and _Regeneration of Lost
Parts_ (Vol. 23, p. 36), by P. Chalmers Mitchell, discuss the capacity
for repeating parts (as in the case of the common earth worm) and for
the formation of new parts to take the place of those lost by accident
or injury. The article MONSTER (Vol. 18, p. 740) by Dr. Charles
Creighton will be found very suggestive.

[Sidenote: Protective Modifications]

The eyes of most of us are shut to the wonders of the animal kingdom. We
know by hearsay that the colouring of an animal or insect, brilliant and
startling though it often be, is designed by nature for protection by
enabling it to assimilate itself to that of its surroundings. But how
many of us have taken the trouble to verify this? The articles COLOURS
OF ANIMALS, _Bionomics_ (Vol. 6, p. 731), by Prof. Poulton of Oxford,
and MIMICRY (Vol. 18, p. 495), by R. I. Pocock, superintendent of the
Zoological Gardens in London, will suggest to the reader many objects
for observation. Especially interesting in the former article is the
section on the use of colour for warning and signaling. In connection
with these articles, those on EGG (Vol. 9, p. 13) and FEATHER (Vol. 10,
p. 224), by W. P. Pycraft, of the British Museum, may be read, and
NIDIFICATION (Vol. 19, p. 666), by Prof. Alfred Newton of Cambridge
University, and Hans Gadow, Strickland curator and lecturer on zoology
in the University of Cambridge; especially those sections concerned with
the precautions taken by the birds for protection and concealment. A
very fascinating subject is discussed in the articles dealing with the
distribution and movements of animal life. These are ZOOLOGICAL
DISTRIBUTION (Vol. 28, p. 1002), by the well-known zoologist Richard
Lydekker; MIGRATION (Vol. 18, p. 433), by Hans Gadow; and PLANKTON (Vol.
21, p. 720), by G. H. Fowler of University College, London. Reference to
these articles has already been made in the chapter on _Biology_.
Closely connected with them is the article on PALAEONTOLOGY (Vol. 20, p.
579), by Prof. H. F. Osborn, Columbia University and American Museum of
Natural History, in which the distribution of prehistoric life is
discussed; and, as will be seen from the list below, all the principal
species now only found in fossil remains are described in separate
articles.

[Sidenote: Intelligence of Animals]

The editor succeeded in getting the psychologist, Prof. C. Lloyd Morgan,
of the University of Bristol, who has made a specialty of this
particular subject, to write extremely illuminating articles on INSTINCT
and on INTELLIGENCE IN ANIMALS (Vol. 14, pp. 648 and 680). Interesting
as throwing a side light on either the instinct or intelligence of
birds, is the section on their song in the article SONG (Vol. 25, p.
413). It is hardly possible to look through any of these articles, or
those on mimicry and colour, above alluded to, without coming across
some striking and interesting fact, as for instance, the sudden change
from a divine melody to an anxious croak in the utterance of the male
nightingale as soon as the brood is hatched. These articles will be read
for their great interest by many who do not intend systematically to
pursue the subject of Zoology.

[Sidenote: Animals in Captivity]

The housing of animals in captivity is discussed in the articles
AQUARIUM (Vol. 2, p. 237), by Professor G. H. Fowler, University
College, London; AVIARY (Vol. 3, p. 60), by D. Seth-Smith, curator of
birds to the Zoological Society of London; and ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS (Vol.
28, p. 1018), by P. Chalmers Mitchell. The first two contain some very
useful hints for the care of small aquaria and aviaries; and young
people who like to have aquaria at home, and are often disappointed by
their failure to keep alive some of their specimens, especially larval
and other surface-swimming animals, will find one of their difficulties
solved. These surface-swimming animals die of exhaustion from their
unaided efforts to keep off the bottom, lacking the support given in
their surroundings by the natural flow of the water, native tides, and
surface currents. The article describes a very simple arrangement by
which this motion of the water can be simulated.

Other articles which will be found very interesting are those on
HIBERNATION (Vol. 13, p. 441) and on INCUBATION AND INCUBATORS (Vol. 14,
p. 359). In the latter many will be surprised to note that incubators
have been in use in Egypt from time immemorial under the name MAMAL. In
one district of Egypt alone 90,000,000 eggs are annually hatched out in
these old time incubators, of which the secret has been handed down,
jealously guarded, from father to son. In the article TAXIDERMY (Vol.
26, p. 464), Montagu Browne, a practical taxidermist, deals with the
artistic as well as the technical aspects of the craft.

[Sidenote: Classification and Divisions]

Turning to the articles of the chief divisions of the animal kingdom,
the most useful arrangement will be to enumerate them in their order. As
has been already said, zoologists do not yet agree as to the best system
of classification; the one which is given in the Britannica is that upon
which the very eminent zoologists who have contributed the special
articles, agree as being the most suitable. There are two main grades.
The PROTOZOA (Vol. 22, p. 479) contain the animalcules, mainly
microscopic. These are the most elementary forms of life and consist of
single cells. The other and more important grade is that of the METAZOA,
which are built up of many cells.

[Sidenote: Protozoa]

The main subdivisions (called phyla) of the Protozoa are: phylum i.
SARCODINA (Vol. 24, p. 208); phylum ii. MASTIGOPHORA (Vol. 17, p. 873);
phylum iii. SPOROZOA (Vol. 25, p. 734); phylum iv. INFUSORIA (Vol. 14,
557).

[Sidenote: Metazoa]

Coming next, the Metazoa in their order are, as follows: phylum i.
Porifera (see SPONGES, Vol. 25, p. 715); phylum ii. HYDROMEDUSAE or
HYDROZOA (Vol. 14, pp. 135 and 171) which include aquatic animals of the
coral kind; phylum iii. SCYPHOMEDUSA (Vol. 24, p. 519) which include
groups of shell fish; phylum iv. ANTHOZOA (Vol. 2, p. 97) with the
corals; phylum v. CTENOPHORA (Vol. 7, p. 592) including the jelly fish;
phylum vi. PLATYELMIA (Vol. 21, p. 826) a group of animals in which
creeping first became habitual; phylum vii. Nematoidea (see NEMATODA,
Vol. 19, p. 359) which include certain kinds of worms; phylum viii.
CHAETOGNATHA (Vol. 5, p. 789) an isolated class of transparent pelagic
organisms; phylum ix. NEMERTINA (Vol. 19, p. 363) worm families; phylum
x. MOLLUSCA (Vol. 2, p. 669) shell-bearing animals.

Phylum xi. APPENDICULATA (Vol. 2, p. 220) which include the sub-phyla
ROTIFERA (Vol. 23, p. 759), CHAETOPODA (Vol. 5, p. 789), and ARTHROPODA
(Vol. 2, p. 673), the sub-phylum which comprises practically the whole
insect family. Important articles on animals in this class are: HEXAPODA
(Vol. 13, p. 418) which include the wasp, beetle, and other families;
the CRUSTACEA (Vol. 7, p. 552) which cover a field wide enough to
embrace species as different outwardly as lobsters, wood-lice, and
minute water fleas; and ARACHNIDA (Vol. 2, p. 287) the spider family.
Phylum xii. ECHINODERMA (Vol. 8, p. 871) with all the sea-urchins and
star fish.

Phylum xiii. VERTEBRATA (Vol. 27, p. 1047) to which man belongs as an
order of a sub-class of a class of a sub-phylum. The most important
sub-phylum of the Vertebrata is the Craniata (see Vol. 27, p. 1048). The
sub-phyla HEMICHORDA (Vol. 13, p. 257), Urochorda (see TUNICATA, Vol.
27, p. 379), and Cephalochorda (see AMPHIOXUS, Vol. 1, p. 886) deal with
the lower orders of Vertebrata. The sub-phylum Craniata comprises the
following classes: class i. Pisces, see ICHTHYOLOGY (Vol. 14, p. 243)
with the fishes; class ii. BATRACHIA (Vol. 3, p. 521), with the frog
tribe; class iii. Reptilia (see REPTILES, Vol. 23, p. 136); and in close
connection with this—class iv. Aves (see BIRD, Vol. 3, p. 959, and
ORNITHOLOGY, Vol. 20, p. 299); class v. MAMMALIA (Vol. 17, p. 520) to
which man belongs.

Phylum xiv. MESOZOA (Vol. 18, p. 187) minute parasitic animals
intermediate between the Protozoa and the Metazoa. Phylum xv. POLYZOA
(Vol. 22, p. 42) aquatic animals forming colonies by budding. Phylum
xvi. ACANTHOCEPHALA (Vol. 1, p. 109) including the parasitic worms.
Phylum xvii. PODAXONIA (Vol. 28, p. 1023), and phylum xviii.
GASTROTRICHA (Vol. 11, p. 526) minute animals living at the bottom of
ponds and marshes.

[Sidenote: Natural History]

This is an outline of the main division of the animal kingdom in their
order as now classified. The subject of zoology is so vast that the
student will probably confine himself to one branch of the subject,
perhaps to one small fraction of a division, of which he proposes to
investigate the complete natural history. As will be seen from the list
below, which is classified, the Britannica offers an immense amount of
material bearing on the subject. But of course the study of any one
sub-class needs a general knowledge of the foundations of zoological
science, so that some acquaintance with the principles on which the
animal world is classified is indispensable. As in Botany, it will be
easy to see from the article on any individual animal to which family it
belongs so that the young student can work back from the particular to
the general and find out the whole relationship of the subject in which
he is interested by reference to the “systematic” article.


      LIST OF ARTICLES IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA ON ZOOLOGY

 (For biographies of Zoologists, see the end of the chapter on Biology)


                           =Zoology: General=

 Abomasum
 Acetabulum
 Animal
 Aquarium
 Aviary
 Beak
 Breeds and Breeding
 Carapace
 Colours of Animals
 Comparative Anatomy
 Conch
 Contractile Vacuole
 Crepuscular
 Dew-claw
 Dewlap
 Dorsiventral
 Dredge
 Egg
 Feather
 Grub
 Herd
 Hibernation
 Incubation and Incubators
 Instinct
 Intelligence in Animals
 Karyogamy
 Larval Forms
 Meganucleus
 Membranelle
 Metamerism
 Metamorphosis
 Micronucleus
 Migration
 Mimicry
 Mongrel
 Monster
 Moult
 Nest
 Nidification
 Plankton
 Proboscis
 Pylome
 Quill
 Regeneration of Lost Parts
 Sex
 Song (of Birds)
 Taxidermy
 Vermin
 Zoology
 Zoological Distribution
 Zoological Gardens
 Zoological Nomenclature


                  =Zoology, Systematic=: Invertebrata

 Acanthocephala
 Acineta
 Actinozoa
 Algae
 Amoeba
 Annelida
 Anthozoa
 Appendiculata
 Aptera
 Arachnida
 Arcella
 Arthropoda
 Articulata
 Aspirotrochaceae
 Brachiopoda
 Campodea
 Cephalopoda
 Chaetognatha
 Chaetopoda
 Ciliata
 Coccidia
 Coelentera
 Coleoptera
 Crustacea
 Ctenophora
 Cystoflagellata
 Dendrocometes
 Desmoscolecida
 Difflugia
 Dinoflagellata
 Diptera
 Echinoderma
 Echiuroidea
 Ectospora
 Endospora
 Entomostraca
 Epistylis
 Filosa
 Flagellata
 Foraminifera
 Gastropoda
 Gastrotricha
 Gephyrea
 Globigerina
 Gnathopoda
 Gregarines
 Gymnostomaceae
 Haemosporidia
 Haplodrili
 Heliozoa
 Hemiptera
 Heterokaryota
 Hexapoda
 Hydromedusae
 Hydrozoa
 Hymenoptera
 Infusoria
 Kinorhyncha
 Labyrinthulidea
 Lamellibranchia
 Lepidoptera
 Malacostraca
 Mastigophora
 Medusa
 Mesozoa
 Mollusca
 Molluscoida
 Mycetozoa
 Myonemes
 Myriapoda
 Myzostomida
 Nematoda
 Nematomorpha
 Nemertina
 Neuroptera
 Nummulite
 Opalina
 Orthoptera
 Paramecium
 Pedipalpi
 Pelomyxa
 Pentastomida
 Peripatus
 Perissodactyla
 Phoronidea
 Planarians
 Platyelmia
 Polyp
 Polyzoa
 Priapuloidea
 Proteomyxa
 Protista
 Protogenes
 Protomyxa
 Protozoa
 Pseudopod
 Pycnogonida, or Pantopoda
 Radiata
 Radiolaria
 Rhizopoda
 Rotifera
 Sarcodina
 Scaphopoda
 Scyphomedusae
 Sipunculoidea
 Sponges
 Sporozoa
 Stentor
 Thyrostraca
 Thysanoptera
 Thysanura
 Trematodes
 Trypanosomes
 Vampyrella
 Vorticella


                   =Zoology, Systematic=: Vertebrata

 Amphibia
 Artiodactyla
 Amphioxus
 Balanoglossus
 Batrachia
 Bovidae
 Caecilia
 Carnivora
 Cetacea
 Chaetosomatida
 Chiroptera
 Cyclostomata, or Marsipobranchii
 Cyprinodonts
 Edentata
 Equidae
 Hemichorda
 Hyracoidea
 Insectivora
 Marsupialia
 Monodelphia
 Monotremata
 Pecora
 Proboscidea
 Pterobranchia
 Ratitae
 Rodentia
 Ruminantia
 Salmon and Salmonidae
 Sauropsida
 Selachians, or Elasmobranchii
 Suina
 Tardigrada
 Teleostomes
 Tunicata
 Tylopoda
 Ungulata
 Vertebrata


                  =Zoology, Natural History=: Mammals

 Aard-vark
 Aard-wolf
 Addax
 Agouti
 Alpaca
 Ant-eater
 Antelope
 Anthropoid Apes
 Aona
 Ape
 Argali
 Armadillo
 Ass
 Aurochs
 Avahi
 Aye-aye
 Babirusa
 Baboon
 Badger
 Bandicoot
 Bandicoot-rat
 Bantin
 Barbary Ape
 Bat
 Bear
 Beaver
 Beluga
 Bharal
 Binturong
 Bison
 Black Ape
 Black Buck
 Boar
 Bongo
 Bottlenose Whale
 Bronco
 Buck
 Buffalo
 Bushbuck
 Ca’ing Whale
 Calf
 Camel
 Capuchin Monkey
 Capybara
 Caracal
 Cat
 Catarrhine Ape
 Cattle
 Cavy
 Chacma
 Chamois
 Cheeta
 Chevrotain
 Chimpanzee
 Chinchilla
 Chiru
 Civet
 Clouded Leopard
 Coati
 Colugo
 Coyote
 Coypu
 Dasyure
 Deer
 Diana Monkey
 Dingo
 Dog
 Dolphin
 Dormouse
 Douroucouli
 Dromedary
 Dugong
 Duiker
 Echidna
 Eland
 Elephant
 Elk
 Ermine
 Eyra
 Fallow-deer
 Ferret
 Field-mouse
 Filander
 Flying-fox
 Flying Squirrel
 Foussa
 Fox
 Galago
 Galeopithecus
 Gaur
 Gayal
 Gelada
 Genet
 Gerbil
 Gerenuk
 Gibbon
 Giraffe
 Glutton, or Wolverine
 Gnu
 Goat
 Gopher
 Goral
 Gorilla
 Green Monkey
 Grison
 Grivet
 Groove-toothed Squirrel
 Ground-squirrel
 Guanaco
 Guenon
 Guereza
 Hamster
 Hare
 Hartebeest
 Hedgehog
 Heifer
 Heron
 Hind
 Hippopotamus
 Horse
 Hound
 Howler
 Humpback-whale
 Hunting Dog
 Hyena
 Ibex
 Ichneumon
 Indri
 Jackal
 Jaguar
 Jaguarondi
 Jennet
 Jerboa
 Jumping-hare
 Jumping-mouse
 Jumping-shrew
 Kangaroo
 Kangaroo-rat
 Kinkajou
 Kit-fox
 Klipspringer
 Koala
 Kudu
 Langur
 Lemming
 Lemur
 Leopard
 Linsang
 Lion
 Llama
 Loris
 Lynx
 Macaque
 Macrauchenia
 Mammalia
 Manati
 Mandrill
 Mangabey
 Manul
 Mare
 Markhor
 Marmoset
 Marmot
 Marshbuck
 Marsupial Mole
 Marten
 Merino
 Mink
 Mole
 Mole-rat
 Mole-shrew
 Mona Monkey
 Monkey
 Moose
 Mouflon
 Mouse
 Mule
 Muntjac
 Musk-deer
 Musk-ox
 Musk-rat
 Musk-shrew
 Mustang
 Nilgai
 Ocelot
 Octodon
 Okapi
 Opossum
 Orang-utan
 Oribi
 Oryx
 Otter
 Ox
 Paca
 Palla
 Palm-civet
 Panda
 Pangolin
 Panther
 Pariah Dog
 Patas Monkey
 Peccary
 Père David’s Deer
 Phalanger
 Pica
 Pig
 Pithecanthropus Erectus
 Platypus
 Pluto Monkey
 Pocket-gopher
 Pocket-mouse
 Polecat
 Pony
 Porcupine
 Porpoise
 Potoroo
 Potto
 Pouched-mouse
 Prairie-marmot
 Primates
 Proboscis-monkey
 Prongbuck
 Puma
 Quagga
 Rabbit
 Raccoon
 Raccoon-dog
 Ram
 Rat
 Ratel
 Reedbuck
 Reindeer
 Rhinoceros
 Rhytina
 River-hog
 Rocky-Mountain Goat
 Roebuck
 Rorqual
 Sable Antelope
 Saiga
 Saki
 Seal
 Serow
 Serval
 Sheep
 Shrew
 Sifaka
 Sirenia
 Skunk
 Sloth
 Snow-leopard
 Souslik
 Sperm-whale
 Spider-monkey
 Spiny Squirrel
 Springbuck
 Squirrel
 Squirrel Monkey
 Star-nosed Mole
 Suricate
 Swine
 Tahr
 Takin
 Tapir
 Tarsier
 Tenrec
 Thylacine
 Tiger
 Tiger-cat
 Timber-Wolf
 Tree Kangaroo
 Tree-shrew
 Udad, Aoudad, or Audad
 Uakari
 Vampire
 Vervet
 Vicugña
 Viscacha
 Vole
 Wallaby
 Walrus
 Waltzing Mouse
 Wanderu
 Wart-hog
 Waterbuck
 Water-deer
 Water-opossum
 Weasel
 Whale
 Wolf
 Wombat
 Yak
 Zebra


                   =Zoology, Natural History=: Birds

 Albatross
 Auk
 Beccafico
 Bird
 Birds of Paradise
 Bittern
 Blackbird
 Blackcock
 Bullfinch
 Bunting
 Bustard
 Buzzard
 Canary
 Capercally
 Cassowary
 Chaffinch
 Cockatoo
 Cock-of-the-Rock
 Condor
 Coot
 Cormorant
 Crane
 Crossbill
 Crow
 Cuckoo
 Curassow
 Curlew
 Diver
 Dodo
 Dove
 Duck
 Eagle
 Eider
 Emeu
 Falcon
 Fieldfare
 Finch
 Flamingo
 Flycatcher
 Fowl
 Frigate-bird
 Fulmar
 Gadwall
 Gannet
 Gare-fowl
 Garganey
 Goatsucker
 Godwit
 Golden-eye
 Goldfinch
 Goose
 Gos-hawk
 Grackle
 Grebe
 Greenfinch
 Greenshank
 Grosbeak
 Grouse
 Guacharo
 Guan
 Guillemot
 Guinea Fowl
 Gull
 Harpy
 Harrier or Hen Harrier
 Hawfinch
 Hawk
 Hen
 Heron
 Hoactzin, or Hoatzin
 Honey-eater
 Honey-guide
 Hoopoe
 Hornbill
 Humming-bird
 Ibis
 Icterus
 Jabiru
 Jacamar
 Jacaná
 Jackdaw
 Jay
 Kakapo
 Kestrel
 Killdeer
 King-bird
 Kingfisher
 Kinglet
 Kite
 Kiwi, or Kiwi-Kiwi
 Knot
 Lammergeyer
 Lapwing
 Lark
 Linnet
 Loom, or Loon
 Lory
 Love-bird
 Lyre-bird
 Macaw
 Magpie
 Mallemuck
 Manakin
 Manucode
 Martin
 Megapode
 Merganser
 Mew
 Moa
 Mocking-bird
 Moor-hen
 Morillon
 Motmot
 Mouse-bird
 Nestor
 Nightingale
 Noddy
 Nonpareil
 Nutcracker
 Nuthatch
 Ocydrome
 Oriole
 Ornithology
 Orthonyx
 Ortolan
 Osprey
 Ostrich
 Ousel, or Ouzel
 Owl
 Oyster-catcher
 Parrot
 Partridge
 Peacock
 Pelican
 Penguin
 Petrel
 Pheasant
 Pica
 Pigeon
 Pipit
 Pitta
 Plover
 Pochard, Pockard, or Poker
 Pratincole
 Ptarmigan
 Puff-bird
 Puffin
 Quail
 Quezal, or Quesal
 Rail
 Raven
 Razorbill
 Redbreast, or Robin
 Redshank
 Redstart
 Redwing
 Rhea
 Rifleman-bird
 Roller
 Rook
 Ruff
 Sand-grouse
 Sandpiper
 Scaup
 Scoter
 Screamer
 Scrub-bird
 Secretary-bird
 Seriema, or Cariama
 Shearwater
 Sheathbill
 Sheld-drake
 Shoe-bill
 Shoveler
 Shrike
 Siskin
 Skimmer
 Skua
 Snake-bird
 Snipe
 Sparrow
 Spoonbill
 Starling
 Stilt, or Long-legged Plover
 Stork
 Sugar-bird
 Sun-bird
 Sun-bittern
 Swallow
 Swan
 Swift
 Tanager-bird
 Tapaculo
 Teal
 Tern
 Thrush
 Tinamou
 Titmouse
 Tody
 Toucan
 Touracou
 Tree-creeper
 Trogan
 Tropic-bird
 Trumpeter
 Turkey
 Turnstone
 Vulture
 Wagtail
 Warbler
 Waxwing
 Weaver-bird
 Wheatear
 Whitethroat
 Wigeon, or Widgeon
 Woodchuck
 Woodcock
 Woodpecker
 Wren
 Wry-neck
 Zosterops


                  =Zoology, Natural History=: Reptiles

 Adder
 Alligator
 Alytes
 Amphisbaena
 Anaconda
 Asp
 Basilisk
 Boa
 Chameleon
 Cobra
 Cockatrice
 Crocodile
 Cryptobranchus
 Dragon
 Gecko
 Iguana
 Lizard
 Proteus
 Python
 Rattlesnake
 Reptiles
 Sea-serpent
 Snakes
 Sphenodon
 Tortoise
 Viper


                   =Zoology, Natural History=: Fishes

 Anchovy
 Angler
 Barbel
 Beluga
 Bitterling
 Bleak
 Bream
 Brill
 Burbot
 Carp
 Cat-fish
 Char
 Chub
 Cichlid
 Coal-fish
 Cod
 Dace, Dare, or Dart
 Dog-fish
 Dory, or John Dory
 Eel
 Electric Eel
 File-fish and Trigger Fish
 Flat-fish
 Flounder
 Fluke
 Flying-fish
 Gar-fish
 Globe-fish
 Goby
 Goldfish
 Goramy, or Gouramy
 Grampus
 Grayling
 Gudgeon
 Gurnard
 Gwyniad
 Haddock
 Hag-fish
 Hair-tail
 Hake
 Halibut
 Hammer-Kop, or Hammerhead
 Herring
 Horse Mackerel
 Ichthyology
 Kipper
 Lamprey
 Ling
 Loach
 Lump-sucker
 Mackerel
 Mahseer, or Mahaseer
 Menhaden
 Miller’s Thumb
 Minnow
 Mormyr
 Mullet
 Muraena
 Murray Cod
 Narwhal
 Opah
 Parr
 Parrot-fishes
 Perch
 Pike
 Pike-perch
 Pilchard
 Pilot-fish
 Pipe-fishes
 Plaice
 Pollack
 Pollan
 Pout
 Ray
 Ribbon-fishes
 Roach
 Rudd, or Red-eye
 Salmon
 Sand-Eel
 Sea-horse
 Sea-wolf
 Shad
 Shark
 Sheepshead
 Silverfish
 Smelt
 Sole
 Sprat
 Stickleback
 Sturgeon
 Sun-fish
 Sword-fish
 Tench
 Trout
 Tunny
 Turbot
 Vendace
 Weever
 Whitebait
 Whitefish
 Whiting
 Wrasse


                =Zoology, Natural History=: Batrachians

 Axolotl
 Batrachia
 Frog
 Newt
 Salamander
 Siren
 Surinam Toad
 Tadpole
 Toad
 Tree Frog


                  =Zoology, Natural History=: Insects

 Acarus
 Alder-fly
 Ant
 Ant Lion
 Aphides
 Bee
 Beetle
 Bird-louse
 Bug
 Butterfly and Moth
 Caddis-fly and Caddis-worm
 Caterpillar
 Chafer
 Cicada
 Cochineal
 Cockroach
 Cricket
 Cuckoo-spit
 Death-watch
 Dragon-fly
 Earwig
 Entomology
 Fire Brat
 Fire-fly
 Flea
 Fly
 Glow-worm
 Gnat
 Grasshopper
 Ground-pearl
 Harvest-bug
 Harvester
 Hemimerus
 Ichneumon-fly
 Insect
 Katydid
 Lacewing-fly
 Lantern-fly
 Leaf-insect
 Locust
 Louse
 Mantis
 Mantis-fly
 May-fly, or Ephemeridae
 Mosquito
 Moth
 Palmer
 Phylloxera
 Saw-fly
 Scale-insect
 Scorpion-fly
 Snake-fly
 Springtail
 Stick-insect
 Stone-fly
 Tarantula
 Termite
 Ticks
 Tsetse-fly
 Wasp
 Water-boatman
 Water-scorpion
 Weevil
 Wireworm


             =Zoology, Natural History=: Other Invertebrata

 Abalone
 Asterid
 Barnacle
 Bêche-de-Mer, or Trepang
 Book-scorpion
 Centipede
 Chiton
 Cockle
 Cowry
 Crab
 Crayfish
 Cuttle Fish
 Earthworm
 King-crab
 Leech
 Lobster
 Millipede
 Mite
 Mussel
 Nautilus
 Octopus
 Oyster
 Prawn
 Scorpion
 Sea-urchin
 Shrimp
 Snail
 Spider
 Starfish
 Tapeworms
 Teredo
 Water-flea
 Wood-louse
 Worm


                        =Zoology, Palaeontology=

 Amblypoda
 Anclyopoda
 Anthracotherium
 Archaeopteryx
 Arsinoïtherium
 Creodonta
 Dinotherium
 Diplodocus
 Dryopithecus
 Ganodonta
 Glyptodon
 Graptolites
 Ichthyosaurus
 Iguanodon
 Litopterna
 Machaerodus
 Mammoth
 Mastodon
 Megatherium
 Multituberculata
 Mylodon
 Odontornithes
 Oreodon
 Ostracoderms, or Ostracophores
 Palaeontology
 Palaeospondylus
 Palaeotherium
 Phenacodus
 Phorohacos
 Plesiosaurus
 Pterodactyles
 Sparassodonta
 Tillodontia
 Titanotheriidae
 Toxodontia
 Trilobites




                               CHAPTER LX
                       PHILOSOPHY AND PSYCHOLOGY


[Sidenote: Definitions]

Philosophers, says Plato, are “those who are able to grasp the eternal
and immutable”; their pursuit is wisdom. The history of philosophy is,
therefore, the history of the ideas which have animated successive
generations of man; so that in the wide sense the investigation includes
all knowledge; the natural as well as the moral sciences; and the
Greeks, to whom the western world owes the direction of its thought, so
understood it. The several divisions of PHILOSOPHY (Vol. 21, p. 440), as
we reckon them, were all fused by Plato in a semi-religious synthesis,
with resulting confusion. Aristotle, the encyclopaedist of the ancient
world, saw that the several issues should be regarded as separate
disciplines, and became the founder of the sciences of logic,
psychology, ethics, and aesthetics. His “first philosophy,” or, as we
should say, “first principles,” which stood as introductions to his
separate special inquiries, gradually acquired the name metaphysics. In
more recent times the natural sciences: biology, physics, chemistry,
medicine, etc., have been regarded as outside the strict boundaries of
the philosophic schools; and theology, is excluded on the ground that
its subject matter is so extensive that it may be looked upon as a
separate science. The main divisions of philosophy are: EPISTEMOLOGY
(Vol. 9, p. 701), which is concerned with the nature and origin of
knowledge, i. e., the possibility of knowledge in the abstract;
METAPHYSICS (Vol. 18, p. 224), the science of being, often called
ONTOLOGY (Vol. 20, p. 118), dealing, that is to say, with being as
being; and PSYCHOLOGY (Vol. 22, p. 547), the science of mind, an
analysis of what “mind” means.

[Sidenote: Some Important Articles and Their Writers]

[Sidenote: Metaphysics and Logic]

It will be of interest to the reader if, at this point, we enumerate
some of the more important articles in the Britannica covering this
field with the names of their authors. Andrew Seth Pringle-Pattison,
professor of logic and metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh, wrote
the general article PHILOSOPHY, which is a key to the whole subject, as
well as the articles MYSTICISM (Vol. 19, p. 123), SCEPTICISM (Vol. 24,
p. 306), SCHOLASTICISM (Vol. 24, p. 346), SPINOZA (Vol. 25, p. 687), and
others. Of fundamental importance is the article LOGIC (Vol. 16, p.
879), which would occupy 124 pages of this Guide. It is divided into two
parts: the first, by Thomas Case, president of Corpus Christi College,
Oxford, formerly professor of moral and metaphysical philosophy in that
university, treats of the science generally, and examines in detail the
processes of inference. The second, by H. W. Blunt, of Christ Church,
Oxford, and formerly fellow of All Soul’s, gives a brilliant account of
the _history_ of logic, that is, the history of the ideas which have
been the basis of all attempts to regulate these processes of inference.
This account is unique in that it is the first critical review of the
types of logical theory that has been attempted. A lucid discussion of a
most difficult subject is that given under METAPHYSICS (Vol. 18, p.
224); equivalent to 100 pages in this Guide by Professor Case, to whom,
as one of the most distinguished of modern Aristotelians, the article
ARISTOTLE (Vol. 2, p. 501) was also assigned. The life and work of PLATO
are examined in a valuable article (Vol. 21, p. 808), the equivalent in
length to 54 pages of this Guide, by the late Professor Lewis Campbell,
of St. Andrews, one of the best known Platonists of the time.

Henry Sturt, author of _Personal Idealism_ and many other books, is
responsible for brilliant discussions of UTILITARIANISM (Vol. 27, p.
820), NOMINALISM (Vol. 19, p. 735), METEMPSYCHOSIS (Vol. 18, p. 259),
SPACE AND TIME (Vol. 25, p. 525), etc. And F. C. S. Schiller, of Corpus
Christi College, Oxford, who, under the wider, and historically more
significant title “Humanism,” has further developed the pragmatic
philosophy of William James, contributed the articles on PRAGMATISM,
HERBERT SPENCER, and NIETZSCHE.

[Sidenote: Psychology]

The very important article on PSYCHOLOGY (Vol. 22, p. 54), equal to
nearly 200 pages of this Guide was contributed by James Ward, professor
of mental philosophy, Cambridge, who has devoted his whole life to
psychological research. In addition to PSYCHOLOGY he also contributed
the articles HERBART (Vol. 13, p. 335), and NATURALISM (Vol. 19, p.
274). James Sully, the well-known psychologist, former professor of the
philosophy of the mind and logic, at University College, London,
contributes the article AESTHETICS (Vol. 1, p. 277). The article ETHICS
(Vol. 8, p. 808), equivalent to about 100 pages of this Guide, and WILL
(Vol. 28, p. 648), both of primary importance, were the work of the Rev.
H. H. Williams, lecturer in philosophy, Hertford College, Oxford.

Very interesting articles are ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS (Vol. 2, p. 784),
DREAM (Vol. 8, p. 588), INSTINCT (Vol. 14, p. 648) and, very important,
WEBER’S LAW (Vol. 28, p. 458), which expresses the relation between
sensation and the stimulus which induces it.

Of recent years the psychology of crowds has received a good deal of
attention; in fact, the need of an understanding of the phenomena
attending it is of increasing importance in this age of universal
suffrage. Interesting light is thrown upon the subject in the articles
SUGGESTION (Vol. 26, p. 48), by W. M. McDougall, Wilde reader in mental
philosophy at Oxford; IMITATION (Vol. 14, p. 332); and RELIGION (Vol.
23, p. 66). A line of inquiry of vital importance to the social body is
examined in the articles CRIMINOLOGY (Vol. 7, p. 464), by Major
Griffith, for many years H. M. Inspector of Prisons, in which Lombroso’s
theory of the possession by criminals of special anatomical and
physiological characteristics is criticized, and the problem is shown to
be one of abnormal psychology; see also CESARE LOMBROSO (Vol. 16, p.
936). For discussions of other forms of abnormal psychology, see the
chapter _For Physicians and Surgeons_ in this Guide, and in particular
the article INSANITY (Vol. 14, p. 597).

[Sidenote: Psychical Research]

Perhaps more popular, certainly more sensational, than the more
legitimate branches of psychology, is that classed under PSYCHICAL
RESEARCH (Vol. 22, p. 544). The title article was written by Andrew
Lang, who wrote POLTERGEIST (Vol. 22, p. 14), as well as articles on
SECOND SIGHT (Vol. 24, p. 570), APPARITIONS (Vol. 2, p. 209), etc. The
article DIVINATION (Vol. 8, p. 332) was written by Northcote Thomas,
government anthropologist to Southern Nigeria, and author of _Thought
Transference_ and other books; and Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, formerly
principal of Newnham College, Cambridge, and secretary to the Society
for Psychical Research, was responsible for the article SPIRITUALISM
(Vol. 25, p. 705). Among the biographical articles in this section,
interest will be felt in the biography of Daniel Dunglas HOME, the
original of Robert Browning’s poem, “Sludge the Medium.”

[Sidenote: Classification]

We now may classify the principal subjects belonging to the main
divisions of philosophy, the sciences of epistemology, metaphysics, and
psychology. The wider phases of thought roughly belonging to the
division of metaphysics are, in their historical order: Platonism (see
PLATO, Vol. 21, p. 808), and Aristotelianism (see ARISTOTLE, Vol. 2, p.
501), the two great Greek systems of the classical period; NEOPLATONISM
(Vol. 19, p. 372), the last school of pagan philosophy, which grew up
mainly among the Greeks of Alexandria from the 3rd century A.D. onwards;
SCHOLASTICISM (Vol. 24, p. 346), which gave expression to the most
typical products of medieval thought; IDEALISM (Vol. 14, p. 281), the
philosophy of the “absolute,” which, though it has given a tinge to
philosophic thought from the days of Socrates to the present time, is in
its self-conscious form a modern doctrine; MATERIALISM (Vol. 17, p.
878), which regards all the facts of the universe as explainable in
terms of matter and motion; REALISM (Vol. 22, p. 941), which is a sort
of half-way house between Idealism and Materialism; PRAGMATISM (Vol. 22,
p. 246), the philosophy of the “real,” which expresses the reaction
against the intellectualistic speculation that has characterized most of
modern metaphysics. LOGIC (Vol. 16, p. 879), the art of reasoning, or,
as Ueberweg expresses it, “the science of the regulative laws of
thought,” clearly belongs to the division of epistemology. Aspects of
psychology, since they depend essentially upon perceptions of the human
mind in relation to itself or its environment, are ETHICS (Vol. 9, p.
808), or moral philosophy, the investigation of theories of good and
evil; and AESTHETICS (Vol. 1, p. 277), the philosophy or science of the
beautiful, of taste, or of the fine arts.

[Sidenote: History of Thought Personal]

The articles enumerated will give the reader a clear idea of the drift
of thought currents throughout the course of history, and they will
introduce him to the detailed discussions of the various systems which
have been propounded by the little band of men who have contributed
something vital to the treasury of thought. Each has been in and out of
fashion at different times. In the Britannica the contributions to
philosophic thought by the great philosophers are discussed in
biographical articles, to which we now turn.

[Sidenote: Breaking the Ground]

The father of Greek philosophy and indeed of European thought was THALES
of Miletus (Vol. 26, p. 720), who founded the IONIAN SCHOOL (Vol. 14, p.
731) at the end of the 7th century B.C. He first, as far as we know,
sought to go behind the infinite multiplicity of phenomena in the hope
of finding an all embracing infinite unity. This unity he decided was
water. HERACLITUS (Vol. 13, p. 309), the “dark philosopher,” nicknamed
from his aristocratic prejudices “he who rails at the people,” later
selected fire. The never ending fight between advocates of the “One” and
the “Many” had therefore begun. Sophistry (see SOPHISTS, Vol. 25, p.
418) has now an unpleasant connotation, inherited from the undisciplined
reasonings of the schools of which PROTAGORAS (Vol. 22, p. 464), GORGIAS
(Vol. 12, p. 257), PARMENIDES of Elea (Vol. 20, p. 851), and ZENO, also
of Elea (Vol. 28, p. 970), were leaders. The “science of the regulative
laws of thought” had not yet been developed and fallacies were the rule
rather than the exception. Protagoras, the first of the Sophists, in his
celebrated essay on Truth, said that “Man is the measure of all things,
of what is, that it is, and what is not, that it is not.” In other
words, there is no such thing as objective truth. After nineteen-hundred
years we are still seeking the answer to Pilate’s question, “What is
truth?” Gorgias, in his equally famous work on Nature or on the Nonent
(notbeing) maintained that “(a) nothing is, (b) that, if anything is, it
cannot be known, (c) that, if anything is and can be known, it cannot be
expressed in speech.” The paradoxes with which Zeno, the pupil and
friend of Parmenides, adorned his arguments are proverbial. Who has not
heard of Achilles and the tortoise? And it is a little curious that in
quite modern times his sophisms have, after centuries of scornful
neglect, been reinstated and made the basis of a mathematical
renaissance by the German professor Weierstrass, who shows that we live
in an unchanging world, and that the arrow, as Zeno paradoxically
contended, is truly at rest at every moment of its flight (Vol. 28, p.
971).

[Sidenote: The Socratic Schools]

The teaching of SOCRATES (Vol. 25, p. 331) was oral, and his philosophy
is handed down to us in the refined and elaborated system which PLATO
(Vol. 21, p. 808) developed in his dialogues. The “One” and the “Many”
were united in the philosophy of Plato. To him we owe a debt which is
simply incalculable, for, as is shown in the Britannica, “to whatever
system of modern thought the student is inclined he will find his
account in returning to this wellspring of European thought, in which
all previous movements are absorbed, and from which all subsequent lines
of reflection may be said to diverge.” The germs of all ideas, even of
most Christian ones, are, as Jowett remarked, to be found in Plato. The
teaching of Socrates bore fruit in strangely divers forms. Plato, his
legitimate successor, and the expounder of his philosophy, has been
referred to, but there were other very different developments. The
CYNICS (Vol. 7, p. 691), of whom DIOGENES (Vol. 8, p. 281) is the
notorious prototype, uncouthly preached the asceticism which was to
become so fashionable in a later era; but, their central doctrine, “let
man gain wisdom—or buy a rope,” contains more than a germ of truth. The
CYRENAICS (Vol. 7, p. 703), under ARISTIPPUS (Vol. 2, p. 497), starting
from the two Socratic principles of virtue and happiness, differed from
the Cynics in emphasizing the second. The MEGARIANS (Vol. 18, p. 77),
the “friends of ideas,” as Plato called them, united the Socratic
principles of virtue (as the source of knowledge) with the Eleatic
doctrine (Vol. 9, p. 168) of the “One” as opposed to the “Many.” Their
strength lay in the intellectual pre-eminence of their members, not so
much in the doctrine, or combination of doctrines, which they
inculcated.

[Sidenote: Aristotle]

Plato had done much, he had laid the foundation of modern thought; it
remained to classify it and to systematize it. This task was reserved
for ARISTOTLE (Vol. 2, p. 501), one of the greatest geniuses of any age.
He invented the sciences of logic, ethics, aesthetics, and psychology,
as separate sciences. He was at once a student, a reader, a lecturer, a
writer, and a book collector. He was the first man whom we know to have
collected books, and he was employed at one time by the kings of Egypt
as consulting librarian. His system of aesthetics still remains the best
foundation of the critic’s training. The fundamental difference between
Aristotle and Plato is that Platonism is a philosophy of universal
forms, and Aristotelianism one of individual substances. As Professor
Case puts it in the Britannica: “Plato makes us think first of the
supernatural and the kingdom of heaven, Aristotle of the natural and the
whole world.” His inquiries, therefore, pre-eminently implied that
“transvaluation of all values,” of which Nietzsche was to boast more
than two thousand years later. A contemporary of Aristotle, whose
philosophy occupies a somewhat independent position, is EPICURUS (Vol.
9, p. 683). His advice to a young disciple was to “steer clear of
culture.” His system, in fact, led him to go back from words to
realities in order to find in nature a more enduring and a wider
foundation for ethical doctrine; “to give up reasonings, and get at
feelings, to test conceptions and arguments by a final reference to the
only touchstone of truth—the senses.” A famous Roman who subscribed to
the doctrines of Epicurus was the poet-philosopher-scientist, LUCRETIUS
(Vol. 17, p. 107), whose theories in his poem _De Rerum Natura_ so
curiously anticipated much of modern physics and psychology.

[Sidenote: The Last Greek Schools]

Two schools remain to be considered before the Greek philosophy can be
dismissed: the STOICS (Vol. 25, p. 942) and the Neoplatonists (see
NEOPLATONISM, Vol. 19, p. 372). The Stoics caught the practical spirit
of the age which had been evoked by Aristotle and provided a popular
philosophy to meet individual needs. They showed kinship with the
Cynics, but under the inspiration of their founder, Zeno of Citium, they
avoided the excesses of that school, and formulated a system which fired
the imagination of the time and finally bequeathed to Rome the guiding
principles which were to raise her to greatness. Zeno is regarded as the
best exponent of anarchistic philosophy in ancient Greece, and he and
his philosophers opposed the conception of a free community without
government to the state-Utopia of Plato; see ANARCHISM (Vol. 1, p. 915).
Of Neoplatonism Adolph Harnack says in the Britannica (Vol. 19, p. 372):

  Judged from the standpoint of empirical science, philosophy passed its
  meridian in Plato and Aristotle, declined in the postAristotelian
  systems, and set in the darkness of Neoplatonism. But, from the
  religious and moral point of view, it must be admitted that the
  ethical “mood” which Neoplatonism endeavored to create and maintain is
  the highest and purest ever reached by antiquity.

The most famous exponents of this system were PLOTINUS (Vol. 21, p.
849), an introspective mystic, and PORPHYRY (Vol. 22, p. 103), who
edited Plotinus’s works and wrote his biography. Neoplatonism, coming as
it did early in our era, formed a link between the pagan philosophy of
ancient Greece and Christianity.

[Sidenote: Medieval Ecclesiasticism]

With the death of BOETIUS (Vol. 4, p. 116), in 524 A.D., and with the
closing of the philosophical schools in Athens five years later,
intellectual darkness settled over Europe and hung there for centuries.
When in the Middle Ages, the speculative sciences once again attracted
men’s minds, Christianity had already impressed its mark. SCHOLASTICISM
(Vol. 24, p. 346) as a system began with the teaching of SCOTUS ERIGENA
(Vol. 9, p. 742) at the end of the 9th century, and culminated three
centuries later with ALBERTUS MAGNUS (Vol. 1, p. 504), with his greater
disciple THOMAS AQUINAS (Vol. 2, p. 250), whose ideas have animated
orthodox philosophic thought in the Catholic Church to this day, and
with MEISTER ECKHART (Vol. 8, p. 886), the first of the great
speculative mystics (see MYSTICISM, Vol. 19, p. 123).

[Sidenote: Modern Ideas]

With the Reformation an assertion of independence made itself heard.
Man’s relation to man assumed an importance comparable to that of his
relation to God; and the first steps on the path which was to lead to
the rationalism of the French Encyclopaedists and of the English
Utilitarians were taken by Albericus GENTILIS (Vol. 11, p. 603), and
Hugo GROTIUS (Vol. 12, p. 621). In England, FRANCIS BACON (Vol. 3, p.
135) was independently working out the same problems. In philosophy his
position was that of a humanist. The remarkable success of Grotius’s
treatise _De Jure Belli et Pacis_ brought his views of natural right
into great prominence, and suggested such questions as: “What is man’s
ultimate reason for obeying laws? Wherein exactly does their agreement
with his rational and social nature exist? How far and in what sense is
his nature really social?” The answers which HOBBES (Vol. 13, p. 545),
who was considerably influenced by Bacon, gave to these fundamental
questions in his _Leviathan_ marked the starting point of independent
ethical inquiry in England. [Sidenote: The Utilitarians] From this time
on the drift of thought in England, though of course often profoundly
affected by the speculations of continental philosophers, mainly ran in
utilitarian channels; and the succession of ideas may be traced through
LOCKE (Vol. 16, p. 844), whose influence on the French Encyclopaedists
was far reaching, HUME (Vol. 13, p. 876), Jeremy BENTHAM (Vol. 3, p.
747) with his famous principle of the “greatest happiness for the
greatest number,” J. S. MILL (Vol. 18, p. 454), and Herbert SPENCER
(Vol. 24, p. 634), with his philosophy of the “unknowable.”

[Sidenote: Back to Dreams]

Meanwhile, on the continent of Europe, DESCARTES (Vol. 7, p. 79), in the
_Discourse of Method_, had stated his famous proposition “_Cogito, ergo
sum_,” and had laid down those fundamental dogmas of logic, metaphysics,
and physics, from which started the subsequent inquiries of LOCKE,
LEIBNITZ (Vol. 16, p. 385), and NEWTON (Vol. 19, p. 583). But
CARTESIANISM (Vol. 5, p. 414), as Dr. Caird points out in the
Britannica, includes not only the work of Descartes, but also that of
MALEBRANCHE (Vol. 17, p. 486) and of SPINOZA (Vol. 25, p. 687), who,
from very different points of view, developed the Cartesian theories,
the former saturated with the study of Augustine, the latter with that
of Jewish philosophy.

[Sidenote: The Rights of Man]

There follows a group of men whose speculations left a deep mark on the
course of events in Europe and America: VOLTAIRE (Vol. 28, p. 199),
MONTESQUIEU (Vol. 18, p. 775), Jean Jacques ROUSSEAU (Vol. 23, p. 775),
and Denis DIDEROT (Vol. 8, p. 204). The antiecclesiastical animus which
informed the writings of the first, the _Esprit des Lois_ of the second,
the _Contrat Social_ of the third, and the famous encyclopaedia of the
last, had political results, but their influence on metaphysical inquiry
was practically nil.

[Sidenote: Transcendentalism]

Outstanding, of course, in the 18th century was the influence of
Immanuel KANT (Vol. 15, p. 662), who summed up the teachings of Leibnitz
and Hume, carried them to their logical issues, and immensely extended
them. In fact, Kant and his disciple FICHTE (Vol. 10, p. 313), as Prof.
Case shows in the article METAPHYSICS (Vol. 18, p. 231), “became the
most potent philosophic influences on European thought in the 19th
century, because their emphasis was on man.” They made man believe in
himself and in his mission. They fostered liberty and reform, and even
radicalism. They almost avenged man on the astronomers, who had shown
that the world is not made for earth, and therefore not for man. Kant
half asserted, and Fichte wholly, that Nature is man’s own construction.
The _Kritik_ and the _Wissenschaftslehre_ belonged to the revolutionary
epoch of the “Rights of Man,” and produced as great a revolution in
thought as the French Revolution did in fact. Instead of the old belief
that God made the world for man, philosophers began to fall into the
pleasing dream “I am everything, and everything is I”—and even “I am
God.” The term TRANSCENDENTALISM (Vol. 27, p. 172) has been specially
applied to the philosophy of Kant and his successors, which is based on
the view that true knowledge is intuitive, or supernatural. The famous
Transcendental Club founded, 1836, by EMERSON (Vol. 9, p. 332) and
others in New England, was not “transcendental” in the Kantian sense;
its main theme was regeneration, a revolt from theological formalism,
and a wider literary outlook; see also BROOK FARM (Vol. 4, p. 645),
THOREAU (Vol. 26, p. 877), A. BRONSON ALCOTT (Vol. 1, p. 528), and
MARGARET FULLER (Vol. 11, p. 295).

[Sidenote: Idealism]

SCHELLING’S position (Vol. 24, p. 316), like that of his disciple HEGEL
(Vol. 13, p. 200), differed from the transcendentalism of Kant and
Fichte in regarding all noumena, or things comprehended (Vol. 19, p.
828), as knowable products of universal reason—the Absolute Ego, and,
the absolute being God, nature as a product of universal reason, “a
direct manifestation not of man but of God.” This was the starting point
of noumenal idealism in Germany, and showed a reversion to the wider
opinions of Aristotle. Hegelianism in which this idealism is carried to
its limit is professedly one of the most difficult of philosophies.
Hegel said “One man has understood me and even he has not.” His
obscurity lies in the manner in which, as William Wallace shows in his
article on the philosopher (Vol. 13, p. 204), he “abruptly hurls us into
worlds where old habits of thought fail us.” The influence of Hegel on
English thought has been wide and lasting.

[Sidenote: Realism]

SCHOPENHAUER (Vol. 24, p. 372) was essentially a realist. He led the
inevitable reaction against the absorption of everything in reason which
is the keynote of the Kantian system. In the very title of his chief
work, _The World as Will and Idea_, he emphasizes his position in giving
“will” equal weight with “mind” or “idea” (_Vorstellung_). His “Will to
Live” embodies a wholesome practical idea. Eduard von HARTMANN (Vol. 13,
p. 36) in his sensational _Philosophy of the Unconscious_ established
the thesis: “When the greater part of the Will in existence is so far
enlightened by reason as to perceive the inevitable misery of existence,
a collective effort to will non-existence will be made, and the world
will relapse into nothingness, the Unconscious into quiescence.” He thus
goes a step further in pessimism than did Schopenhauer, and the essence
of his doctrine is the will to non-existence—_not_ to live, instead of a
will to live. German realism is, however, so strongly coloured by the
idealistic cast of the national thought that we have to go to France and
England for the most thorough-going statement of the realist position.
In France the eclecticism of V. COUSIN (Vol. 7, p. 330) marked a
doctrine of comprehension and toleration, opposed to the arrogance of
absolutism and to the dogmatism of sensationalism which were the
tendencies of his day. In England a reversion to Baconian ideas produced
the natural or intuitive realism of REID (Vol. 23, p. 51), DUGALD
STEWART (Vol. 25, p. 913), SIR WILLIAM HAMILTON (Vol. 12, p. 888) and
their followers, and led to the synthetic philosophy of HERBERT SPENCER
(Vol. 25, p. 634).

[Sidenote: Materialism]

The materialists go a step further than the realists. In its modern
sense materialism is the view that all we know is body (or matter), of
which the mind is an attribute or function. This attitude was induced by
the rapid advances of the natural sciences, and by the unifying doctrine
of gradual evolution in nature. It was also heralded by a remarkable
growth in commerce, manufactures, and industrialism. The leaders of the
movement were BÜCHNER (Vol. 4, p. 719) whose _Kraft und Stoff_ became a
text book of materialism, and HAECKEL (Vol. 12, p. 803) who in his
_Riddle of the Universe_ asserts that, sensations being an inherent
property of all substance, neither mind nor soul can have an origin.

[Sidenote: The 19th Century and Beyond]

In the inquiries of LOTZE (Vol. 17, p. 23), and FECHNER (Vol. 10, p.
231), the latter an experimental psychologist, lies the germ of much of
the speculative thought of the present day. Lotze, as the well-known
psychologist Henry Sturt says in his article in the Britannica (Vol. 17,
p. 25), “brought philosophy out of the lecture room into the market
place of life.” He saw that metaphysics must be the foundation of
psychology, and that the current idealist theories of the origin of
knowledge were unsound; and he concluded that the union of the regions
of facts, of laws, and of standards of values, can only become
intelligible through the idea of a personal deity. Like a brilliant
meteor NIETZSCHE (Vol. 19, p. 672) flashed across the philosophic sky.
His theories of the super-man are known to everyone. His brilliant
essays are all in the nature of prolegomena to a philosophy which,
embodied in a master work, the “Will to Power,” was to contain a
transvaluation of all existing ethical values. Unfortunately he did not
live to complete the work, which remains a fragment; but the drift of
his thought is clearly indicated. One other system should be mentioned,
that of POSITIVISM (Vol. 22, p. 172), which its founder, AUGUSTE COMTE
(Vol. 6, p. 814) hoped would supersede every other system. Comte’s
philosophy confines itself to the data of experience and declines to
recognise a priori or metaphysical speculations. The system of morality
which he built up on it, and in which God is replaced by Humanity, has
largely failed, in spite of the brilliant ideas which animate it,
because it is in many of its aspects retrograde. A most interesting
review of present day tendencies in the regions of Metaphysics will be
found at the end of that article, with special reference to the
brilliant work of WUNDT (see also Vol. 28, p. 855), who constructing his
system on the Kantian order—sense, understanding, reason, exhibits most
clearly the necessary consequence from psychological to metaphysical
idealism. His philosophy is the best exposition of modern idealism—that
we perceive the mental and, therefore, all we know and conceive is
mental.

[Sidenote: The Historical Clue]

This sketch of the course of events in philosophical speculation will at
least enable the reader to follow the historical clue to the evolution
of ideas. Every student must, in order to attain a true perspective,
know the _genealogy_ of the ideas he is studying. It will therefore be
best that he first read the general articles referred to in the
beginning of this chapter, supplementing them by the accounts given of
the separate systems under the headings of their authors.

A list of the philosophical and psychological articles (more than 500 in
number) in the Britannica will be found in the Index (Vol. 29, p. 939)
and it is not repeated here.




                                PART III
                  DEVOTED TO THE INTERESTS OF CHILDREN




                              CHAPTER LXI
                              FOR PARENTS


[Sidenote: The Science of Rearing Children]

The new Encyclopaedia Britannica is full of encouragement for parents
who are tempted to feel that the proper care and training of a child
require almost superhuman skill and energy. Many of the fears and doubts
by which they are beset rest upon vague traditions, handed down from a
day when a child’s health was threatened by more dangers and greater
dangers than now, and when much less was known than is known to-day
about the training of a child. Statistics are dull things, as a rule,
but it would be difficult to find pleasanter reading than the
statistical tables which show how much the modern progress of science
has done for children. And these figures, in many Britannica articles on
various diseases and localities, by showing how much safer children’s
lives are than they used to be, also indicate a _decrease of children’s
suffering_ and an _increase of children’s happiness_ which cannot be
expressed in numbers. Sheer ignorance caused much of the pain that
children used to suffer and also much of the neglect that led to bodily
and mental deficiency in later life. There is still room for
improvement; but it is no exaggeration to say that the child of the
average American mechanic is more intelligently cared for than was, a
hundred years ago, the heir to a European kingdom.

Every branch of science has contributed to these improved conditions.
Medical and surgical research have no doubt been the great factors, as
disease and deformity were the worst evils; but the child’s mind has
been as carefully studied as its body. Here, again, figures cannot tell
the whole story. They can show the universal benefits of our public
school system, but they cannot show how greatly the children of
well-read and thoughtful parents benefit by home influences
intelligently exerted. That element of education begins as soon as a
child is born, and it is based upon such observation of its individual
needs as only a parent’s affection and sympathy can achieve. And in this
part of the parent’s task, as in the case of the child’s health, it is
essential to be guided by specialists of the highest authority, such as
those who wrote for the Britannica the articles of which a brief account
is given in this chapter.

The child’s individuality, physical and mental, is largely inherited.

[Sidenote: What is Known about Heredity]

The vast subject of heredity has indeed not yet been reduced to an exact
science, but the newest theories advanced by Weismann, Hertwig, and
others, with such confirmation as has already been obtained, are clearly
set forth in Dr. P. Chalmers Mitchell’s article HEREDITY (Vol. 13, p.
350). As for our knowledge of the physiological process of heredity, the
foundation may be said to have been laid by the labours of the Austrian
monk Mendel, and biologists are rapidly extending his work in various
directions. What has been done in the past thirteen years since
scientists rediscovered Mendel’s work is described in MENDELISM (Vol.
18, p. 115), by R. C. Punnett, professor of biology, Cambridge
University. There is no subject of greater interest or fascination
before the world to-day, and there is no better or simpler introduction
to it than Professor Punnett’s able article. As he says, “Increased
knowledge of our heredity means increased power of control over the
living thing.” We know very little as yet, but that little “offers the
hope of a great extension at no very distant time. If this hope is borne
out, if it is shown that the qualities of man, his body and his
intellect, his immunities and his diseases, even his very virtues and
vices, are dependent upon the ascertainable presence or absence of
definite unit-characters whose mode of transmission follows fixed laws,
and if also man decides that his life shall be ordered in the light of
this knowledge, it is obvious that the social system will have to
undergo considerable changes.”

The relations between parent and offspring are also dealt with in
REPRODUCTION (Vol. 23, p. 116), by Dr. Mitchell; and those who wish to
study the development of the organism will find such information in
EMBRYOLOGY (Vol. 9, p. 314), by Adam Sedgwick, who is professor of
zoology at the Imperial College of Science and Technology, London. This
masterly account is supplemented by a section (p. 329) on the
_Physiology of Development_ by Dr. Hans A. E. Driesch, of Heidelberg
University.

[Sidenote: The New-Born Child]

The article INFANCY (Vol. 14, p. 513), by Dr. Harriet Hennessy, is
devoted to the care of the child during its first year. The first bath,
care of the eyes, clothing, increase of weight, etc., are thoroughly
discussed, and the directions for artificial feeding contain tables of
milk-dilution and of the amounts to be given. In CHILD (Vol. 6, p. 136)
will be found a valuable table of average heights and weights of
children from the ages of one to fifteen, and a full bibliography of
works relating to child-study.

The main points to be considered for each sex in the difficult period
between childhood and maturity are concisely set forth in ADOLESCENCE
(Vol. 1, p. 210). An ideal system of child raising is outlined, dealing
with hygiene, clothing, and moral and physical training. See also
GYMNASTICS AND GYMNASIUM (Vol. 12, p. 752), by R. J. McNeill.

[Sidenote: The Vital Question of Food]

Parents must have a thorough and clear understanding of the question of
bodily nourishment. This is most imperative. It means sound bodies for
the children, their good health in after years, their efficiency and
success in life. On this point the new Britannica provides information
of a character that for authoritativeness and completeness can nowhere
else be matched.

The important matter of feeding a family is treated at great length in
DIETETICS (Vol. 8, p. 214), by the late Prof. W. O. Atwater of Wesleyan
University, known the world over as an authority on this subject, and R.
D. Milner, formerly assistant in the U. S. Department of Agriculture.
The article gives information as to the composition and nutritive values
of foods and their adaptation to the use of people in health. There are
tables of food composition, of the digestibility of nutrients, of the
quantities of available nutrients, etc. The hygienic and pecuniary
economy of food are discussed in such a way as to be of real service.
For those who desire further information on the subject of food
assimilation reference may be made to NUTRITION (Vol. 19, p. 920), by
Dr. D. Noel Paton, professor of physiology, University of Glasgow, and
Dr. E. P. Cathcart, lecturer in chemical physiology in the same
institution.

[Sidenote: Maintenance of Health]

In regard to the maintenance of general health of children without
reference to specific ailments there is a vast fund of information to be
extracted by consulting the new Britannica. The titles of a few of the
articles will sufficiently indicate information to which every parent
should have constant access: ANTISEPTICS (Vol. 2, p. 146); DISINFECTANTS
(Vol. 8, p. 312); CARBOLIC ACID, _Pharmacology and Therapeutics_, (Vol.
5, p. 305); SALICYLIC ACID, _Medicine and Therapeutics_ (Vol. 24, p.
70); EMETICS (Vol. 9, p. 336); ACONITE, _Therapeutics_ (Vol. 1, p. 152);
COLCHICUM, _Pharmacology_ (Vol. 6, p. 662); PHENACETIN (Vol. 21, p.
363); PEPSIN (Vol. 21, p. 130); RHUBARB (Vol. 23, p. 273); SENNA (Vol.
24, p. 646); POISON, with list of poisons and antidotes (Vol. 21, p.
893); HAEMORRHAGE, how to tell the different kinds (Vol. 12, p. 805);
WOUND, nature of bruises and treatment (Vol. 28, p. 837); BURNS AND
SCALDS (Vol. 4, p. 860); SUNSTROKE, nature of heat prostration (Vol. 26,
p. 110); nature and treatment of frost-bite, MORTIFICATION (Vol. 18, p.
878); ULCER (Vol. 27, p. 565); CHILBLAINS (Vol. 6, p. 134); ECZEMA (Vol.
8 p. 920); relief from choking, OESOPHAGUS (Vol. 20, p. 14); BONE,
_Fractures_, special fractures in the young (Vol. 4, p. 201); DROWNING
AND LIFE SAVING (Vol. 8, p. 592); SLEEP, amount of sleep necessary at
different ages (Vol. 25, p. 238); DISEASES OF VISION (Vol. 28, p. 142);
with its special section (p. 144) on the care of the eyesight of
children; BLINDNESS, _Causes and Prevention_ (Vol. 4, p. 60), by Sir F.
J. Campbell, principal, Royal Normal College for the Blind, London;
SHOCK, injuries and accidents (Vol. 24, p. 991). There is a section on
_Action of Baths on the Human System_, in BATHS AND BATHING (Vol. 3, p.
518), telling of the effects of cold, tepid, warm, hot, and very hot
baths.

Parents will be most grateful to the Britannica for the complete
descriptions of infantile diseases, dealing with symptoms and principles
of cure and treatment.

[Sidenote: Treatment of Infantile Diseases]

_The British Medical Journal_ commenting on the nature of the medical
section of the new Britannica has said that it is “an admirable example
of the kind of exposition which will enable the head of a family,
without embarrassing him with technical details, to deal with a
situation with which he may be confronted at any moment.” Realizing the
great necessity for a popular yet authentic discussion of diseases, the
editors have produced a work which has received the highest approval of
the medical world for its quality of practical usefulness.

In the first place, parents should devote much study to Sir T. Lauder
Brunton’s most clear and able discussion of THERAPEUTICS (Vol. 26, p.
793), dealing in a general manner with the means employed to treat
disease. Here we learn about the action of microbes, the nature of
inflammation and fever (which are protective processes calculated to
defend the organism against the attacks of microbes but which often
become injurious), about defensive measures and principles of cure,
proper nutrition and elimination, flatulence, constipation, etc. It is
also important to know something about the action of drugs, and this is
fully explained in PHARMACOLOGY (Vol. 21, p. 350), by Dr. Ralph
Stockman, of Glasgow University, while Dr. H. L. Hennessy in the same
article (p. 352) explains the terms used in the classification of drugs.

Before describing the material devoted to the special diseases of
children, it is well to remind parents of a valuable illustrated article
on PARASITIC DISEASES (Vol. 20, p. 770), by Dr. G. Sims Woodhead,
professor of pathology in Cambridge University. It is about the length
of 52 pages in this Guide. The information as to the origin of various
diseases, of those which are due to vegetable and those due to animal
parasites, of the infective diseases in which no organism yet discovered
has surely been connected with the malady (as is the case with scarlet
fever), and of infective diseases, such as measles, mumps, and
whooping-cough, not yet traced to microorganisms, will prove of the
highest interest because the facts related have a most important
influence upon present methods of treatment.

[Sidenote: Diseases most Common to Childhood]

CROUP (Vol. 7, p. 511) is a concise account of spasmodic croup—so
terrifying to all parents. The treatment is carefully described. The
same is true of TONSILLITIS (Vol. 27, p. 11). For other common throat
diseases see BRONCHITIS (Vol. 4, p. 634); RESPIRATORY SYSTEM, _Pathology
of_ (Vol. 23, p. 195) by Dr. Thomas Harris, a noted authority, and Dr.
Harriet Hennessy, and LARYNGITIS (Vol. 16, p. 228), which fully
describes the paroxysmal laryngitis so peculiarly fatal to infants. In
all these articles reference is made to adenoids as a contributing cause
of the maladies described. There is a separate account of these recently
discovered troublesome growths, ADENOIDS (Vol. 1, p. 191), and of the
comparatively simple operation for their removal, by Dr. Edmund Owen,
consulting surgeon to the Children’s Hospital, London.

The great attention which, in recent years, has been paid to DIPHTHERIA
(Vol. 8, p. 290) has produced most striking results. We know its cause
and nature, we understand the conditions which influence its prevalence;
and a “specific” cure in an antitoxin has been found. Specialists now
trace to diphtheria many of the serious cases which would formerly have
been thought due to other diseases, and especially to croup.

WHOOPING COUGH (Vol. 28, p. 616) is one of the most common diseases of
infancy, but, except in the most extreme cases, does not require the
regular attendance of a physician. The malady has three recognized
stages, in the second of which complications are apt to arise which may
become a source of danger greater than the malady itself. Parents should
also understand the curious structural changes in the lungs which
sometimes remain after the disease has run its course.

Of all the diseases of earlier childhood, MEASLES (Vol. 17, p. 947) is
the most prevalent, and its spread is largely due to the fact that its
initial symptoms are slight and not easily recognizable. The proper
understanding of these is, therefore, most necessary, as well as a
thorough appreciation of possible complications and their consequences.
The best mode of treatment is also indicated in this article. There are
several well-marked varieties of SCARLET FEVER (Vol. 24, p. 303) of
which the chief are simple scarlatina, septic scarlatina, and malignant
scarlatina; and the complications and effects of the disease are among
the most important features which should be understood. The list of
infantile diseases is too long for specific description, but parents can
appreciate the value and significance of this valuable department of the
work by referring to such articles as MUMPS (Vol. 18, p. 968); DYSENTERY
(Vol. 8, p. 785); CHOLERA (Vol. 6, p. 262), with a special section on
children’s simple cholera; see also DIGESTIVE ORGANS, _General and Local
Diseases_ (Vol. 8, p. 262) by Dr. A. L. Gillespie, lecturer on modern
gastric methods, Edinburgh Post-Graduate School, and MENINGITIS,
_Cerebro-Spinal_ (Vol. 18, p. 130), with an account of the new and
successful serum treatment.

[Sidenote: Mental Training]

In planning the groundwork of education, parents should have a clear
idea of the principles of modern instruction. Here the Britannica again
comes to their assistance. The biographies of PESTALOZZI (Vol. 21, p.
284) and of FROEBEL (Vol. 11, p. 238) describe the insistence of these
leaders on the need of educating a child through his own activity, and
the results they obtained by this method. Further elaboration of the
subject is given in EDUCATION, _Theory_ (Vol. 8, p. 951), by James
Welton, professor of education in the University of Leeds, to which
article there are added detailed accounts of national systems of
education. An interesting supplementary article is SCHOOLS (Vol. 24, p.
359), by A. F. Leach, describing the stages of experiment by which our
modern idea of a school has been developed. There is an admirably
instructive article, TECHNICAL EDUCATION (Vol. 26, p. 487), by Sir
Philip Magnus, formerly member of the Royal Commission of Technical
Instruction.

[Sidenote: Assistance at Home in School Education]

The new Britannica performs a service of the greatest importance in
responding to the opening mind of the child. Children are the greatest
of question askers, and the Britannica is the best question answerer
ever devised. They want to know about the races of men, the different
animals and plants they see; in fact, almost every object that comes
under their observation. The inestimable advantage of answering an
inquiry fully and correctly and not in an offhand manner is too obvious
to need mention. _Let your young children see you go to your Britannica
for information and as soon as they are old enough they will naturally
do the same, and then the volumes will be performing their most
efficient work in the household._

For helping children with their school “themes” and “compositions,” for
elucidation or amplification of any topic that comes up in the course of
their studies, there is no medium so useful as the new Britannica—the
most exhaustive compendium of knowledge which has ever been devised,
with its elaborate index of 500,000 alphabetical references, giving
instant access to every fact in the whole work. Of equal assistance will
be its employment in connection with Sunday School lessons; for the
accounts of the Bible and its separate books, giving the latest results
of Biblical criticism, are the product of the highest learning of the
age.

[Sidenote: The World of Nature]

For the instruction of children about the history of mankind, the nature
of the universe, the animal, plant, and mineral world, the new
Britannica offers a complete fund of necessary knowledge. There are 277
astronomical articles, including biographies; 889 zoological articles;
675 on plants; 380 on minerals and rocks. The classified subject-list in
the Index Volume places the whole of this material immediately before
the eye.

The articles ANTHROPOLOGY (Vol. 2, p. 108), by Dr. Edward B. Tylor of
Oxford University, dean of living anthropologists, and ETHNOLOGY AND
ETHNOGRAPHY (Vol. 9, p. 849) describe the races of mankind, man’s place
in nature, the origin of man, and his antiquity. The main article
ZOOLOGY (Vol. 28, p. 1022), by Sir Edwin Ray Lankester, of London
University, is an introduction to knowledge of the whole of the animal
world, which is amplified, with minute details, in separate accounts of
all members of the animal kingdom. ZOOLOGICAL DISTRIBUTION (Vol. 28, p.
1002), by the noted naturalist, Richard Lydekker, is a mine of
information about the distribution of living animals and their
forerunners on the surface of the globe. Articles of great importance
are BOTANY (Vol. 4, p. 299), by Dr. A. B. Rendle of the British Museum,
and the great article PLANTS (Vol. 21, p. 728), in the various sections
of which the whole story of the vegetable world is told by eight famous
specialists. There are, of course, separate articles on all plants. We
also recommend to parents a careful study of the section (Vol. 23, p.
120) of REPRODUCTION, _Reproduction of Plants_, by Dr. S. H. Vines, and
POLLINATION (Vol. 22, p. 2), from which they can give their children
much necessary instruction. Such a course is now strongly advised by
educators and authorities in child-study as the best method of preparing
the mind for a healthy, sane knowledge of sex matters in later years.

[Sidenote: What Happens on the Earth and in the Air]

All the facts about the earth’s surface will be found in GEOGRAPHY, in
the section _Principles of Geography_ (Vol. 11, p. 630), by Dr. H. R.
Mill, formerly president of the Royal Meteorological Society; and see
also OCEAN AND OCEANOGRAPHY (Vol. 19, p. 967), by Dr. Otto Krümmel,
professor of geography, University of Kiel, and Dr. H. R. Mill.
Everything about the weather, storms, etc., may be learned from
METEOROLOGY (Vol. 18, p. 264), by Dr. Cleveland Abbe, professor of
meteorology in the U. S. Weather Bureau; and from ATMOSPHERIC
ELECTRICITY (Vol. 2, p. 860), by Dr. Charles Chree of the National
Physical Laboratory, England.

Clouds always appeal strongly to a child’s imagination. The article
CLOUD (Vol. 6, p. 557), by A. W. Clayden, author of _Cloud Studies_, has
beautiful illustrations of cloud forms, with explanations.

Lord Rayleigh, a winner of the Nobel prize and one of the most
distinguished of living scientists, in the article SKY (Vol. 25, p. 202)
explains why the blue of the sky varies as it does.

Parents will find a great deal to tell their children about phenomena of
nature in such articles as EARTHQUAKE (Vol. 8, p. 817), by F. W. Rudler,
formerly president of the Geologists’ Association, England, and Dr. John
Milne, author of _Earthquakes_; and VOLCANO (Vol. 28, p. 178), by F. W.
Rudler. Glaciers and their effects are described in GLACIER (Vol. 12, p.
60), by E. C. Spicer.

In teaching rudimentary things about the heavens, it is well to note
that CONSTELLATION (Vol. 7, p. 11), by Charles Everitt, contains
star-maps by which the positions may easily be recognized. After reading
STAR (Vol. 25, p. 784), by A. S. Eddington, of the Royal Observatory,
Greenwich, many wonders of the heavens about the number of the stars,
their distances, the variable and double stars, etc., may be told the
child. The same is true of the articles PLANET (Vol. 21, p. 714), by Dr.
Simon Newcomb, director of the American Nautical Almanac and professor
of mathematics in the Navy, and of the separate accounts of all the
different planets; COMET (Vol. 6, p. 759), by Dr. Newcomb; and NEBULA
(Vol. 19, p. 332), by A. S. Eddington, etc. These are all very fully
illustrated. Ideas as to the structure of the universe, the origin of
the solar system, etc., will be found in NEBULAR THEORY (Vol. 19, p.
333), by Sir Robert S. Ball, professor of astronomy, Cambridge
University.

[Sidenote: The Training of the Hand]

A great many children show a liking for the mechanical arts and are
curious about processes of manufacture. Parents will find in the new
Britannica complete information about the marvelous things ingenious
machines do and how they do them; for example, SPINNING (Vol. 25, p.
685), by T. W. Fox, professor of textiles in the University of
Manchester; COTTON-SPINNING MACHINERY (Vol. 7, p. 301), also by
Professor Fox; WEAVING (Vol. 28, p. 440), by Professor Fox, with
illustrations; HOSIERY (Vol. 13, p. 788), by Thomas Brown, of the
Incorporated Weaving, Dyeing and Printing College, Glasgow; CARPET (Vol.
5, p. 392), by A. S. Cole, assistant secretary for art, Board of
Education, England; SILK (Vol. 25, p. 96), by Frank Warner, president of
the Silk Association of Great Britain and Ireland; Richard Snow,
examiner in silk throwing and spinning for the City and Guilds of London
Institute, and Arthur Mellor; FLOUR AND FLOUR MANUFACTURE (Vol. 10, p.
548), by G. F. Zimmer, author of _Mechanical Handling of Material_; ROPE
AND ROPE MAKING (Vol. 23, p. 713), by Thomas Woodhouse, head of the
weaving and textile department, Technical College, Dundee; SUGAR, _Sugar
Manufacture_ (Vol. 26, p. 35), by A. Chapman, designer and constructor
of sugar machinery, and Valentine W. Chapman.

[Sidenote: The Foundation of Good Taste]

An important service to education is rendered by the Britannica in the
way that it supplements and extends education received in the school.
There, far too often children learn little or nothing of the world of
art, of the beautiful creations of the human intellect by means of
which, even before the dawn of history, men attempted to express in
concrete form their sense of beauty. It is surely most desirable for
children to have an idea, at least, of principles and styles of
architecture; of ancient and modern painting and sculpture—to know the
chief characteristics of schools of art; to have a little knowledge of
musical forms, of what a symphony, a concerto, a sonata, an opera, are;
to be able to recognize a piece of Dresden, Sèvres, Italian faience,
Copenhagen, or Wedgwood ware when they see it; to know the different
periods and styles of furniture; to tell Bohemian from Venetian glass;
to be familiar with lovely textiles and fabrics and to appreciate their
true value. Such knowledge is the foundation of good taste. It serves to
arouse appreciation of, and respect for, the objects with which a child
is surrounded, and leads to delightful interests, recreations and
occupations in later years. There are few better and more constant uses
to which the Britannica can be put than the systematic education of
children in matters of general culture and refined taste.

[Sidenote: Knowledge of the Fine Arts]

A list of articles to serve this purpose would be too long to give here.
They are easily found by means of other chapters in this Guide. But
special mention may be made of ARCHITECTURE (Vol. 2, p. 369), by R.
Phené Spiers, master of the architectural school, Royal Academy, London,
by John Bilson, of the University of Manchester, and others; PAINTING
(Vol. 20, p. 459), by Prof. G. B. Brown of Edinburgh University; L.
Bénédite, keeper of the Luxembourg Gallery, Paris; Richard Muther,
professor of modern art, Breslau University; and John C. Van Dyke,
professor of history of art, Rutgers College; SCULPTURE (Vol. 24 p.
488), by Marion H. Spielmann, formerly editor, _Magazine of Art_, P. G.
Konody, art critic of the _Observer_, L. Bénédite, and Dr. J. H.
Middleton, Slade professor of fine art, Cambridge University; CERAMICS
(Vol. 5, p. 703), by Hon. William Burton, chairman, Joint Committee of
Pottery Manufacturers of Great Britain, R. L. Hobson of the British
Museum, and other authorities; GLASS (Vol. 12, p. 86), by Alexander
Nesbitt, H. J. Powell, author of _Glass Making_, and Dr. W. Rosenhain of
the National Physical Laboratory, England; LACE (Vol. 16, p. 37), by A.
S. Cole, author of _Embroidery and Lace_; FURNITURE (Vol. 11, p. 363),
by J. Penderel-Brodhurst. All of these articles are superbly
illustrated, and this feature alone would give them a direct educational
value for young people.

[Sidenote: The Best Picture-Book in the World]

In fact, the new Britannica may be said to be the greatest and most
varied picture book in existence. There are 7,000 text illustrations and
450 full-page plates. This suggests at once a special use for the work
in making children familiar, by purely pictorial means, with objects
they should learn to recognize. When a child asks for a description of
some object whose name has aroused his curiosity, it is safe to say that
an accurate picture of it will be found in the new Britannica. Suppose
that he has heard of a dirigible balloon and wants to know how it
differs from the ordinary balloon which he has seen. The index will
guide his instructor to the article AERONAUTICS (Vol. 1, p. 260), with
two full-page plates of dirigible balloons. A child can learn to
distinguish the breeds of domestic animals from the illustrations alone.
Thirst for mechanical knowledge may be satisfied by such articles as
STEAM ENGINE (Vol. 25, p. 818), with about 70 illustrations, by Prof. J.
A. Ewing, of Cambridge University; WATCH (Vol. 28, p. 362), by Lord
Grimthorpe and Sir H. H. Cunynghame; LIGHTHOUSE (Vol. 16, p. 627), by W.
T. Douglass and N. G. Gedye; TELEPHONE (Vol. 26, p. 547), by Emile
Garcke; and LOCK (Vol. 16, p. 841), by A. B. Chatwood—all fully
illustrated.

[Sidenote: Sport and Recreation]

The new Britannica is an exhaustive and practical compendium of sports,
games, and recreations of all kinds. Part 6 of this Guide contains a
survey of this department in the book. There are over 260 articles on
sports and games alone, and they describe clearly how each is played,
and also give expert advice. There is also much that is extremely
interesting in the historical development of pastimes, a knowledge of
which heightens the interest and pleasure of those who participate in
them; and parents can be of real assistance to their children in
instructing them about their sports, and by acquiring this information
themselves can give sympathetic appreciation to the children’s
amusements. Among the noteworthy contributions on sports and games there
are CHILDREN’S GAMES (Vol. 6, p. 141), an article for parents by Alice
B. Gomme, an expert on this subject; GAMES, CLASSICAL (Vol. 11, p. 443),
an account which every boy will read with pleasure, by Francis Storr,
editor of the _Journal of Education_, London; ATHLETIC SPORTS (Vol. 2,
p. 846); BASE-BALL (Vol. 3, p. 458), by Edward Breck; BASKET-BALL (Vol.
3, p. 483), FOOTBALL (Vol. 10, p. 617), of which the American section is
written by Walter Camp, the football expert; KITE-FLYING (Vol. 15, p.
839), by Major-Gen. Baden Powell; MARBLES (Vol. 17, p. 679), by W. E.
Garrett Fisher; LAWN TENNIS (Vol. 16, p. 300), by R. J. McNeill;
SWIMMING (Vol. 26, p. 231), by William Henry, founder and chief
secretary of the Royal Life Saving Society; SKATING (Vol. 25, p. 166),
and COASTING (Vol. 6, p. 603).

[Sidenote: Diverting Occupations]

Recreation in the form of diverting occupations is sometimes more
attractive to children, especially to those of a practical turn of mind,
than sports and games. It is often difficult for parents to encourage
these inclinations, since they themselves may not be familiar with the
subjects for which their children show a special aptitude, and a real
talent may thus fail to be cultivated. As soon as any particular bent in
the child is discovered, a parent ought to consider it a duty to learn
to help the boy or girl.

The new Encyclopaedia Britannica will, on all subjects of diverting
occupations, prove of immense practical assistance to parents. They will
find all that they need to know to help their children under such
headings as PHOTOGRAPHY (Vol. 21, p. 485), by Sir William de Wiveleslie
Abney, formerly president of the Royal Photographic Society, James
Waterhouse also a former president of the same society, who writes on
photographic apparatus, and A. H. Hinton, author of _Practical Pictorial
Photography_, etc.; BEE, _Bee Keeping_ (Vol. 3, p. 628), by W. B. Carr,
formerly editor of the _Bee-Keeper’s Record_; the article AVIARY, on the
keeping of birds (Vol. 3, p. 60), by David Seth-Smith, formerly
president of the Avicultural Society; POULTRY AND POULTRY FARMING (Vol.
22, p. 213), by Lewis Wright, author of _The Practical Poultry-Keeper_;
BASKET, _Basket Making_ (Vol. 3, p. 481); HORTICULTURE (Vol. 13, p.
741), by M. T. Masters, late editor of _The Gardener’s Chronicle_, W. R.
W. Williams, superintendent of London County Council Botany Centre, John
Weathers, author of _Practical Guide to Garden Plants_, Prof. Liberty
Hyde Bailey, director of the College of Agriculture, Cornell University,
and Peter Henderson; CARPENTRY (Vol. 5, p. 386), by James Bartlett,
lecturer on construction, at Kings College, London; CONJURING (Vol. 6,
p. 943), by John Algernon Clarke, G. Faur, and John Nevil Maskelyne.




                              CHAPTER LXII
                          FOR SCHOOL-CHILDREN


[Sidenote: Importance of Correct First Impressions]

When a stick of hot glass is drawn out, no matter how far it is
stretched, the slender stick retains the original shape of the
piece—square, round or oval. In the same way, a child’s mind retains in
after life the shaping originally given to it. Everyone knows from
personal experience how difficult it is to rid the mind of a wrong
impression received in childhood. The editors of the new Britannica feel
that they have solved a great problem in making a work of the most
_accurate_ and _authoritative_ character _interesting to children_, for
they have received much valuable testimony that this end has been
attained. Dr. Charles W. Eliot, president-emeritus of Harvard
University, was an early subscriber for two sets for the use of his
grandchildren. He said that he found the work “altogether admirable; and
my grandchildren, who are at the most inquisitive ages, are of the same
opinion.” Professor W. G. Hale, of the University of Chicago, wrote, “My
children feel the same fascination in it that I do.” Judge J. P. Gorter,
of the Baltimore Supreme Court, has expressed his opinion that “every
family with growing children seeking information should have this
invaluable work in the library.” The owner of the new Britannica should
constantly encourage his children to go to the volumes for further
information on topics included in the course of the day’s studies at
school. It will not take long to make them realize that the volumes open
an inexhaustible mine of knowledge, and answer any question as to which
curiosity has been aroused. With a little help from you, at the
beginning, they will soon learn to use the Britannica for themselves.

[Sidenote: The Britannica Interesting to Children]

The love of reading is quickly developed in children. Some are attracted
to history, to the lives of great men, to exploration and to adventure;
others become more interested in the world of nature; still others have
a natural bent toward science and the mechanical arts. Whatever the
inclination may be, the Britannica stands at the child’s service, giving
to him the true facts in such a way that he can easily understand them.

The following suggestions will help children to pursue their favourite
lines of reading. They may like to begin with the heroes of myth and
history. Andrew Lang contributes a most comprehensive article on
MYTHOLOGY (Vol. 19, p. 128). The classified subject-list in Vol. 29
(Index) indicates nearly 500 separate articles on the gods and
mythological beings of ancient Greece and Rome, Asia, Egypt, Europe and
America. The central hero of medieval romance, ARTHUR (Vol. 2, p. 681),
is described by Miss Jessie L. Weston, author of _Arthurian Romances_.
The famous deeds of the CID (Vol. 6, p. 361), the foremost man of
Spain’s heroic period, are related by H. E. Watts, the well-known
translator of _Don Quixote_. ROLAND, LEGEND OF (Vol. 23, p. 464), tells
another stirring story.

[Sidenote: Heroes and Heroines of History, Romance and Adventure]

[Sidenote: The Romance of the Middle Ages]

[Sidenote: Heroes of Later Times]

[Sidenote: Famous Women of History]

Of peculiar interest to children are such articles as _Cyrus (The
Great)_, (Vol. 7, p. 706), by Dr. Eduard Meyer, professor of ancient
history, University of Berlin, author of the world-famous _History of
Antiquity_; ALEXANDER III (THE GREAT), (Vol. 1, p. 545), by the noted
Hellenist, Edwyn R. Bevan; CAESAR, JULIUS (Vol. 4, p. 938), by Henry
Stuart Jones, of Oxford University; HANNIBAL (Vol. 12, p. 920), by M. O.
B. Caspari, of London University; THEODORIC (Vol. 26, p. 768), the great
ruler of the Gothic nation, by Theodore Hodgkin, author of _Italy and
her Invaders_; CHARLEMAGNE, founder of the Holy Roman Empire (Vol. 5, p.
891), by Arthur W. Holland; CHARLES MARTEL (Vol. 5, p. 942), a great
type of courage and activity, by Christian Pfister, professor at the
Sorbonne, Paris; ALFRED THE GREAT (Vol. 1, p. 582), by Rev. Charles
Plummer, author of _The Life and Times of Alfred the Great_; CRUSADES
(Vol. 7, p. 524), by Ernest Barker, of Oxford University, a narrative
with all the action and interest of the best tales for children;
TEMPLARS (Vol. 26, p. 591), by W. Alison Phillips, author of _Modern
Europe_, etc.; LOUIS IX (Saint) (Vol. 17, p. 37), by Prof. James T.
Shotwell, of Columbia University; CONRADIN (Vol. 6, p. 968), the
pathetic life of this marvelous boy who perished at the age of
seventeen; HUNDRED YEARS’ WAR (Vol. 13, p. 893), by Jules Viard,
archivist of the National Archives, Paris; FROISSART, JEAN (Vol. 11, p.
242), a notable biography, by Sir Walter Besant; CHARLES V (Vol. 5, p.
899), by Edward Armstrong, author of _The Emperor Charles V_, etc.;
CROMWELL, OLIVER (Vol. 7, p. 487), by Philip Chesney Yorke, of Oxford,
Capt. C. F. Atkinson, and R. J. McNeill; GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS (Vol. 12, p.
735), by R. Nisbet Bain, author of _Scandinavia_, etc.; MARLBOROUGH
(Vol. 17, p. 737), by Dr. W. P. Courtney; FREDERICK II (THE GREAT) (Vol.
11, p. 52), by James Sime, author of _History of Germany_, and W. Alison
Phillips; NAPOLEON I (Vol. 19, p. 190), by J. Holland Rose; NELSON (Vol.
19, p. 352), by David Hannay, author of _Short History of the Royal
Navy_; WELLINGTON (Vol. 28, p. 507); WASHINGTON, GEORGE (Vol. 28, p.
344), by Dr. William MacDonald, professor of American History in Brown
University; LINCOLN, ABRAHAM (Vol. 16, p. 703), by John G. Nicolay,
private secretary to President Lincoln, and Charles C. Whinery,
assistant editor of the Encyclopaedia Britannica; GRANT, ULYSSES S.
(Vol. 12, p. 355), by Capt. C. F. Atkinson, and John Fiske, author of
_The American Revolution_; LEE, ROBERT E. (Vol. 16, p. 362); BOADICEA
(Vol. 4, p. 94), by Dr. F. J. Haverfield, professor of ancient history,
Oxford University; MATILDA (THE GREAT COUNTESS) (Vol. 17, p. 888), by
Prof. Carlton H. Hayes, of Columbia University; JOAN OF ARC (Vol. 15, p.
420), by Prof. J. T. Shotwell, of Columbia University; ISABELLA (Vol.
14, p. 859); ELIZABETH, QUEEN OF ENGLAND (Vol. 9, p. 282), by A. F.
Pollard, professor of English history, London University; MARY, QUEEN OF
SCOTS (Vol. 17, p. 817), by Algernon C. Swinburne, the great poet,
author of _Mary Stuart_, etc.; CATHERINE DE’ MEDICI (Vol. 5, p. 528);
VICTORIA, QUEEN (Vol. 28, p. 28), by Hugh Chisholm, editor,
Encyclopaedia Britannica.

The biographies are not dry outlines of the subjects’ lives, but
narratives of a thoroughly interesting and often most entertaining
nature. There has been a generous amount of space alloted the
biographical articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica. The article on
Napoleon I is equivalent to 60 pages of this Guide; that of George
Washington to 13 pages; of Abraham Lincoln to 23 pages; of Queen
Victoria 23 pages. Such length provides space for the picturesque
details which make the articles especially appropriate for children, and
will establish a taste for this kind of reading in later years.

[Sidenote: Readings in Natural History]

Many children show a bent for knowledge of the world of nature, and to
them the new Britannica will prove a faithful, constant companion. Their
pleasure in going to the encyclopaedia will be heightened by the many
beautiful pictures they will find in it. The articles on the domestic
animals not only relate in simple, readable fashion the very interesting
facts about their history and development, but are splendidly
illustrated with pictures of the different breeds so that by this means
alone anyone may learn to distinguish them. CAT (Vol. 5, p. 487), is by
Richard Lydekker, the noted naturalist; CATTLE (Vol. 5, p. 539) is by
Dr. William Fream, author of _Handbook of Agriculture_, and Robert
Wallace, professor of agriculture, Edinburgh University; DOG (Vol. 8, p.
374) is by Walter Baxendale, kennel editor of _The Field_, and Dr. F.
Chalmers Mitchell; HORSE (Vol. 13, p. 712) is by Sir William Henry
Flower, the noted biologist, author of _The Horse, a Study in Natural
History_, Richard Lydekker, E. D. Brickwood, Dr. William Fream and
Robert Wallace; PIG (Vol. 21, p. 594) is by Robert Wallace, and SHEEP
(Vol. 24, p. 817) is by Dr. Fream and Professor Wallace.

In too many books for children about the habits of wild animals, the
facts of nature are grossly distorted with the idea of impressing the
imagination. We are all familiar with the recent spirited controversy
over “nature fakers” and the reaction to more sober statement which it
brought about. It is the truth about the animal world that is wanted;
for it is quite wonderful and fascinating enough as it is. And the new
Britannica supplies this need in a most satisfactory and thorough
manner. Children never tire of natural history, and parents may be
assured that the information in the entertaining articles by noted
naturalists, in the pages of the Britannica, is of the most reliable and
accurate character.

[Sidenote: The Habits and Doings of Clever Animals]

Nothing, for instance, could be more absorbing to the average
school-child than the article ANT (Vol. 2, p. 85), by Prof. George H.
Carpenter of the Royal College of Science, Dublin, who wrote the
well-known book _Insects; their Structure and Life._ Here he tells how
colonies of ants are founded, and how they live, and how they receive
other insects as guests in order to obtain the food they desire, and how
some species make slaves of other species. Numerous examples of their
sense and intelligence are given, and the question as to whether their
actions are rational or instinctive is discussed in the light of the
most recent knowledge. The story of the BEE (Vol. 3, p. 625), also by
Professor Carpenter, is equally wonderful, for we learn all about the
solitary and social bees, the social organization of the hive, and how
the worker bees are victimized. Both of these articles are fully
illustrated. SPIDERS (Vol. 25, p. 663), by R. I. Pocock, superintendent
of the Zoological Gardens, London, is another example of the
adaptability of the Britannica to children’s reading. The accounts of
their webs, nests and modes of catching prey hold the attention
throughout.

A great deal of the most curious and recent knowledge of the animal
kingdom is related in supplementary articles such as COLOURS OF ANIMALS
(Vol. 6, p. 731), by Dr. E. B. Poulton, Hope professor of zoology at
Oxford, author of _The Colours of Animals_, and MIMICRY (Vol. 18, p.
495), by R. I. Pocock. The latter tells how animals protect themselves
from their enemies by resemblance to other animals or objects.

[Sidenote: Knowledge about Plants and Animals]

Space will not permit further specific mention. The life-story of the
entire animal kingdom, detailed information about plants and flowers are
to be found in the pages of the new Britannica. The accurate and
beautiful illustrations and the text, written in every case by
naturalists of acknowledged reputation, and written always in the
clearest language, help to give the work its unique position as the
greatest source of authoritative and easily comprehended knowledge.

[Sidenote: Marvelous Machines]

Children delight in machinery and what it accomplishes, and the
Britannica tells about this with great thoroughness in its complete
section dealing with processes of manufacture. A number of the articles
on this subject have been suggested in the last chapter as suitable for
parents who wish to interest their children in the industrial world, and
the list may be further extended for the benefit of older children by
including such articles as TEXTILE PRINTING (Vol. 26, p. 694), by Dr.
Edmund Knecht, of Manchester University; FINISHING (Vol. 10, p. 378)
also by Professor Knecht; WOOL, WORSTED AND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES (Vol.
28, p. 805), by Aldred F. Barker, professor of textile industries,
Bradford Technical College; TYPOGRAPHY, _Modern Practical Typography_
(Vol. 27, p. 542), by John Southward, author of _Practical Printing_,
and H. M. Ross; PRINTING (Vol. 22, p. 350), by C. T. Jacobi, managing
director of the Chiswick Press, London; DREDGE AND DREDGING (Vol. 8, p.
562), by Walter Hunter, a noted consulting engineer; REAPING (Vol. 22,
p. 944), by Primrose McConnell, author of _Diary of a Working Farmer_,
etc.

Boys with a practical, mechanical turn of mind will delight in such
articles as BRIDGES (Vol. 4, p. 533), by Prof. W. C. Unwin, with many
illustrations; MOTOR VEHICLES (Vol. 18, p. 914), by the late C. S.
Rolls, a pioneer of motoring, and Edward S. Smith; FLIGHT AND FLYING,
_Artificial Flight_ (Vol. 10, p. 510), which describes, with many
pictures, flying machines from the earliest types to the latest, and
CYCLING (Vol. 7, p. 682), an historical and pictorial account of the
velocipede and bicycle. Nothing could be more interesting and
instructive than SHIP (Vol. 24, p. 860), of which the historical part is
by Rev. Edmond Warre, formerly head master of Eton College, and the
account of modern ships by Sir Philip Watts, who designed the
“Dreadnought” and the “Mauretania.” It is a real story, equivalent in
length to 190 pages of this Guide, with nearly 130 illustrations of all
sorts of craft including modern warships, ocean liners and vessels for
inland navigation. Under RAILWAYS (Vol. 22, p. 819) there is an equally
good history of the railway by H. M. Ross, editor of _The Times
Engineering Supplement_, and others.

[Sidenote: Electrical Apparatus]

The remarkable attraction possessed by electrical apparatus for many
boys will doubtless send them to such articles as DYNAMO (Vol. 8, p.
764), by C. C. Hawkins, author of _The Dynamo_; TELEPHONE (Vol. 26, p.
547), by Harry R. Kempe, electrician to the General Post Office, London;
TELEGRAPH (Vol. 26, p. 510), also by H. R. Kempe, and the chapter on
_Wireless Telegraphy_ (p. 529), by J. A. Fleming, professor of
electrical engineering in the University of London. These accounts are
full of the most practical information, and will be of inestimable help
to any boy who wishes to experiment for himself.

[Sidenote: Industrial Processes]

Many industrial processes, while not employing complicated machinery,
nevertheless possess much interest, both from an historical and a
technical point of view, and on these the new Britannica is as complete
and authentic as in all other departments. Especially useful and
entertaining to children will be found the material relating to the
manufacture of the common objects by which they are surrounded. Such,
for instance, are CERAMICS (Vol. 5, p. 703), by William Burton and
several other experts, with beautiful illustrations; GLASS (Vol. 12, p.
86), by Harry James Powell, author of _Glass Making_, etc., Alexander
Nesbitt, and William Rosenhain of the National Physical Laboratory,
England; and PROCESS (Vol. 22, p. 408), an illustrated account, by Edwin
Bale, of the photomechanical processes by which illustrations are
reproduced in printing.

These and hundreds of similar articles will prove most helpful and
suggestive to school-children who are constantly called on to prepare
“themes” and write compositions. As soon as a child makes acquaintance
with the new Britannica he will quickly realize its inexhaustible
resources, and the aid it lends him in his studies will be continued
throughout the course of his life, in his business and in his general
reading.

[Sidenote: Explorers’ Voyages and Journeys]

Children love to read adventures of explorers in forcing their way to
unknown lands. The impression they make is much clearer when the child
has learned to distinguish the different motives which have led to
discovery and to exploration—commercial expansion, fresh conquests,
religious zeal, flight from persecution, or the advancement of knowledge
for its own sake. With such information he will read in a new light the
stirring history of adventure, the great story of hardship and
endurance.

The Britannica presents all this on a definite, scientific plan. The
inquirer starts on his trip through any field of learning with
guide-posts clearly marked, and successive ones in sight one from the
other; so that there is no going astray, no uncertain wandering. A
reader—young or old—with taste for exploration and adventure may turn
first to GEOGRAPHY, _Progress of Geographical Discovery_ (Vol. 11, p.
623), by Dr. H. R. Mill, editor of _The International Geography._ This
article outlines geographical discovery in chronological order from the
days of the Phoenicians. The reader will doubtless make excursions into
other parts of the books for more detailed accounts, but he has always
this main article to guide him. He will go to the article on HERODOTUS
(Vol. 13, p. 381), the traveler, by Canon George Rawlinson, the great
Oriental archaeologist, and the Rev. E. M. Walker of Oxford University;
and to the story of PYTHEAS (Vol. 22, p. 703), the Greek navigator who
brought the first definite news of northwestern Europe to the
Mediterranean world, by Sir Edward H. Bunbury, author of _A History of
Ancient Geography_, and Dr. C. R. Beazley of the University of
Birmingham. Other stories of exploration and adventure are: VIKING (Vol.
28, p. 62), by Charles F. Keary, author of _The Vikings in Western
Christendom_; LEIF ERICSSON (Vol. 16, p. 396), the first European to set
foot on the American continent, by Prof. C. R. Beazley; VINLAND (Vol.
28, p. 98), with all the latest known facts of Leif’s discovery, by
Prof. J. E. Olson of the University of Wisconsin; the marvelous career
of the great Venetian discoverer, POLO, MARCO (Vol. 22, p. 7), boldest
of medieval travelers, by Sir Henry Yule, author of _The Book of Ser
Marco Polo_, and Prof. C. R. Beazley; HENRY OF PORTUGAL (the Navigator)
(Vol. 13, p. 296); DIAZ DE NOVAES (Vol. 8, p. 172); COLUMBUS,
CHRISTOPHER (Vol. 6, p. 741)—all of these by Professor Beazley;
[Sidenote: America—Its Discoverers and Conquerors] GAMA, VASCO DA (Vol.
11, p. 433), who discovered the Cape route to India; PINZON (Vol. 21, p.
631); VESPUCCI, AMERIGO (Vol. 27, p. 1053), by Professor Beazley;
BALBOA, VASCO NUÑEZ DE (Vol. 3, p. 241), discoverer of the Pacific
Ocean; CABOT (Vol. 4, p. 921), by H. P. Biggar, author of _The Voyages
of the Cabots to Greenland_; MAGELLAN, FERDINAND (Vol. 17, p. 302), the
first circumnavigator of the globe, by Professor Beazley; SOTO,
FERDINANDO DE (Vol. 25, p. 435), wrongly called the discoverer of the
Mississippi; PERU, _History_ (Vol. 21, p. 274), by Sir Clements R.
Markham, author of _Travels in Peru and India_, a full account of
Pizarro’s conquest; CORTES, HERNAN (Vol. 7, p. 205), a concise and able
description of the conquest of Mexico; CARTIER, JACQUES (Vol. 5, p.
433), which tells of the discovery of the St. Lawrence; HUDSON, HENRY
(Vol. 13, p. 849); BAFFIN, WILLIAM (Vol. 3, p. 192); LA SALLE (Vol. 16,
p. 230), by C. C. Whinery, assistant editor of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica; [Sidenote: Great Voyages] CHAMPLAIN, SAMUEL DE (Vol. 5, p.
830), by Dr. N. E. Dionne, author of _Life of Samuel Champlain_, etc.;
DRAKE, SIR FRANCIS (Vol. 8, p. 473); BUCCANEERS (Vol. 4, p. 709), by
David Hannay, a stirring account of the piratical adventurers of
different nationalities who united against Spain in the 17th century,
and COOK, JAMES (Vol. 7, p. 71), by Professor Beazley.

[Sidenote: Modern Exploration]

The story of geographical discovery and exploration is continued in such
articles as AMERICA, _General Historical Sketch_ (Vol. 1, p. 806), by
David Hannay; AFRICA, _History: Exploration and Survey since 1875_ (Vol.
1, pp. 331 and 352), by F. R. Cana, author of _South Africa from the
Great Trek to the Union_; ASIA, _Exploration_ (Vol. 2, p. 738), by Col.
Sir Thomas H. Holdich, formerly superintendent of the Frontier Surveys
of India; AUSTRALIA, _Discovery and Exploration_ (Vol. 2, p. 958); and
POLAR REGIONS (Vol. 21, p. 938), by Dr. Fridtjof Nansen, the Arctic
explorer, and Dr. H. R. Mill, which gives a brilliant survey of all the
attempts to conquer the frozen world. In connection with these articles
should be read the full and interesting biographies of the great modern
explorers such as BAKER, SIR SAMUEL WHITE (Vol. 3, p. 227); BURTON, SIR
RICHARD F. (Vol. 4, p. 864), by Dr. Stanley Lane-Poole; LIVINGSTONE,
DAVID (Vol. 16, p. 813), by John Scott Keltie, secretary of the Royal
Geographical Society; STANLEY, SIR HENRY MORTON (Vol. 25, p. 779), by F.
R. Cana; EMIN PASHA (Vol. 9, p. 340); SPEKE, JOHN H. (Vol. 25, p. 633);
PARRY, SIR WILLIAM EDWARD (Vol. 20, p. 865); FRANKLIN, SIR JOHN (Vol.
11, p. 30); KANE, ELISHA KENT (Vol. 15, p. 650); NORDENSKIÖLD, NILS
ADOLF ERIK (Vol. 19, p. 740); NANSEN, FRIDTJOF (Vol. 19, p. 162); PEARY,
ROBERT EDWIN (Vol. 21, p. 30). See the chapter on _Geography_ in this
Guide.

[Sidenote: A Complete History of the World]

A strong taste for history is often found in children, and the new
Britannica is, among other things, a complete history of the world, by
the greatest historians of the present day. In respect to the treatment
and arrangement of the historical section there are many things that
make it especially adapted for young people’s reading. In the first
place the great episodes of history, such as FRENCH REVOLUTION,
RENAISSANCE, REFORMATION, MIDDLE AGES, and CRUSADES, are discussed in
separate articles. Also every battle, siege, campaign, or war of
importance has its article, apart from its treatment in the histories of
countries. The historical articles in the new Britannica will send those
a little older to other articles dealing with government, and thus help
them to cope intelligently with the social and civic problems of the
age—in other words, enable them to become the best kind of citizens. The
chapter in this Guide headed _Questions of the Day_ covers this ground;
and see the chapters on _History_.

A child is naturally curious to know about mountains, rivers, caverns,
the causes of rain, dew and wind. Just as this encyclopaedia shows
itself the best of instructors in regard to the plant and animal world,
so with natural phenomena it serves to bring the child into close,
sympathetic touch with the truths of science.

[Sidenote: Physical Geography made Interesting]

The principles of physical geography are clearly explained in GEOGRAPHY,
_Principles of_ (Vol. 11, p. 630), by Dr. H. R. Mill; and when these are
learned young people will turn with eager interest to such articles as
ALPS (Vol. 1, p. 737), partly by W. A. B. Coolidge, author of _The Alps
in Nature and in History_; ANDES (Vol. 1, p. 960); APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS
(Vol. 2, p. 207), by Dr. Arthur C. Spencer, geologist to the Geological
Survey of the United States; HIMALAYA (Vol. 13, p. 470); VOLCANO (Vol,
28, p. 178), by F. W. Rudler, of the Museum of Practical Geology,
London; VESUVIUS (Vol. 27, p. 1063), by Sir Archibald Geikie and Dr.
Thomas Ashby; EARTHQUAKE (Vol. 8, p. 817), by F. W. Rudler and Dr. John
Milne, author of _Earthquakes_, etc.; GEYSER (Vol. 11, p. 913); CAVE
(Vol. 5, p. 573), by Dr. William Boyd Dawkins, author of _Cave Hunting_,
etc.; MAMMOTH CAVE (Vol. 17, p. 531), by Rev. Horace C. Hovey, author of
_Celebrated American Caverns_, etc.; LURAY CAVERN (Vol. 17, p. 127),
also by Dr. Hovey; GRAND CANYON (Vol. 12, p. 347), by R. S. Tarr, late
professor of physical geography, Cornell University; GREAT SALT LAKE
(Vol. 12, p. 421); YOSEMITE (Vol. 28, p. 937), by Dr. John Muir,
president of the American Alpine Club, and author of _The Mountains of
California_; YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK (Vol. 28, p. 912); GLACIER (Vol.
12, p. 60), by Rev. E. C. Spicer, of Oxford University; NIAGARA (Vol.
19, p. 634), by Dr. G. K. Gilbert, author of _Niagara Falls and their
History_; MISSISSIPPI RIVER (Vol. 18, p. 604); AMAZON (Vol. 1, p. 783),
by Col. George E. Church, the famous American explorer of the Amazon;
ORINOCO (Vol. 20, p. 275), also by Colonel Church; RHINE (Vol. 23, p.
240), by Dr. J. F. Muirhead, editor of many of Baedeker’s Guide Books,
and Philip A. Ashworth; NILE (Vol. 19, p. 692), by F. R. Cana and Sir W.
E. Garstin, governing director, Suez Canal Co.; NIGER (Vol. 19, p. 674)
and CONGO (Vol. 6, p. 914), by F. R. Cana; YANGTSZE-KIANG (Vol. 28, p.
903), by George Jamieson, formerly British consul-general at Shanghai;
DESERT (Vol. 8, p. 92), by Dr. H. N. Dickson, professor of geography,
University College, Reading; SAHARA (Vol. 23, p. 1004), by Edward
Heawood, librarian of the Royal Geographical Society, London, and F. R.
Cana. There are also separate articles on the oceans and large lakes.

Astronomy is a science which is peculiarly attractive to children, since
it arouses the imagination and makes a strong appeal to their delight in
all that is marvelous. There are 277 astronomical articles in the new
Encyclopaedia Britannica to which the classified list in the Index
Volume (Vol. 29, p. 888) is the key.

[Sidenote: Readings in Astronomy]

In the preceding chapter are mentioned a few articles which will serve
for the beginning of an acquaintance with astronomy. When a child has
learned to know the zodiacal constellations he will certainly want to
read ZODIAC (Vol. 28, p. 993), by Agnes M. Clerke, author of _A History
of Astronomy in the 19th Century_, for the story of the signs and what
they meant to the nations of past ages. There are separate articles on
the principal constellations and stars. ASTROLOGY (Vol. 2, p. 795), by
Prof. Morris Jastrow of the University of Pennsylvania, will prove both
entertaining and instructive.

Those who wish to know about methods of observation will find the
complete story in TELESCOPE (Vol. 26, p. 557), a beautifully illustrated
article by H. Dennis Taylor, author of _A System of Applied Optics_, and
Sir David Gill, formerly astronomer royal at the Cape of Good Hope.

[Sidenote: Games and Pastimes]

In the preceding chapter a few articles on games were mentioned as being
useful to parents helping very young children to amuse themselves. A
little later, the child will be delighted to choose for himself among
the 260 articles on sports and pastimes; and the analysis of this
department of the Britannica, in Part 6 of this Guide, will then be of
service. We may mention here the articles GOLF (Vol. 12, p. 219), by H.
G. Hutchinson, golf champion and author of _Hints on Golf_; LACROSSE
(Vol. 16, p. 54); BOWLING (Vol. 4, p. 344); ROWING (Vol. 23, p. 783), by
C. M. Pitman, formerly stroke of the Oxford University Eight;
MODEL-YACHTING (Vol. 18, p. 640); ANGLING, _Methods and Practice_ (Vol.
2, p. 24); CRICKET (Vol. 7, p. 435); ARCHERY, _Pastime of_ (Vol. 2, p.
364), by the late W. J. Ford. A long list of indoor and out-door games
will be found in the classified subject-list (Vol. 29, p. 946).

[Sidenote: Diverting and Profitable Occupations]

The aptitude of children for diverting and often profitable occupations
is admirably fostered by the new Britannica through many of its very
practical articles. This matter has been discussed in the last chapter.
In addition it is worthy of note that an ingenious boy could learn to
make and set up a sun-dial with the help of DIAL AND DIALLING (Vol. 8,
p. 149), by Hugh Godfray; and could experiment and amuse himself with a
CAMERA LUCIDA or a CAMERA OBSCURA (Vol. 5, p. 104), from the articles
written by Charles J. Joly, late Astronomer Royal of Ireland; while even
a younger child could quickly learn to tie any kind of a knot from KNOT
(Vol. 15, p. 871), with 54 illustrations, by P. G. Tait, the famous
British physicist. All the crafts that produce objects of household
utility are practically taught in articles by experts, so that the
Britannica is a complete guide to the use of every kind of tool.

[Sidenote: Reading for Girls]

In the field of girls’ occupations there is in the Britannica much
material that serves to give knowledge of the best methods of home
making.

_A great number of articles for girls’ reading will be found among those
named in the chapter For Women._

In these days parents, and especially mothers, are devoting more and
more time to the study of child development. The importance and value of
intelligent sympathetic guidance in everything a child does—and every
active child strives to do something—has been fully realized. The chief
problem before the parent is, therefore, to have at hand some ready
means of meeting every expression of a child’s interests, every
indication of budding talents. A short experience with the new
Britannica will show this to be one of its many valuable functions.
Children do not need to be driven to the volumes. They need only to be
made acquainted with them.




                             CHAPTER LXIII
    SOME QUESTIONS CHILDREN SOMETIMES ASK, AND SOME QUESTIONS TO ASK
                                CHILDREN


A child gains a great part of its knowledge by asking questions, and he
should be encouraged to ask them. But parents often find the child’s
questions, even those about the objects he sees every day, so difficult
to answer, that he is told “not to bother.” With the new Encyclopaedia
Britannica at hand, there is hardly any intelligent question that cannot
be answered after a glance at the Index and at the page to which it
refers the reader. Again, there is no better way at once of amusing and
instructing the child than to ask him questions and help him find his
way to the answers. Here are a few questions: some of the kind that a
child might ask, and some that may be put to a child. The Britannica
supplies interesting answers to all of them, and some of these answers
are given here.

_What makes people snore?_

The answer, found at once by referring to “snoring” in the Index, is
that the cause is breathing through the mouth, which makes the soft
palate vibrate. When the child is told this, it should also be told what
the Britannica says about mouth-breathing being a dangerous habit for
children to form, as it often leads to sore throats.

_How does one ant tell another to go to work?_

By patting it with its feelers. The article ANT, by Professor Carpenter,
will supply you with stories to tell children as fascinating as any
fairy tale.

_What makes the colours of sunset?_

Dust. If it were not for the dust floating in the air, we should lose
not only the brilliant sunsets but the glorious cloud scenery as well,
and there would be no twilight. Furthermore, all the moisture in the
air, which now condenses on the particles of floating dust, would settle
on our clothes and on the walls of our rooms. You will find many other
curious facts in the article DUST, by John Aitken, who invented the
machine for counting the particles of dust in the atmosphere.

_How does the brightness of moonlight compare with that of sunlight?_

Most people would guess that sunlight is twenty, or, at most, fifty
times as strong; yet it is really half a million times stronger. The
article MOON, by Dr. Simon Newcomb, is full of such curious information
and of delightful pictures.

_Why did the Israelites in bondage need straw to put in their bricks,
although we do not use it in ours?_

The article BRICK tells you that their bricks were made of Nile mud,
which would not bind without something to hold it together.

_When sea-water freezes, does the salt go into the ice?_

Only one-fifth of it, the article ICE says.

_Are you sure you like the taste of vanilla?_

This is an excellent puzzle to put to a bright child. The curious
answer, found in the article TASTE, is that vanilla, like onions and
some other substances which we think have strong flavors, really has no
taste at all. We smell them as we eat them, and therefore we imagine we
taste them. This you can prove to a child by blindfolding it, while its
nose is firmly closed, holding a slice of onion and a slice of apple
near its open mouth, and touching its tongue first with one and then
with the other.

_What is a beaver’s favourite food?_

Of all unlikely things—water-lilies! This, and other things that will
delight children, you will find in the article BEAVER, by Richard
Lydekker, the famous naturalist.

_Why is it harder to guess the width of a river than to guess the width
of a field as wide?_

The article VISION will tell you.

_Why are new-born babies’ eyes often slate-blue, for a time?_

The article EYE will tell you.

_Why is not spiders’ silk manufactured?_

Unfortunately, although the silk is of the finest quality, quite equal
to the silkworm’s, the spiders are such fierce cannibals that each one
would have to be kept in a separate box, and this would make the silk
too costly. The article SPIDERS, by R. I. Pocock, superintendent of the
London Zoological Gardens, also tells you how spiders make their way
through the air to islands in the sea; how the wolf-spider builds a nest
with a hinged door, and how the common pond-spider builds his
thimble-shaped house under water and fills it with air by swimming down
to it, time after time, on each trip taking down a tiny bubble of air.

_Why do not animals that sleep all through the winter starve to death?_

Because they live on the fat they have put on during the summer, as the
article HIBERNATION explains.

_Why could not the Norsemen who visited America in the 11th century
found permanent settlements?_

The natives were hostile and the Norsemen had no firearms. The wonderful
story of the first voyages to America is told in the article VINLAND.

_How can you tell how far away a flash of lightning is?_

Sound travels so much more slowly than light does, that if the flash is
a mile away you see it five seconds before you hear the report; so by
counting the seconds you can measure the distance. The Index, under
“Lightning: distance” refers you to the article SOUND, by Professor
Poynting.

_Why does your hair stand on end when you are frightened?_

The article SKIN, by Professor Parsons, will tell you about this curious
action of the muscles.

_Why do we count by tens?_

Because people began by counting on their fingers and thumbs, and when
they got to ten they had to begin again. Some tribes used to make twenty
their basis for counting, adding in their toes. The article ARITHMETIC
tells you this; and a newspaper critic said of this article that he was
amazed to find it one of the most readable things in the Britannica. The
truth is that there are no subjects that are dull in themselves. There
is a dull way of treating them, and there is also the Britannica way,
which is to show you _how things came to be as they are_. That is why
children are delighted when “Britannica time” comes, the hour when the
parent sits down by the bookcase and tells them true stories out of the
volumes and shows them the exquisite pictures.

_Are men or women oftener stammerers?_

The article STAMMERING, which tells you that men are much oftener
afflicted than women, is one that all parents should read. If a child’s
speech is carefully watched, the first trouble of this kind may
sometimes be checked before it becomes a habit.

_Why does a room look smaller with red than with violet wall-paper?_

Read the article VISION and you will understand this and many other
curious facts about the way our eyes do their work. Furthermore, you
will be reminded that slight defects in a child’s sight should be
noticed and treated by an oculist before permanent harm has been done.

_Why is winter colder than summer?_

Simply because the sun’s rays, coming aslant instead of from overhead,
travel through more miles of air and are thus robbed of much of their
heat before they reach us. The polar regions actually get more hours of
sunlight in a year than we get in the United States, more even than
there are at the equator, but the sun is never high above the horizon at
the poles.

_Can a snake cross a frozen pond?_

No, nor move on any other smooth surface, as the article SNAKES shows.

_How long was Abraham Lincoln at school?_

Less than a year in all, as shown by the article LINCOLN, ABRAHAM, by J.
G. Nicolay (Lincoln’s private secretary) and C. C. Whinery. But although
he could not get much teaching, he read over and over again every book
he could get hold of.

Here are a few questions without the answers; but the numbers after each
question show the volume and page of the Britannica where each answer
can be found:

_What makes blood clot?_ (Vol. 4, p. 81.)

_Are there any red-haired human races?_ (Vol. 12, p. 823.)

_Why does a cut apple turn brown?_ (Vol. 21, p. 756.)

_What makes negroes black?_ (Vol. 25, p. 190.)

_Are men or women oftener colour-blind?_ (Vol. 28, p. 139.)

_Why do stars twinkle?_ (Vol. 23, p. 29.)

_What happens in your throat when you sob?_ (Vol. 23, p. 195.)

_What change in water, as it freezes, makes ice float?_ (Vol. 14, p.
227).

_Why is the shadow cast by an electric light sharper-edged than the
shadow cast by the sun?_ (Vol. 24, p. 758).

_Why does fright make people faint?_ (Vol. 27, p. 942).

_What makes the beautiful “ice-flowers” on a frosted window-pane?_ (Vol.
14, p. 226).

_How do trappers prepare valuable fur-skins so as to preserve them until
they get to market?_

The skins are simply dried in the air, as stated in the article _Fur_,
which was written by the head of a great wholesale fur business.

_How does the amount of air in a room spoiled by an ordinary gas-burner,
or a small reading-lamp, compare with the amount spoiled by a man’s
breathing?_

The gas burner or the lamp spoils four times as much air, as shown in
the article VENTILATION.

_What part of your weight is blood?_

One-twentieth. (Vol. 27, p. 939).

_What domestic animal is oftenest born with only one eye?_

The pig. (Vol. 18, p. 743).

_Which covers the more space, the United States (without Alaska) or
Europe?_

Europe. (Vol. 27, p. 612, and Vol. 9, p. 907.)

_If you looked at the moon all night every night, how soon would you
have seen all its surface?_

Never. Four-tenths of it can never be seen from the earth. (Vol. 18, p.
803.)

_What was the great difference between the destruction of Pompeii and
that of Herculaneum?_

Pompeii was covered by ashes and Herculaneum by mud. (Vol. 22, p. 50,
and Vol. 13, p. 342.)

_Why do not high mountains, where more snow falls than melts, keep
growing higher?_

Because pressure forces the snow, changed into ice, to descend in the
form of glaciers, as explained in the article GLACIER.

_Who wrote to George Washington, on behalf of a number of officers in
the United States army, asking him to make himself king of the United
States?_

Col. Lewis Nicola. The article WASHINGTON, GEORGE, by Professor
MacDonald of Brown University, gives you the words of Washington’s
indignant reply.

_How deep has anyone ever dived in diver’s dress?_

The article DIVERS tells you: 210 feet.

_In baseball, how is a fielding-record calculated?_

To get the fielder’s average, you divide the number of chances he has
made the most of by the total number of chances he has had. (Vol. 3, p.
461.)

_How tall must a giant be?_

Seven feet, to be properly called a giant. (Vol. 18, p. 741).

_Where were the first lighthouses built?_

In lower Egypt, as stated in the article LIGHTHOUSE, which describes all
the great lighthouses and gives pictures of the towers and of the
wonderful lamps.

_When ships are going through the Panama Canal, from the Atlantic to the
Pacific, will they be heading to the eastward or to the westward?_

Oddly enough, to the eastward; for the Isthmus curves so, just where the
canal line lies, that the Pacific end is much to the eastward of the
Atlantic end. You can see this plainly on the detailed map in the
article PANAMA CANAL.

_Why does a tame rabbit die if it is held erect for half an hour?_

Because the muscles of its abdomen are so weak that they cannot act as a
belt, as our muscles do, and all the rabbit’s blood settles below the
heart. (Vol. 27, p. 942.)

_For what price was Manhattan Island bought from the Indians in 1626?_

For $24 worth of goods, as shown in the article NEW YORK.

_Why do people, when they are in the polar regions, seldom catch cold?_

Because colds are caused by microbes and there are very few microbes in
places so far from any masses of people, as you can see from the article
CLIMATE.

_If North America were spread out on the surface of the moon, what share
of the moon’s surface would it cover?_

About four-sevenths. (Vol. 18, p. 805, and Vol. 19, p. 764.)

_Which is the greater: the highest mountain’s height or the deepest
sea’s depth?_

The sea’s depth, which is 31,614 feet; while Mt. Everest is 29,002 feet
high. (Vol. 19, p. 973, and Vol. 10, p. 7.)

_Of what use are the hairs on a caterpillar?_

Like the bristles on a dog-collar, they keep an enemy from biting him.
(Vol. 6, p. 733.)

_Why do you twist yourself into an uncomfortable position when you have
a pain?_

Because instinct teaches you that discomfort will help you by partially
taking your attention away from the pain. (Vol. 22, p. 587.)

_What warm-blooded creature has the longest average life?_

Man, except possibly the whale; but not the elephant, as is generally
believed. The article LONGEVITY tells how long all kinds of animals
live.

_What mistake about American history is caused in our minds by the
celebration of the Fourth of July?_

The belief that the Declaration of Independence was signed on the 4th of
July. Congress did not order it to be engrossed for signature until July
19th. The article INDEPENDENCE, DECLARATION OF, also shows that the most
important day was July 2nd, when Congress adopted the Resolution of
Independence.

If you look up the answers to these questions, in the Britannica, you
will incidentally learn, from the articles to which you turn, a great
many things that will be of practical use to you in every-day life. For
whether you turn to the volumes because you want only a single fact, or
because you want to learn all about some important subject—or even
because you merely want to pass a pleasant hour—you always get from them
far more than you had hoped to find.




                                PART IV
READINGS ON QUESTIONS OF THE DAY WHICH RELATE TO THE DUTIES OF AMERICAN
                  CITIZENSHIP AND TO CURRENT POLITICS




                              CHAPTER LXIV
                          QUESTIONS OF THE DAY


[Sidenote: An Intimate Book]

The old idea of an encyclopaedia as a remote book, distant from
every-day needs and the real public questions of the day, and to be
consulted only for information about ancient history and medieval
philosophy, was a wrong one. It was wrong _in theory_, if an
encyclopaedia is to be a live and valuable book. And it was wrong _in
practice_. It is not the case with the new Britannica. For the
Britannica is full of information about current public questions; and
even its treatment of the past, remote or near, is from a fresh and
modern view-point, and is of the utmost value as throwing the light of
history on the problems of modern politics and every-day life. The
spirit of to-day is an intensely wide-awake and inquisitive one, and
people are no longer willing to believe that “whatever is, is
right”—much less that a thing is right because it _has been_, no matter
how long. Indeed the very phrase “has been” as now used in the
vernacular implies the outworn, the discarded. The Britannica, a book
for intimate use on the questions of the day, is a record _of what is_,
as well as of what has been, and of the great changes, the constant
flux, of the past and of the present.

[Sidenote: Sociology]

One of our symptoms of health is the development of a social sense, or,
better, a social conscience. This is due in no small degree to the work
of Herbert Spencer in founding a new science, called by him Sociology.
For an inspiring and stimulating starting-point for the study in the
Britannica of the great social and political questions of the day let
the reader study the article SOCIOLOGY (Vol. 25, p. 322), by Benjamin
Kidd, who wrote _Social Evolution_, and _Principles of Western
Civilization_.

[Sidenote: Education]

Evolution, sociology, Spencerian psychology and the closer relation of
the state to the individual are all important factors in the educational
changes of the last few years; and their study is indispensable to a
clear understanding of the great questions of education. A more concrete
study may be based on the article EDUCATION (Vol. 8, p. 951) and
particularly the part on education in the United States by Nicholas
Murray Butler, president of Columbia University. An elaborate course of
reading on education is given in another chapter of this Guide _For
Teachers_. But it may be well to call attention here to the fact that
there are in the articles on individual states sections on the
educational system of each state; and in the separate articles on each
city similar descriptions of schools in those cities; and also that
either in the article on the city or town in which it is situated, or in
a separate article there is an estimate, a description, and a historical
sketch of each of the great universities and colleges of the country.
This information is not merely of value if one wishes to understand in a
general way the trend of education, but of particular interest to one
who is choosing the school best adapted to a special need. In the same
way there are articles on other great educational institutions—for
example a general article on MUSEUMS OF SCIENCE (Vol. 19, p. 64) and one
on LIBRARIES (Vol. 16, p. 545), as well as articles on such special
institutions as the Smithsonian, or treatment of them in the article on
the places where the institution is—as in the article on Washington for
the Library of Congress, the article on New York City for the
Metropolitan Museum, etc.

[Sidenote: Defectives and Their Training]

But government, particularly in America, besides taking a direct
interest and responsibility in the education of its youth, has begun
within the last few years to assume the task of uplifting those of its
citizens who are below the normal. Modern methods of dealing with
criminals and of caring for defectives and the insane are based on a
principle entirely different from that which obtained 50, or even 20,
years ago. The whole article _Insanity_ (Vol. 14, p. 597) might well be
read as a preliminary to a study of this topic, since it treats of
idiocy and imbecility as well as of the more violent forms of mental
disorder, and since it treats them all as forms of disease—the basis of
the modern method of treatment which has substituted the hospital and
the school for the mere place of detention. In particular, however, the
last part of this article dealing with _Hospital Treatment_ should be
studied. It is by Dr. Frederick Peterson, the American specialist, and
it describes the improved conditions of modern asylums. “Physical
restraint is no longer practised.... The general progress of medical
science in all directions has been manifested in the department of
psychiatry by improved methods of treatment, in the way of
sleep-producing and alleviating drugs, dietetics, physical culture,
hydrotherapy and the like. There are few asylums now without
pathological and clinical laboratories.... The colony scheme has been
successfully adopted by the state of New York at the Craig Colony for
Epileptics at Sonyea and elsewhere.... Many asylums have, as it were,
thrown off detached cottages for the better care of certain patients....
But the ideal system is that of the psychopathic hospital and the colony
for the insane.” It is with the “colony” plan that Dr. Peterson’s name
is intimately connected, especially in New York state. In the Britannica
article on New York state there is a full treatment (Vol. 19, p. 601) of
the state’s charitable institutions, including its hospitals for the
insane, the Craig Colony already mentioned, the Letchworth Village
custodial asylum for epileptics and feeble-minded, and other
institutions of the same kind. And in the same way the system in each
state is described in the separate article on that state with special
attention to the peculiar features in its administration of its
hospitals and schools for insane and imbeciles.

[Sidenote: The Blind]

There has been a similar change in the education of the blind and the
deaf—or rather education is now provided for these classes, whereas they
formerly received none at all. And this education is coming under state
control and, once under governmental supervision, is being transferred
from departments in charge of penal or charitable institutions to the
department of public schools. For the most striking instances of what
has been accomplished by improved systems of training under private
supervision see the articles on SAMUEL GRIDLEY HOWE (Vol. 13, p. 837),
the great teacher of the blind at the Perkins Institution for the Blind
in Boston; on his blind and deaf pupil, LAURA BRIDGMAN (Vol. 4, p. 559),
and on HELEN ADAMS KELLER (Vol. 15, p. 718), another and even more
remarkable blind and deaf student, whose education, coming as a product
of a new sociology, has made her a most efficient social helper and
social worker.

From these articles the student should go to _Blindness_ (Vol. 4, p.
59), by Sir Francis J. Campbell, principal of the Royal Normal College
for the Blind, Norwood, London; an article equivalent in length to 40
pages of this Guide. Its author, the founder of the college, is himself
a blind man, who, born in Tennessee, in 1832, and educated at the
Nashville school, and afterwards in music at Leipzig and Berlin, had
from 1858 to 1869 been associated with Dr. Howe at the Perkins
Institution, Boston, and was knighted in 1909 for his services to the
education of the blind. The part of his article dealing with the
education of the blind is, therefore, doubly valuable and interesting.
The main topics with which it deals are: early training—other senses of
the blind not _naturally_ sharper than those of the seeing, but
developed by cultivation of hearing and touch from early childhood;
physical training to increase the average of vitality; mental training;
early manual training; choice of occupation; piano-forte tuning; musical
training; deaf-mutes should not be educated with the blind as their
needs are so different; blind boys and blind girls should not be taught
together, as coeducation promotes intermarriage, which is a calamity.
The remainder of the article deals with types and books for the blind,
appliances for educational work, employment, and biographical matter,
with a list of prominent blind people. See also, for literary men who
were blind, the articles on JOHN MILTON, WILLIAM H. PRESCOTT, and PHILIP
BOURKE MARSTON.

[Sidenote: The Deaf]

DEAF AND DUMB (Vol. 7, p. 880) is by the Rev. Arnold Hill Payne,
chaplain to the Oxford Diocesan Mission to the deaf and dumb, late
normal fellow of the National Deaf Mute College, Washington, D. C., and
author of many books on the subject. He points out the mistaken use of
the word “dumb”—“In the case of the deaf and dumb, as these words are
generally understood, dumbness is merely the result of ignorance in the
use of the voice, this ignorance being due to deafness.” After
discussing causes of deafness, the condition of the deaf in childhood,
their natural language, which the contributor thinks is “sign” rather
than purely oral, and their social status, he deals with education of
the deaf, giving an elaborate historical account including the “oral”
revival in Germany and the work in the United States of Dr. Thomas
Hopkins Gallaudet—see also the separate article on him and his two sons
(Vol. 11, p. 416)—and of the National Deaf-Mute College at Washington,
D. C. (on which see also the article WASHINGTON, D. C.). This
interesting article closes with a section on the blind-deaf, telling the
story of several remarkable cases in England less well-known and more
recent than Laura Bridgman or Helen Keller.

[Sidenote: Psychology]

This chapter began with a reference to the article on SOCIOLOGY with the
recommendation that it be used as a basis for the study of present-day
problems. The reader will often have heard vague allusions to sociology,
and his reading this article in the Britannica will certainly sharpen
and define his own idea of the meaning and the value of the science. Has
he not heard much oftener of psychology, and heard it mentioned as if it
were some sort of magic spell to charm away many of the difficulties of
our modern complex world? But has he a full comprehension of the meaning
of psychology and of the knowledge newly gained in regard to the
“psychology of the senses”? The corrective for any vagueness of ideas
about psychology is best found in the article PSYCHOLOGY (Vol. 22, p.
547) by Professor James Ward, whose articles for the Britannica have
been reprinted and used as text-books in schools and colleges all over
the country. Put in a few words, the lesson of psychology is that the
senses, sensations, thoughts and feelings, which, even when they are our
own, we too often speak of as if they were things apart and independent,
are subject to certain natural laws in much the same way as are the
forces treated by the science of physics. The reader who would study the
subject of psychology in the Britannica should make use of the analysis
of many articles in the chapter in this Guide _For Teachers_.

[Sidenote: Crime]

As with general education, special education of defectives, state
training of feeble-minded, and restraint of the insane, so with the
state’s attitude toward the criminal there has been in recent years a
great change which is still working toward full fruition, so that prison
administration, children’s courts, delinquency, probation, etc., are
live topics of interest.

Just as the whole new science of sociology was based by Spencer on
biology and on the Darwinian theory of evolution, so in this field of
delinquency a “science” has been devised called criminology by its
“inventor” Cesare Lombroso. The article LOMBROSO (Vol. 16, p. 936) in
the Britannica criticizes his theories as showing “an exaggerated
tendency to refer all mental facts to biological causes.” His theory of
a criminal type points to a “practical reform ... a classification of
offenders, so that the born criminal may receive a different kind of
punishment from the offender who is tempted into crime.” The article
CRIMINOLOGY (Vol. 7, p. 464), by Major Arthur Griffiths, Inspector of
Prisons, should be read carefully. It lists the supposed criminal traits
as follows:

  Various brain and cerebral anomalies; receding foreheads; massive
  jaws, prognathous chins; skulls without symmetry; ears long, large and
  projecting; noses rectilinear, wrinkles strongly marked, even in the
  young and in both sexes, hair abundant on the head, scanty on the
  cheeks and chin; eyes feline, fixed, cold, glassy, ferocious; bad
  repellent faces.... Other peculiarities are:—great width of the
  extended arms, extraordinary ape-like agility; left-handedness as well
  as ambi-dexterism; obtuse sense of smell, taste and sometimes of
  hearing, although the eyesight is superior to that of normal
  people.... So much for the anatomical and physiological peculiarities
  of the criminal. There remain the psychological or mental
  characteristics, so far as they have been observed. Moral
  insensibility is attributed to him, a dull conscience that never
  pricks and a general freedom from remorse. He is said to be generally
  lacking in intelligence, hence his stupidity, the want of proper
  precautions, both before and after an offence, which leads so often to
  his detection and capture. His vanity is strongly marked and shown in
  the pride taken in infamous achievements rather than personal
  appearance.

Although Major Griffiths thinks that criminality is oftener due to
environment than to congenital defects, he closes his article with this
estimate of what has been accomplished by Lombroso and his followers:

  The criminologists have strengthened the hands of administrators, have
  emphasized the paramount importance of child-rescue and judicious
  direction of adults, have held the balance between penal methods,
  advocating the moralizing effect of open-air labour as opposed to
  prolonged isolation, and have insisted upon the desirability of
  indefinite detention for all who have obstinately determined to wage
  perpetual war against society by the persistent perpetration of crime.

The article CRIME (Vol. 7, p. 447) is full of interesting statistics and
facts. It tells us that “the growth of criminals is greatly stimulated
where people are badly fed, morally and physically unhealthy, infected
with any forms of disease and vice,” and after proving by the records of
various countries that men everywhere are more addicted to crime than
are women, ends with this statement: “It has been well said that women
are less criminal according to the figures, because when a woman wants a
crime committed she can generally find a man to do it for her.”

Other important articles on the subject are DEPORTATION (Vol. 8, p. 56)
and PRISON (Vol. 22, p. 361). For English prison reforms, see also the
article on JOHN HOWARD and that on ELIZABETH FRY, with an outline of the
growth in Pennsylvania and New York (Auburn and Sing Sing), of the
method of solitary confinement and of its adoption in England, and of
the development in New York (see also the article on ELMIRA for the work
of Zebulon R. Brockway), and in Massachusetts (Concord), of distinct and
different treatment for first offenders.

[Sidenote: Children’s Courts]

JUVENILE OFFENDERS (Vol. 15, p. 613) describes the work of Charles
Dickens and others in England, the reform in Europe and in the United
States; the philanthropic criminal code proposed by EDWARD LIVINGSTON
(see the biographical article, Vol. 16, p. 811); the Randall’s Island
House of Refuge, the Elmira (N. Y.) Reformatory, the reformatory for
women at Sherborn, Massachusetts, and the George Junior Republic at
Freeville, New York, and its offshoots—see also the separate article
GEORGE JUNIOR REPUBLIC (Vol. 11, p. 749); and the Borstal scheme, a
modification of the American state reformatory system adopted in England
in 1902.

CHILDREN’S COURTS (Vol. 6, p. 140) calls attention to the origin of
these tribunals in the United States, in Massachusetts and Illinois, and
their success in Chicago, Indianapolis, Denver and Washington, leading
to their adoption in England; see also the article PROBATION (Vol. 22,
p. 404) in general and, for particular and local methods, the articles
on BIRMINGHAM (Vol. 3, p. 985), BOSTON (Vol. 4, p. 294), CHICAGO (Vol.
6, p. 124), COLORADO (Vol. 6, p. 722), EGYPT (Vol. 9, p. 29), ILLINOIS
(Vol. 14, p. 308), and UTAH (Vol. 27, p. 818). The articles on
individual states also contain detailed information about local penal
institutions of all kinds.

The reader should also study the articles POLICE (Vol. 21, p. 978),
FINGER PRINTS (Vol. 10, p. 376), IDENTIFICATION (Vol. 14, p. 287),
PUNISHMENT (Vol. 22, p. 653), CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (Vol. 5, p. 279),
GUILLOTINE (Vol. 12, p. 694), HANGING (Vol. 12, p. 917), and
ELECTROCUTION (Vol. 9, p. 210), the last by Professor Edward Anthony
Spitzka, the American authority on the subject. In the article on Utah,
already mentioned, the reader will find that “a person sentenced to
death may choose one of two methods of execution—hanging or shooting.”

[Sidenote: Alcohol]

If a respectable citizen of a century ago could return to earth he could
not fail to be greatly surprised at dinner, whether in a private home or
in a hotel, to see how much less alcoholic beverages are used, how much
lighter they are, and how much more common are other drinks. If he
“returned” to certain parts of the United States he would find that he
could get no alcohol except on a doctor’s prescription stating the
reason why the patient needed it, and he would learn that such a
prescription could be filled only once, and then only by a registered
pharmacist of good character. No matter to what place he came back, he
would find a constant interference with or supervision of the
manufacture, sale and consumption of alcoholic liquors on the part of
the government. He would probably wonder why the state should interfere
with private and personal liberty in such matters. We have already
pointed out that the state now _does_ interfere, and that this is one of
the distinguishing marks of the government of the day. For information
on this particular form of interference, its prevalence, its necessity,
and its advisability, the student may confidently turn to the
Britannica. The hygienic side of the question is outlined in the chapter
of this Guide on _Health and Disease_. The social or sociological side
claims our attention here. Read the article DRUNKENNESS (Vol. 8, p.
601), and for the relation between alcohol and mental disease, the
section _Toxic Insanity_ (Vol. 14, p. 609) in the article on INSANITY
already mentioned, and also NEUROPATHOLOGY (Vol. 19, p. 429); then the
article INEBRIETY, LAW OF (Vol. 14, p. 409); that on LIQUOR LAWS (Vol.
16, p. 759), with a special section referring to the United States,
which deals with local prohibition, state prohibition, public
dispensaries, and taxation; and for a general and elaborate summary of
the whole question the article TEMPERANCE (Vol. 26, p. 578) equivalent
to about 50 pages of this Guide, by Dr. Arthur Shadwell, author of
_Drink, Temperance and Legislation_. In the section on the _Use and
Abuse of Alcohol_ Dr. Shadwell summarizes the results of modern
scientific investigation of the abuse in its bearings upon crime,
poverty, insanity, mortality, longevity, and heredity.

In such articles as those on THEOBALD MATHEW (“Father Mathew”) (Vol. 17,
p. 886), NEAL DOW (Vol. 8, p. 456), JOHN B. GOUGH (Vol. 12, p. 282), and
FRANCES E. WILLARD (Vol. 28, p. 658) the reader will find biographies
relating to the temperance movement; and in the separate articles on
states there is information about state prohibition, local option, and
the state dispensary system.

[Sidenote: Heredity and Eugenics]

Dr. Shadwell’s remarks on the relation of alcoholism to heredity may
remind us that the very word “heredity” would seem strange to the
typical man of a century ago, whose return to life we have imagined. We
should be no more shocked by the occasional crudeness of his intimate
and excited phraseology than he would be at our frankness in discussing
even in mixed company such subjects as birth, reproduction, sexual
morality, the social evil and the white slave trade. The growth of
interest in these topics may be traced in part to Darwin, Huxley and
Mendel, to what they did to make biology a science. Read in the
Britannica the interesting story, in the article MENDELISM (Vol. 18, p.
115), of the investigations of Gregor Mendel, Abbot of Brünn, in his
cloister garden, in crossing peas and classifying the inheritance of
peculiarities. Then read the articles HEREDITY (Vol. 13, p. 530), by
Prof. Chalmers Mitchell, and HYBRIDISM (Vol. 14, p. 26), by the same
contributor, and turn to the articles EUGENICS (Vol. 9, p. 855) and SIR
FRANCIS GALTON (Vol. 11, p. 427), for an account of the attempt to found
a practical science to improve the breed of men.

Especially within the last few years has the public conscience been
aroused on the white slave traffic and prostitution, both in Great
Britain and the United States, and particularly in the great cities,
where this form of vice, if left under the jurisdiction of the police,
gives rise to a singularly dangerous form of corruption and to the
general disrepute of the defenders of public safety. The many important
aspects of the subject, which need not be rehearsed here, are to be
found in Dr. Shadwell’s article PROSTITUTION (Vol. 22, p. 457) and Dr.
Edmund Owen’s article VENEREAL DISEASES (Vol. 27, p. 983).

One of the remedies most commonly suggested for the evils of
prostitution in general and of the white slave trade in particular is a
minimum wage. Dr. Shadwell’s article on prostitution gives “excessively
laborious and ill-paid work” as only one of many secondary causes for
women’s taking to a life of evil repute. Indolence, love of excitement,
dislike of restraint, and abnormal sexual appetite, he counts as primary
causes; and among secondary causes he names the difficulty of finding
employment; harsh treatment at home, promiscuous living among the
overcrowded poor; overcrowding in factories; the example of luxury,
self-indulgence and loose manners set by the wealthy; demoralizing
literature and amusements; and the arts of profligate men. But the
subject of wages is an important one in itself, and as an introduction
to the study of the labour question, it may well be taken up here, even
if the efficacy of minimum-wage laws, or of any legislation, in
producing a higher sexual morality has been exaggerated.

[Sidenote: Wages and Labour]

Read the article WAGES (Vol. 28, p. 229, equivalent to 20 pages of this
Guide), by Joseph Shield Nicholson, professor of political economy at
Edinburgh University. The difficulty of an exact definition, and,
specifically, of one that distinguishes between “wages” and “profits,”
leads the author to adopt as the best the definition of Gen. Francis A.
Walker, the American economist, “the reward of those who are employed in
production with a view to the profit of their employers and are paid at
stipulated rates.” The distinction between a nominal and real wage is
based on the difference between the money value and the purchasing value
of the wage as affected by variation in the cost of living. Irregularity
of employment and other elements of uncertainty, such as liability to
accident or to occupational diseases, are factors to be considered in
estimating real wages. Professor Nicholson discusses the wage-fund
theory, corrects it by Adam Smith’s observation that wages are paid from
the product of labour; and treats “relative” wages, the state-regulation
of wages (which he does not consider feasible); poor relief in aid of
wages; factory legislation; trade unions; the effects of machinery on
wages; and the progress of the working-classes.

[Sidenote: Labour Legislation]

The subject of factory legislation brings us back to the general topic
of “state interference with private matters” as the old school of
political scientists would have called it. Two treatises in the
Britannica are important for the study of this subject—the general
article LABOUR LEGISLATION (Vol. 16, p. 7), equivalent to 70 pages of
this Guide, by Adelaide Mary Anderson, principal lady inspector of
factories to the British Home Office, and Carroll D. Wright, late U. S.
Commissioner of Labor; and the article EMPLOYERS’ LIABILITY AND
WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION (Vol. 9, p. 356), which is of peculiar interest
now that in the United States recent laws in regard to employers’
liability and workmen’s compensation have shown a change in legislative
theory and practice. Statutes of this kind have been passed by the
legislatures of several states where nothing of the sort would have been
attempted a generation ago, although legislatures have always been
readier than courts to approve radical laws, and have been far more
readily influenced by popular sentiment. After their passage they have
in some states been held unconstitutional, and in other states the
highest court has recognized them as valid; the decisions perhaps
depending to some extent on the attitude of the court toward the opposed
claims of capital and labour. Here as elsewhere the student should
remember that much information of a local character is to be found in
the articles on different states of the Union. The article LABOR DAY
(Vol. 16, p. 6) describes an official recognition of the claims of
labour in the United States.

[Sidenote: Organized Labour]

On labour organizations and their work see the articles: TRADE UNIONS
(Vol. 27, p. 140), and particularly the section _Economic Effects of
Trade Unionism_, and the section on trade unions in the United States,
by Carroll D. Wright, late U. S. Commissioner of Labor, who deals with
such topics as railway brotherhoods, national unions, the
“International,” Knights of Labor, American Railway Union, federations
of labour, especially the American Federation of Labor, and estimated
strength of trade unions. For the earlier history of trade unions or
similar organizations see TRADE ORGANIZATION (Vol. 27, p. 135), GILDS
(Vol. 12, p. 14), LIVERY COMPANIES (Vol. 16, p. 809), and APPRENTICESHIP
(Vol. 2, p. 228).

STRIKES AND LOCK OUTS, particularly the sections _Economic Effects_
(Vol. 25, p. 1028), _Important British Strikes and Lock Outs_ (p. 1029),
and on strikes in the United States (p. 1033),—the last by Dr. Carroll
D. Wright, who describes, among others, the Homestead strike of 1892,
the Pullman strike of 1894, the steel strike of 1901, and the coal
strike of 1902. For these and other strikes see the local articles on
such storm-centres as Homestead, Pullman, Leadville, Cripple Creek,
Chicago.

See also BOYCOTT (Vol. 4, p. 353); and INJUNCTION (Vol. 14, p. 570),
and, for a “classic” use of the injunction against boycott, the article
on WILLIAM HOWARD TAFT (Vol. 26, p. 354);

ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION (Vol. 2, p. 331) for attempts by the state
to regulate the relations of capital and labour at variance.

Related topics which have not been analyzed here will be found in the
articles UNEMPLOYMENT (Vol. 27, p. 578), LABOUR EXCHANGE (Vol. 16, p.
7), and VAGRANCY (Vol. 27, p. 837).

[Sidenote: Immigration]

Closely connected with the American labour problems, since growing
American industries demand a supply of workmen that cannot be filled by
natural increase in the population, is the question of immigration. The
article MIGRATION (Vol. 18, p. 427) is divided into two parts, the
second dealing with migration in zoology. The first section, dealing
with emigration and immigration and internal migration of populations,
is for the most part by Richmond Mayo-Smith, late professor of political
economy and social science in Columbia University, New York City. It is
appropriate that the subject should be treated by an American and with
special attention to the United States, since this country owes its
origin to an immigration three centuries ago; as the presence of many
recent immigrants puts a strain on our powers of assimilation and gives
rise to other serious problems; and as internal migrations are markedly
affecting social conditions. In a preliminary historical sketch the
author deals with: prehistoric migrations in search of booty, through
the desire of the stronger to take possession of the lands of the
weaker, or by pressure of population on the food supply; Greek and Roman
colonization; the German conquest; minor migratory movements such as the
introduction of Flemish weavers to England and the forced migration of
the Huguenots from France; the great colonization period after the
discovery of America; and modern migration—characterized by its
magnitude, by the change of the emigrant’s political allegiance, and by
the circumstance that it is a movement of “individuals seeking their own
good without state direction or aid.” In a statistical discussion of
immigration to the United States (Vol. 18, p. 430) there is much
valuable information. “At first the Irish and Germans were most
prominent. Of later years, the Italians, Czechs, Hungarians and Russians
were numerously represented.” Immigration to other countries, especially
Canada and South America; the balance of migration and temporary
emigration; and the effects of migration on the country “from which” and
the country “to which”—are topics considered in the article, which also
discusses the restriction of immigration. As to Asiatic immigration see
CALIFORNIA (especially p. 20, Vol. 5), SAN FRANCISCO (p. 148, Vol. 24),
and COOLIE (Vol. 7, p. 77). See also the article UNITED STATES, section
_Population and Social Conditions_ (p. 634, Vol. 27), and, in separate
articles on states and larger cities of the United States, the analysis
of foreign-born population, that of foreign parentage, etc. For
instance, in the article MASSACHUSETTS (Vol. 17, p. 854), there is a
most interesting account of the varying sources of immigration and of
the replacing of Irish labour by Canadians and Italians. Boston is the
second immigrant port of the country. A large part of the transatlantic
immigrants pass speedily to permanent homes in the West, but by far the
greater part of the Canadian influx remains there.

The article on NEW YORK CITY (p. 617 of Vol. 19) remarks that

  there are in New York City more Germans than in any city of Germany,
  save Berlin, and more Irish than in Dublin. There are many
  well-defined foreign communities in the city, such as “Little Italy”
  about Mulberry Street, “Chinatown” on Mott, Pell and Doyers Streets,
  the Hebrew quarter on the upper Bowery and east of it, a “German
  Colony” east of Second Avenue below Fourteenth Street, French quarters
  south of Washington Square about Bleecker Street and on the West Side
  between Twentieth and Thirty-fourth Streets; a Russian quarter near
  East Broadway, a “Greek Colony” about Sixth Avenue in the 40’s, and
  negro quarters on Thompson Street and on the West Side in the 50’s,
  and there are equally well-defined Armenian and Arab quarters.

Chicago, as the article on that city shows, is the second largest
Bohemian city in the world, the third Swedish, the fourth Norwegian, the
fifth Polish and the fifth German.

[Sidenote: Negro Problem]

The Southern states of the Union, though they have much less immigration
than the North or West, have a population problem that is even more
difficult in some respects—that of the negro. Many immigrant elements
are readily “amalgamated” or assimilated into the native local
population—by marriage, by trade, and indeed even by physical
environment. It seems certain, for instance, that the physical type of
the children of Italian or Hebrew immigrants in New York City is
different from that of their parents and more like a local type, even in
such respects as the shape and contour of the head and its ratio of
length to breadth. But the negro does not assimilate physically or, to
any considerable degree, mentally; and the communities in America in
which he is most plentiful are so far from eager to assimilate him that
they socially and politically isolate him. The reader should go to the
article NEGRO (Vol. 19, p. 344), in which there is a general study of
the race by T. Athol Joyce, assistant in the Department of Ethnography,
British Museum, and a section on _Negroes in the United States_ by Dr.
Walter Francis Willcox, late chief statistician U. S. Census Bureau and
professor of social science and statistics, Cornell University. The
magnitude of the negro problem may be deduced from Professor Willcox’s
remark that the present number of negroes in the United States “is
greater than the total population of the United States was in 1820, and
nearly as great as the population of Norway, Sweden and Denmark.” Birth
and mortality statistics in regard to negroes show that they are
increasing much less rapidly than whites; but it must be remembered that
there is an absolute increase, that there is no prospect of the negro
problem being solved by the dying out of the race, and that even the
fact that negroes constitute a smaller proportion of the population than
formerly does not greatly affect the problem. There is also much
relevant information of value in the articles on the Southern states,
particularly in the sections on population, education and government;
and as to education see the articles TUSKEGEE (Vol. 27, p. 487), BOOKER
T. WASHINGTON (Vol. 28, p. 344) and S. C. ARMSTRONG (Vol. 2, p. 591).
See also the article LYNCH LAW (Vol. 17, p. 169) by Prof. W. L. Fleming
of the Louisiana State University.

[Sidenote: Trusts]

There is a very close relation between the economic problems connected
with labour and those which have to do with capital and especially with
capital in its organized and monopolistic forms. A monopoly of the
supply, sale, or manufacture of any class of goods was, especially in
England under the Tudors and Stuarts, a crown grant; and the theory of
patent and copyright law is based on such grants, as is shown in the
articles MONOPOLY (Vol. 18, p. 733), LETTERS PATENT (Vol. 16, p. 501),
and PATENTS (Vol. 20, p. 903). On the modern monopoly which, far from
being cherished by government, is constantly being regulated, checked or
“crushed,” see the article TRUSTS (Vol. 22, p. 334) by Prof. J. W.
Jenks, formerly of Cornell and now of New York University, whose
treatment is from the American point of view—the problem is peculiarly
an American one—but with sections on European experience, including
paragraphs on Great Britain, Germany, France and Austria.

  Among the questions answered by this article—questions that are
  continually presenting themselves to the mind of every intelligent
  citizen, but that are seldom lucidly answered even by the most
  intelligent—are:

  What are trusts? Why are they formed?

  Why were they not formed before the latter years of the 19th century?

  Why can combination be successfully applied in some industries and not
  in others? Why do some industries thrive better under competition than
  under combination? Why are some combinations bound to fail?

  In what respect has the trust advantages over the individual
  competitor?

  How do trusts benefit by protective tariffs and by discrimination in
  rates of transportation?

  What has been the history of trusts in Europe?

  The question of most interest to the ordinary person is: Do trusts
  raise prices? To this the Encyclopaedia Britannica answers:
  “Experience seems to show, beyond question, that whenever the
  combinations are powerful enough to secure a monopolistic control it
  has usually been the policy to increase the prices above those which
  obtained during the period of competition preceding the formation of
  the combination.” Besides this increased price, the evils of
  combinations are: loss to investors through promotion and speculation
  by directors; loss to wage-earners, corruption of legislatures, and
  the suppression of independent activity.

The most obvious remedies are “more rigid laws with reference to the
methods of incorporation and to the responsibility of directors to
stockholders and to the public,” greater publicity and closer government
inspection, and the abolition of special favours granted by government
and shipping companies.

[Sidenote: Government Control]

For American legislation in regard to trusts see the article INTERSTATE
COMMERCE (Vol. 14, p. 711), equivalent to 10 pages of this Guide, by
Prof. Frank A. Fetter, formerly of Cornell and now of Princeton
University. This article shows the constitutional basis for action by
the Federal government and the power given to Congress to regulate
commerce among the several states; and it describes the Interstate
Commerce Act of 1887, amended in 1903 by the Elkins Act, and the Sherman
Anti-Trust Act of 1890. See also in the article UNITED STATES, the
section _History_, §§ 353, 357, 396 (pp. 725, 726, 733 of Vol. 27).

But although there have been great changes in the relation of government
to the individual in his private and business life, the extent of
practical government control is still much less than many theorists
would like to see. It is true that in many countries of Europe railways
are owned and operated by the state—see p. 826 of Vol. 22, in the
article RAILWAYS. See also the article NEW ZEALAND and the summary of
conditions there (p. 307, Vol. 25), in part as follows:

  The government owns not only the railways, but two-thirds of the whole
  land, letting it on long leases. It sets a limit to large estates. It
  levies a progressive income-tax and land tax. It has a labour
  department, strict factory acts and a law of compulsory arbitration in
  labour disputes (1895). There are old-age pensions (1898), government
  insurance of life (1871) and against fire (1905). Women have the
  suffrage, and, partly in consequence, the restriction of the liquor
  traffic is severe. There is a protective tariff, and Oriental labour
  is excluded. The success of the experiment is not yet beyond doubt;
  compulsory arbitration, for example, did not work with perfect
  smoothness, and was amended in 1908.... It is fair to add that the
  experiment is probably on too small a scale to show what might happen
  in larger countries. New Zealand has only 100,000 sq. m. of territory
  and about one million of inhabitants, mainly rural and of picked
  quality. The conditions of combined isolation and security are not
  easily obtained elsewhere. The action of the state has been in the
  great majority of instances rather regulative than constructive.

[Sidenote: Socialism, etc.]

But in general governments have extended their control more or less
along the conventional lines of law and legislative theory, and have not
undertaken ownership and operation—even in New Zealand, as we have just
seen, public action being “rather regulative than constructive.” See the
general article SOCIALISM (Vol. 25, p. 310) and biographies of those
connected with the Socialist movement, such as Marx, Lassalle, Robert
Owen, Rodbertus, Bebel, Liebknecht, Jaures, Ballance, William Morris,
Edward Bellamy, and Henry George. On communism, see the article on that
subject, the biographies of Owen, Saint-Simon, Fourier, Cabet, etc., and
descriptions of the more important American communistic experiments in
the articles on Brook Farm, Shakers, Amana, Nauvoo, Harmony, Oneida
Community, Hopedale, etc. For communism merely as a business scheme see
the article CO-OPERATION (Vol. 7, p. 82) and the biographies of
Raiffeisen and Schulze-Delitzsch.

[Sidenote: Finance]

We have now run through the more strikingly novel public questions of
the day, and we come next to questions which have been long discussed
and longer recognized as being within the sphere of government. The one
of these that is most intimately connected with the economic problems we
have just been discussing is the subject of public finance and revenue.
On this read the articles FINANCE (Vol. 10, p. 374), TAXATION (Vol. 26,
p. 458), and NATIONAL DEBT (Vol. 19, p. 266); and, on American public
finance, see Vol. 27, p. 654; on Congressional legislation and finance,
p. 661 of the same volume; for a general and statistical treatment of
American finance, the sections headed _Finance_ in each article dealing
with a state of the Union, the articles GOLD (Vol. 12, p. 192), SILVER
(Vol. 25, p. 112), and BIMETALLISM (Vol. 3, p. 946), and the biographies
of ROBERT MORRIS (Vol. 18, p. 871), ALEXANDER HAMILTON (Vol. 12, p.
880), and JAY COOKE (Vol. 7, p. 73).

[Sidenote: Tariff]

Of perennial interest in the field of public finance is the question of
tariff reform. This is true both in the United States and in the United
Kingdom, but strangely enough “tariff reform” is used with absolutely
opposite meanings in the two countries. Tariff reform in England is
linked with Imperialism and means the introduction of higher tariffs for
protection of colonial as well as British industries. In the United
States the typical tariff reformer is usually an opponent of Imperialism
(which, of course, does not mean the same thing in the two countries),
and tariff reform here involves lowering duties, doing away with
protection, and, in short, adopting approximately the very system now in
vogue in the United Kingdom, and the very system that the followers of
Joseph Chamberlain wish to replace with something not entirely unlike
the American protective system as it has been since the Civil War. On
this subject see the article TARIFF (Vol. 26, p. 422), by the American
economist, F. W. Taussig, professor at Harvard, the articles PROTECTION
(Vol. 22, p. 464), by E. J. James, president of the University of
Illinois, and author of the _History of American Tariff Legislation_,
and FREE TRADE (Vol. 11, p. 88), by the Venerable Dr. William
Cunningham, Archdeacon of Ely, and author of _The Growth of English
Industry and Commerce_; the biographies of ALEXANDER HAMILTON (Vol. 12,
p. 880), and HENRY CLAY (Vol. 6, p. 470), for the foundation of American
protection; and the articles on H. C. CAREY (Vol. 5, p. 329), FRIEDRICH
LIST (Vol. 16, p. 776), and WILLIAM MCKINLEY (Vol. 17, p. 256) for the
principal exponents, theoretical and practical, outside of Great
Britain, of protection; the lives of RICHARD COBDEN (Vol. 6, p. 607) and
JOHN BRIGHT (Vol. 4, p. 567) and the article CORN-LAWS (Vol. 7, p. 174)
for the genesis of free trade in Great Britain; and the article on
JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN (in particular pp. 816–817 of Vol. 5) for English
tariff reform in politics.

[Sidenote: Banking Laws]

Another topic in public finance of great interest at the present moment
is the banking laws,—the interference of government with banking and
similar business. Local regulations in regard to banking will be found
in sections on legislation and finance in articles on each of the states
of the Union. The article OKLAHOMA (Vol. 20, p. 57), for example,
contains the following summary of the first radical state
enactment—constitutional in this case,—providing bank guarantees:

  The unique feature of the banking system (with amendments adopted by
  the second legislature becoming effective on the 11th of June, 1909)
  is a fund for the guaranty of deposits. The state banking board levies
  against the capital stock of each state bank and trust company,
  organized or existing, under the laws of the state to create a fund
  equal to 5% of average daily deposits other than the deposits of state
  funds properly secured. One-fifth of this fund is payable the first
  year and one-twentieth each year thereafter; 1% of the increase in
  average deposits is collected each year. Emergency assessments, not to
  exceed 2%, may be made whenever necessary to pay in full the
  depositors in an insolvent bank; if the guaranty fund is impaired to
  such a degree that it is not made up by the 2% emergency assessment,
  the state banking board issues certificates of indebtedness which draw
  6% interest and which are paid out of the assessment. Any national
  bank may secure its depositors in this manner if it so desires. The
  bank guarantee law was held to be valid by the United States Supreme
  Court in 1908, after the attorney-general of the United States had
  decided that it was illegal.

More general treatment is to be found in the articles BANKS AND BANKING
(Vol. 3, p. 334), SAVINGS BANKS (Vol. 24, p. 243) and TRUST COMPANY
(Vol. 27, p. 329); and see further the articles listed in the chapter in
this Guide _For Bankers and Financiers_.

[Sidenote: Insurance]

Another sphere of private finance over which government restriction and
regulation has been greatly extended during the last few years, is
insurance. The entire subject of insurance is, moreover, of interest not
merely to the citizen as a member of the body politic but to the
individual as the head of a family and as an investor for his own
protection in old age. To every one, therefore, the article INSURANCE
(Vol. 14, p. 656) will be of the utmost value, by reason of its rare
combination of interest and authority. For a full analysis of this
article and of related topics see the chapter in this Guide _For the
Insurance Man_.

[Sidenote: Legislation and Courts]

Much of the earlier part of the present chapter has been devoted to the
rapid extension of governmental control, regulation and supervision
through legislation. Interesting and novel though this is, it is far
less important for an intelligent comprehension of government than is a
careful study of the foundations and principles of legislation. Only the
specialist will wish to pursue a complete course in political science,
but every well-informed citizen of the United States should study the
general powers and functions of national and state legislatures and
courts. This material is given briefly, lucidly and critically by the
Hon. James Bryce, late British Ambassador to the United States, former
President of the British Board of Trade, and author of _The American
Commonwealth_, in the section _Constitution and Government_, article
UNITED STATES (Vol. 27, pp. 646–658). Part of this section deals with
the governments of the states, as to which there is also special
information in the section on government of the article on each state.
Regarding city governments similar sections will be found in the
articles on the larger cities. For a full analysis and a list of
articles see the chapter _For Lawyers_ in this Guide. Constitutional
restrictions of all delegated powers must be continually kept in mind in
the study of the action of legislatures and courts, and of the questions
that arise in regard to legislation or to court decisions. Although the
legislature represents the people more or less directly—the lower house
being commonly called the House of Representatives—and so has delegated
to it from the people the power of making laws, still, in the Federal
and state constitutions (except those of a very recent date) there is a
system of checks on every delegated power. The result is that an act
passed by Congress does not become law without the approval of the
president, nor, in most states, a local statute without that of the
governor, and—more important—is not a valid law if the highest Federal
Court (or, if it be a state enactment, the highest state court) holds it
contrary to the terms of the constitution. [Sidenote: The System of
Checks] For a summary of the historical arguments for this system of
checks see the section on the Constitution (Vol. 27, p. 686), in the
article UNITED STATES and such biographical articles as JAMES MADISON
(Vol. 17, p. 284); ALEXANDER HAMILTON (Vol. 12, p. 880), and GOUVERNEUR
MORRIS (Vol. 18, p. 869). The working of this system in nation and state
has been greatly affected by the distinction between the legislators’
mandate and that of the judge. Legislators have shorter terms of service
than judges, and especially judges of the higher courts, and so may be
said to be in much closer and more constant contact with the people; and
the legislator is bound by what he thinks the people need and
want,—something that is continually changing. On the other hand, the
judge is bound by the written law, unchanged and unchangeable except by
constitutional amendments or slightly varying interpretation of the
constitution. The result has been dissatisfaction with the courts and
with legislatures. The definite expression of this dissatisfaction is in
constitutional amendments or in new constitutions, adopted in order that
future action of the courts may more nearly accord with the present
sentiment of the people. The story of the constitution of each state in
the Union is told, with a summary of important constitutional changes,
in the section on government of each article on a separate state. In his
analysis of the state constitutions, Mr. Bryce says (Vol. 27, p. 647):

[Sidenote: Initiative, Referendum and Recall]

  Comparing the old constitutions with the new ones, it may be said that
  the note of those enacted in the first thirty or forty years of the
  republic was their jealousy of executive power and their careful
  safeguarding of the rights of the citizen; that of the second period,
  from 1820 to the Civil War (1861–65), the democratization of the
  suffrage of institutions generally; that of the third period (since
  the war to the present day), a disposition to limit the powers and
  check the action of the legislature, and to commit power to the hands
  of the whole people voting at the polls.

And at the close of his treatment of local government in the United
States, the same authority writes (Vol. 27, p. 651):

  Several state constitutions now contain provisions enabling a
  prescribed number (or proportion) of the voters in a state or city to
  submit a proposition to all the registered voters of the state (or
  city) for their approval. If carried, it takes effect as a law. This
  is the Initiative. These constitutions also allow a prescribed number
  of voters to demand that a law passed by the state legislature, or an
  ordinance passed by the municipal authority, be submitted to all the
  voters for their approval. If rejected by them, it falls to the
  ground. This is the Referendum. Some cities also provide in their
  charters that an official, including the mayor or a member of the
  council, may be displaced from office if, at a special election held
  on the demand of a prescribed number of the city voters, he does not
  receive the largest number of votes cast. This is the Recall. All
  these three institutions are in operation in some Western states and
  are spreading to some of the Eastern cities. Their working is observed
  with lively interest, for they carry the principle of direct popular
  sovereignty to lengths unprecedented except in Switzerland. But it is
  not merely to the faith of the Western Americans in the people that
  their introduction is due. Quite as much must be ascribed to the want
  of faith in the legislature of states and cities, which are deemed too
  liable to be influenced by selfish corporations.

In connection with the above reference to the referendum and initiative
in Switzerland, see the description of the Swiss system of continuous
control by the electors (Vol. 26, p. 243).

On previous experience, outside the United States, with the referendum
and the initiative, see the article REFERENDUM (Vol. 23, p. 1), by the
Rev. Dr. W. A. B. Coolidge, an American whose life has been chiefly
spent in, and devoted to the study of, Switzerland, where the system was
evolved. In the United States the system was first tried in Oregon, and
the student should read the description in the article OREGON of the
legislative department (Vol. 20, p. 246), which also deals with the
recall of officers. See also under OKLAHOMA (Vol. 20, p. 59), and the
articles on SOUTH DAKOTA and LOS ANGELES.

[Sidenote: Suffrage]

On suffrage in the United States see p. 647 of Vol. 27, describing the
requirements in different states and pointing out that “by the Federal
Constitution state suffrage is also the suffrage for Federal elections,
viz. elections of representatives in Congress and of presidential
electors.” On representation see the passage on p. 653 of Vol. 27, a
portion of which has been quoted above; and on representation in state
legislatures see p. 647 of Vol. 27 and consult the articles on the
separate states, where in the sections headed _Government_ there is also
supplementary information about election and ballot laws. It is
interesting to note, in the articles on Mississippi, Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana and Oklahoma, that
these states have practically disfranchised the negro. For a concrete
instance of the awkward working of the electoral college, in the choice
of the president in 1876, see the article ELECTORAL COMMISSION (Vol. 9,
p. 172). On the position of aliens see the articles ALLEGIANCE (Vol. 1,
p. 689) and NATURALIZATION (Vol. 19, p. 275); and articles on various
states. In the article OREGON, for instance (Vol. 20, p. 245), the
reader will find that “the constitution provides that no Chinaman, not a
resident of the state at the time of the adoption of the constitution,
shall ever hold any real estate or mining claim, or work any mining
claim in the state.”

See also, on the whole subject, the articles BALLOT (Vol. 3, p. 279);
VOTE (Vol. 28, p. 216); VOTING MACHINES (Vol. 28, p. 217); ELECTION
(Vol. 9, p. 169); REPRESENTATION (Vol. 23, especially pp. 112–116, for
proportional voting, second choice voting, etc.), and WOMEN (Vol. 28, p.
782) for the history of the woman’s suffrage movement. In that
connection it is curious to note in this article (p. 787) that, owing to
an oversight in the wording of the first constitution of New Jersey,
women could vote in that state from 1776 to 1807. For any thorough
knowledge of practical, as contrasted with theoretical representative
government in the United States, the student should read what Mr. Bryce
has to say about _Party Government_ (Vol. 27, p. 658–660); a large part
of the article on the history of the United States after the adoption of
the Constitution (Vol. 27, pp. 688–735); articles on the great parties,
FEDERALIST (Vol. 10, p. 235), DEMOCRATIC (Vol. 8, p. 2), and REPUBLICAN
(Vol. 23, p. 177); and the lives of the great party leaders from
Hamilton and Jefferson to McKinley, Roosevelt, Bryan and Woodrow Wilson.
A fuller outline for the study of United States history will be found in
another chapter of this Guide, on _History of the United States_.

[Sidenote: Municipal Government]

But the Federal government and even the state governments do not touch
any one of us so closely as does the local government of our city and
township; and Mr. Bryce gives (Vol. 27, p. 650) a valuable criticism of
the American system of local government,—which, in some cities, indeed,
seems a lack of system in the business sense of that word, and a control
of the government by political parties prone to corruption, bribery and
the granting of special privilege. Mr. Bryce dwells on the
over-developed power of the state in legislating for the cities or other
minor governmental units, and the consequent activity of local city
interests in state and national politics, but he also points to the
growing tendency of the states to permit cities to enact their own
charters. The movement to take the city government out of politics has
reached its greatest force—and its greatest success—in government by
commission.

  In 1902 the city of Galveston, in Texas, adopted a new form of
  municipal government by vesting all powers in a commission of five
  persons, elected by the citizens on a “general ticket,” one of whom is
  mayor and head of the commission, while each of the others has charge
  of a department of municipal administration. A similar plan, differing
  in some details, was subsequently introduced in the city of Des
  Moines, in Iowa; and the success which has attended this new departure
  in both cities has led to its adoption in many others, especially, but
  not exclusively, in the Western states.

For a fuller account see the articles on GALVESTON and DES MOINES,
where, as in other articles on towns and cities, there is a summary of
their government and particularly of the distinctive features of local
administration.

[Sidenote: International Relations]

What we have said, up to this point, has all dealt with our country as a
self-contained unit—except that we have touched on tariffs and on
immigration and on the treatment of aliens. In the article ALIEN (Vol.
1, p. 662) the reader will find the sentence: “In the United States the
separate state laws largely determine the status of an alien, but
subject to Federal treaties.” And Mr. Bryce (Vol. 27, p. 652)
characterizes some of the powers allotted to the national government
“which relate to its action in the international sphere.” See
particularly Mr. Bryce’s remarks (Vol. 27, p. 656) on the powers of the
president:

  In time of war or of public disturbance, however, the domestic
  authority of the president expands rapidly. This was markedly the case
  during the Civil War. As commander-in-chief of the army and navy, and
  as ‘charged with the faithful execution of all laws,’ he is likely to
  assume, and would indeed be expected to assume, all the powers which
  the emergency requires. In ordinary times the president may be almost
  compared to the managing clerk in a large business establishment,
  whose chief function is to select his subordinates, the policy of the
  concern being in the hands of the board of directors. But when foreign
  affairs reach a critical stage, or when disorders within the Union
  require Federal intervention, immense responsibility is then thrown on
  one who is both commander-in-chief of the army and the head of the
  civil executive. In no European country is there any personage to whom
  the president can be said to correspond. He may have to exert more
  authority, even if he enjoys less dignity, than a European king. He
  has powers which are in ordinary times narrower than those of a
  European prime minister; but these powers are more secure, for instead
  of depending on the pleasure of a parliamentary majority, they run on
  to the end of his term.

In this connection you should read the articles INTERNATIONAL LAW and
INTERNATIONAL LAW (PRIVATE), TREATIES, PEACE, PEACE CONFERENCES,
PAN-AMERICAN CONFERENCES and ARBITRATION, INTERNATIONAL; the last
showing plainly how large a part the United States has played in
promoting better international feeling throughout the world.

  Such articles as these tell how peace has changed from a purely
  negative condition to a positive subject of international regulation
  and an object of active political effort. They answer the following
  concrete questions on the subject:

  What was the earliest plan of peace known to history? What were the
  Pax Romana, the “Truce of God,” the “Grand Design” of Henry IV, and
  other schemes for the preservation of peace?

  What was the greatest deliberate effort ever made to secure the peace
  of the world?

  What has been done by the two Hague Conferences, and when will the
  next one be held?

  How far can disarmament be carried out?

  What standing-peace agreements have been executed?

  What is the history of popular effort for international peace, and
  what peace societies exist to-day?

  What are the present recognized limitations of international
  arbitration?

  What are the first steps toward an era of universal peace?

  What has been accomplished by the Pan-American Conferences?

[Sidenote: International Affairs]

On international affairs of to-day in which the United States has a
special interest there is a wealth of information in the Britannica. The
first topic that will naturally present itself to the mind of the reader
is the Panama canal. On this see the article PANAMA CANAL (Vol. 20, p.
666), with a large-scale map, a history of the project and a description
of the engineering features; and on the politics, national and
international, of the question of building the canal, the articles
COLOMBIA, PANAMA, ROOSEVELT, UNITED STATES, _History_ (Vol. 27, pp. 730
and 732), JOHN HAY, and PAUNCEFOTE.

Our relations with Colombia in connection with the canal will naturally
lead the student to a general consideration of the relation of the
United States with the Latin-American countries. Here the most
interesting factor is the Monroe Doctrine, which has been characterized
“as one of the things that every one knows about but that few can
explain.” Read the article MONROE DOCTRINE (Vol. 18, p. 738), by Dr. T.
S. Woolsey, Professor of international law, Yale University; the article
JAMES MONROE (Vol. 18, p. 736), and, in the article UNITED STATES,
_History_ § 156 (Vol. 27, p. 695).

A second topic in the story of Latin-America and the United States is
Cuba; and this part of the story has probably never been told as
accurately and interestingly as in the articles CUBA (Vol. 7, p. 594),
and HAVANA (Vol. 13, p. 76) in the Britannica, both by Dr. F. S.
Philbrick.

American relations with the Orient is a third subject of importance in
the foreign affairs of the United States; and in this subject the most
interesting topic is Chinese and Japanese exclusion. On this see the
articles CALIFORNIA, SAN FRANCISCO, COOLIE, and UNITED STATES, _History_
§ 339 (Vol. 27, p. 723). At the end of the article JAPAN (Vol. 15, p.
156) there is a section on _The Claims of Japan_, by Baron Dairoku
Kikuchi, which is of great interest in this connection.

[Sidenote: Sea-Power]

The place of the United States as a world power, we are proud to say,
depends little on its army or navy—because of its enormous latent
strength, its commanding geographical position, etc. But the
comparatively greater importance of navy over army is now admitted by
nearly every serious thinker—it was the concrete lesson of the
Spanish-American War of 1898 as it was the point of the valuable
historical essays on sea-power written before and since that war by the
American naval officer, Rear-Admiral A. T. Mahan. The American navy and
the navies of the world are matters of interest to every one—and like
all matters of importance they are to be found treated in the
Britannica.

In general see the elaborate articles NAVY (Vol. 19, p. 299); SEA-POWER
(Vol. 25, p. 548); and SEA, COMMAND OF THE (Vol. 24, p. 529); and for a
detailed course of reading on naval history and theory see the chapter
in this Guide _For Naval Officers_.

[Sidenote: The Greater United States]

The topics just discussed will serve as an introduction to the study of
the Imperial United States, which may be pursued in the articles ALASKA,
HAWAII, PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, PORTO RICO, GUAM and CUBA, and the articles
on the towns and cities in the outlying possessions.

The result of reading these articles will be a determination to know
_more_ about your country, to master its history, its industries and its
commerce as well as its political conditions.




                                 PART V
                           READINGS FOR WOMEN




                              CHAPTER LXV
                               FOR WOMEN


It would be absurd, in the full stream of the 20th century, to imagine
that any of the articles in the new edition of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica can be either beyond the comprehension of women or unlikely
to interest women. And since any method of selection is also a method of
elimination, it may be illogical to suggest that any one class of
articles especially merits their attention. But the difficulty is purely
formal. For perhaps the greatest victory of the feminist movement lies
in the demonstrated proposition that women can, in one field after
another, establish their equality with men, without losing any of their
superiority in the exercise of those arts to which they were formerly
restricted. And this chapter, therefore, after describing the articles
which relate to the present political and economic position of women,
naturally turns to subjects such as domestic science and the adornment
of the home, which in all ages and all countries have been considered to
be the special province of women.

[Sidenote: Women Contributors]

If the question of women’s ability to do a full share of the world’s
work any longer admitted of argument, there would be no more vivid way
of coming to an appreciation of the versatility and range as well as the
high quality of women’s intellectual capacity than by looking at the
contributions by women to the Britannica itself. First in mass, and
first in practical value as because it vastly increases the usefulness
of the entire book, is the Index volume with its 975 pages, its 500,000
index entries, its classified list of articles covering nearly 70 pages
and its list of contributors and their principal signed articles. This
volume was the work of a large and carefully organized staff under the
supervision of Miss Janet Hogarth (now Mrs. W. L. Courtney). The
following is a partial alphabetical list of women contributors to the
Britannica with the more important articles they wrote:

           _Contributors_                        _Articles_

 Adelaide Mary Anderson (Principal   LABOUR LEGISLATION (in part).
   Lady Inspector of Factories,
   British Home Office).

 Gertrude Atherton (Author of        REZÁNOV.
   _Rezánov, The Tower of_ _Ivory_,
   etc.).

 Mary Bateson (Late Fellow of        BOROUGH ENGLISH.
   Newnham College, Cambridge;
   Author of _Borough_ _Customs_,
   etc.).

 Gertrude Bell (Author of _The       DRUSES (in part).
   Desert and the Sown_).

 Isabella Bird Bishop (Author of     KOREA (in part).
   _Korea and her Neighbours_,
   etc.).

 Lady Broome (Author of _Station     WESTERN AUSTRALIA, _History_.
   Life in New Zealand_).

 Margaret Bryant                     ALEXANDER THE GREAT, _Legends_;
                                       CAESAR, _Medieval Legends_;
                                       CHARLEMAGNE, _Legends_; VIRGIL,
                                       _the Virgil Legend_; etc.

 Agnes Muriel Clay (Joint Editor of  AGRARIAN LAWS (in part);
   _Sources of Roman History_).        CENTUMVIRI; CURIA; DECURIO;
                                       MUNICIPIUM; PATRON AND CLIENT (in
                                       part); SENATE.

 Agnes M. Clerke (Hon. Member Royal  ASTRONOMY, _History_; BRAHE, TYCHO;
   Astronomical Society, Author of     COPERNICUS; FLAMSTEED; HALLEY;
   _History of Astronomy_, etc.).      HUYGENS; KEPLER; ZODIAC; etc.

 Mrs. Craigie (“John Oliver Hobbes”) GEORGE ELIOT.
   (Author of _The School for
   Saints_, etc.).

 Lady Dilke (Author of _French       GREUZE; INGRES; MILLET, J. F.
   Painters_, etc.).

 Mme. Duclaux (Author of _Life of    RENAN.
   Renan_, etc.).

 Lady Eastlake (Author of _Five      GIBSON, JOHN.
   Great Painters_, etc.).

 Lady Gomme (Author of _Traditional  CHILDREN’S GAMES.
   Games of Great Britain_, etc.).

 Dr. Harriet L. Hennessy, L.R.C.S.I. GYNAECOLOGY; INFANCY; INTESTINAL
                                       OBSTRUCTION; MEDICAL EDUCATION,
                                       _U. S. A._ (in part); RESPIRATORY
                                       SYSTEM, _Pathology_ (in part);
                                       TUBERCULOSIS, etc.

 Lady Huggins (Author, with Sir      ARMILLA; ASTROLABE.
   William Huggins, of _Atlas of
   Representative Stellar Spectra_,
   etc.).

 Lady Lugard (Author of _A Tropical  BRITISH EMPIRE; BAUCHI; BORNU;
   Dependency_, etc.).                 KANO; KATAGUM; NASSARAWA;
                                       NIGERIA; RHODES, CECIL; SOKOTO;
                                       ZARIA.

 Kate A. Meakin                      MOROCCO (in part); TETUAN; SUS.

 Alice Meynell (Author of _The       BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.
   Rhythm of Life_, etc.).

 Hilda M. R. Murray (Lecturer on     ENGLISH LANGUAGE (in part).
   English, Royal Holloway College).

 Mrs. H. O. O’Neill (Formerly Fellow PECKHAM, JOHN; PREBENDARY; PRELATE;
   of Manchester University).          PRIOR; PROCURATOR; VICAR.

 Dr. Anna C. Paues (Author of _A     ENGLISH BIBLE (in part).
   Fourteenth Century Biblical
   Version_, etc.).

 Mrs. W. Alison Phillips (Associate  LOUIS XVIII; MARIE ANTOINETTE, etc.
   of Bedford College, London).

 Bertha S. Phillpotts (Formerly      GERMANY, _Archaeology_; NORWAY,
   Librarian of Girton College,        _Early History_; SCANDINAVIAN
   Cambridge).                         CIVILIZATION.

 Kathleen Schlesinger (Author of     BAGPIPE; BUGLE; DRUM; HARP; HORN;
   _The Instruments of the             ORGAN, _Ancient History_;
   Orchestra_, etc.).                  PIANOFORTE (in part); SPINET;
                                       TIMBREL; VIOL; etc.

 Mrs. Henry Sidgwick (Hon. Secretary SPIRITUALISM.
   to the Society for Psychical
   Research, late Principal of
   Newnham College).

 Mrs. Alec. Tweedie (Author of       DIAZ, PORFIRIO.
   _Porfirio Diaz_).

 Mme. Villari (English translator of SAVONAROLA.
   works of Prof. Villari).

 Mrs. Humphry Ward (Author of        LYLY.
   _Robert Elsmere_, etc.).

 Lady Welby (Author of _What is      SIGNIFICS.
   Meaning?_ etc.).

 Jessie L. Weston (Author of         KING ARTHUR; ARTHURIAN LEGEND; THE
   _Arthurian Romances_, etc.).        HOLY GRAIL; GUENEVERE; LANCELOT;
                                       MALORY, SIR THOMAS; MAP, WALTER;
                                       MERLIN; PERCEVAL; THE ROUND
                                       TABLE; TRISTAN; ESCHENBACH,
                                       WOLFRAM VON.

 Alice Zimmern (Author of _The       MARY CARPENTER.
   Renaissance of Girls’ Education_,
   etc.).

This remarkable list shows that women have contributed to the Britannica
on subjects so varied as astronomy, medieval literature, medicine,
sociology, linguistics, literary biography, art criticism, law and
politics, political science and sociology, musical instruments,
education, the Bible and ecclesiastical history, and philosophy.

[Sidenote: Woman’s Advance]

It may be noted as indicating the advance of women during the last
century and a half that in the first edition of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, which was published in 1771, the article on women consisted
of the following eight words “WOMAN,—the female of man—see HOMO.” In the
present 11th edition, published nearly a century and a half later, one
single article entitled WOMEN in volume 28, beginning on page 782, is
equivalent in its contents to 22 pages of this Guide.

What woman has accomplished in scholarship, literature, art and science
has been done very largely in the last hundred years. In authorship and,
to a greater degree, on the stage her activity dates back a little
further. In Shakespeare’s time all women’s parts on the stage were taken
by boys. In fact as the Britannica tells us (Vol. 8, p. 521) in the days
of Queen Elizabeth and Shakespeare “No woman might appear at a
playhouse, unless masked.”

It is only in comparatively recent times that the real “emancipation” of
woman began; and this explains why the list of women famous in history
is so much longer than any of the other lists given in this part of the
Guide. Through earlier periods women attained power only by birth, by
marriage, or by being “queens uncrowned,” but none the less powerful on
that account, like Aspasia, Nell Gwyn, Jane Shore and the Pompadour.

There can be no question that during most of the world’s history,
woman’s only place was in the home. And it is certain that no matter how
far her emancipation may be carried the home will be _a_ sphere for her.
Her relation to her husband and her children, her right to a share of
his property and of theirs—and to her own—as now more liberally granted
and interpreted by law, are outlined in the Britannica. The status of
women in early times is described in the article in the Britannica on
women. It is, with variations in different places, everywhere a story of
dependence. Even in Roman law a woman was completely dependent. If
married she and her property passed into the power of her husband; if
unmarried she was (unless a vestal virgin) under the perpetual tutelage
of her father during his life, and after his death of her agnates, that
is, of those of kinsmen by blood or adoption who would have been under
the power of the common ancestor had he lived. Under English civil law a
girl can contract a valid marriage at 12, a boy at 14. Under the common
law “the father was entitled as against the mother to the custody of a
legitimate child up to the age of sixteen, and could only forfeit such
right by misconduct.” But the Court of Chancery sometimes “took a less
rigid view of the paternal rights and looked more to the interest of the
child, and consequently in some cases to the extension of the mother’s
right at common law. Legislation has tended in the same direction.” In
England women are still under two remarkable disabilities: “the
exclusion of female heirs from intestate succession unless in the
absence of a male heir; and the fact that a husband could obtain a
divorce for the adultery of his wife, while a wife could only obtain it
for her husband’s adultery if coupled with some other cause, such as
cruelty or desertion.”

[Sidenote: The Legal Status of American Women]

In the United States the legal and political status of woman varies
largely with the laws of the different states. For example, as is well
known, in certain states women have the same right as men to the ballot.
Wyoming (1869) and Colorado (1893) were the first women’s suffrage
states. In more than half the states, roughly everywhere except in the
South and a few eastern states, she has the right to vote for the
members of school boards and has a general school suffrage. In Louisiana
since 1898 women tax-payers may vote on questions of tax levies. As
regards property rights, in the state of New York, a woman in possession
of property, who marries, has the unqualified use, irrespective of the
wishes of her husband, of her property. That is, she owns and can spend
as she pleases the whole of the income of her property, while, on the
other hand, her husband is compelled by law to give her a certain
proportion of his income. In other states, Mississippi, notably, the
laws as regard property of married women are precisely the same as that
for married men. If the husband is compelled to give a certain
proportion of his income to his wife, she is compelled to give the same
proportion of her income to him. This is true in several states,
Michigan, for example, except that married women cannot usually convey
property without the husband’s permission. In the state of New York a
married woman making her will has a right to dispose of her property as
she pleases; whereas in other states, Missouri for instance, the law
prescribes that at least one-half shall go to her husband, if there are
no children. In other words, in no two states of the Union is the legal
and political status of woman the same. It is often important, and in
these days always a matter of interest, for a woman to know just what
her legal position is in the state in which she lives. This information
the Britannica gives.

What a mother can do for her children she may learn from the Britannica
articles indicated in the chapters of this Guide _For Children_ and in
the chapter _For Teachers_. Similarly she will find assistance in
choosing, building or furnishing a house from the chapters _For Builders
and Architects_, _For Designers_, _For Manufacturers of Furniture_, etc.

Such articles as LACE, EMBROIDERY, CARPETS, TAPESTRY, FURNITURE,
PAINTING, SCULPTURE, JEWELRY, PLATE, particularly as they are all
remarkably well illustrated, will be of great value either for the
general formation of taste or for giving definite information about a
particular style. For the adornment of “the House Beautiful” the
Britannica is, however, valuable not merely because of the information
it contains. The set on India paper, compact, slender and graceful,
handsomely bound in leather, and contained in one of the “period”
bookcases designed especially for the books, is in itself an adornment
and an ornament for any library or drawing room. For the country home
with flower or vegetable gardens the article HORTICULTURE (Vol. 13, p.
741) will be found full of helpful information, both in its general
treatment, and in the gardeners’ calendar for the United States, which
tells in the most practical fashion what to do each month in the garden.

[Sidenote: Home Making]

For the transformation of a house, well-situated, well-built,
well-furnished, well-decorated into a home,—for _home-making_,—any
course of study in the Britannica should be helpful to a woman, by
broadening her sympathies and her knowledge and by making a more
interesting and better-informed companion to her husband, a more
competent hostess to his and her guests, and a wiser mother to her
children. But home-making is an art and not a science—or, if the modern
woman will forgive the use of so old-fashioned a phrase, it is a
spiritual grace rather than an intellectual achievement—and even a Guide
to readings in the Britannica cannot give an exact formula for it.

[Sidenote: Domestic Science]

But there is a science whose field is the home and whose formulas are
definite, and this “domestic science” may be learned from the
Britannica. Of primary interest is the article DIETETICS (Vol. 8, p.
214), equivalent in length to 25 pages of this Guide. It is by the late
Dr. Wilbur Olin Atwater, professor of chemistry, Wesleyan University,
Middletown, Connecticut, who was special agent of the U. S. Department
of Agriculture in charge of nutrition investigations, and R. D. Milner,
formerly of the same Department. It contains 6 valuable tables: I.
Percentage Composition of some Common Food Materials (64 in all); II.
Digestibility (or Availability) of Nutrients in Different Classes of
Food Materials (22 in all); III. Estimates of Heats of Combustion and of
Fuel Value of Nutrients in Ordinary Mixed Diet; IV. Quantities of
Available Nutrients and Energy in Daily Food Consumption of Persons in
Different Circumstances; V. Standards for Dietaries—Available Nutrients
and Energy per Man per Day; and VI. Amounts of Nutrients and Energy
Furnished for one Shilling in Food Materials at Ordinary Prices (22 food
materials, at 44 different prices). The topics of the article are:

  Food and its functions—refuse, water, mineral matter, protein,
  including albuminoids and gelatinoids, fats, carbohydrates.

  Conversion of food into body-material and of food and body-material
  into heat, muscular energy, etc., with results obtained from Dr.
  Atwater’s famous experiments with men in the “respiration
  calorimeter,” from measurement and analysis of food and drink, and
  from measurement of energy expended as heat and as external muscular
  work.

  Composition of food materials.

  Digestibility or availability of foods.

  Full value of food.

  Food consumption.

  Quantities of nutrients needed—tentative estimates of the average
  daily amounts required.

  Hygienic economy of food: Eat what agrees with you and use foods which
  give needed nutriment, but do not burden the body with superfluous
  material. The importance of good cooking, neatness and cleanliness.

  Pecuniary economy of food.

Read also the article NUTRITION (Vol. 19, p. 920, equivalent to 25 pages
of this Guide), by Dr. D. N. Paton, professor of physiology, University
of Glasgow, and Dr. E. P. Cathcart, lecturer in chemical physiology,
University of Glasgow. This article considers “the mode of digestion,
the utilization and the elimination of the end products of the three
great constituents, proteins, carbohydrates and fats,” discussing in
detail:

  Chemistry of Digestion—digestion in the mouth, stomach and the
  intestines; bile.

  Mode of Formation of Digestive Secretions—the salivary and gastric
  glands, secretion in the pancreas, intestinal juice.

  Mechanism of the Alimentary Canal—mastication, swallowing, stomach
  movements, intestinal movements, etc.

  Absorption by the mouth, stomach and intestines.

  Changes in the cells—proteins, carbohydrates, fats, fasting, muscular
  work, internal secretions, pancreas.

  Excretion—urea, ammonia, sulphur, phosphorus, etc.

[Sidenote: Cookery]

There is much very practical information for the housewife in the
article COOKERY (Vol. 7, p. 74), besides the interesting historical
sketch. Cookery, says this article, as an art “is only remotely
connected with the mere necessities of nutrition or the science of
dietetics. Mere hunger, though the best sauce, will not produce cookery,
which is the art of sauces.” Oriental, Greek and Roman cookery, at least
as we know them from literature, aimed at luxury, rich and rare foods,
cost and show. After the Renaissance, the history of modern cookery
began with Italy, and from Italy Catherine de’ Medici brought “Italian
cooks to Paris and introduced there a cultured simplicity which was
unknown in France before.” _Forks and spoons were “Italian neatnesses”
unknown in England until the early part of the 17th century_; their use
“marked an epoch in the progress of dining, and consequently of
cookery.” French cookery advanced under Louis XIV and XV; received an
apparent set back from the French Revolution—which, however, marked the
rise of Parisian restaurants; but revived with brilliancy early in the
19th century, so that now “French cooking is admittedly the ideal of
culinary art, directly we leave the plain roast and boiled. And the
spread of cosmopolitan hotels and restaurants over England, America and
the European continent, has largely accustomed the whole civilized world
to the Parisian type.”

The article closes with eminently useful “notes on broiling, roasting,
baking, boiling, stewing and frying.”

The article FOOD (Vol. 10, p. 611) describes particularly the best foods
for infants and children; foods for adults are treated in NUTRITION,
DIETETICS, already mentioned, and in the article VEGETARIANISM (Vol. 27,
p. 967). Other articles of importance to the cook are:

FOOD PRESERVATION (Vol. 10, p. 612), by Otto Hehner, English public
analyst, formerly president of the Society of Public Analysts; and the
same authority’s article on ADULTERATION (Vol. 1, p. 218), which deals
with legislation against adulteration, and discusses arsenic in foods,
preservatives such as formaldehyde and salicylic acid, boracic
preservatives,—colouring matter in food, metallic impurities; American
laws against adulteration; German laws; particular articles
adulterated—milk, condensed milk, cream, butter, margarine, cheese,
lard, oils, flour and bread, sugar, marmalade, jams, tea, coffee,
chocolate, cocoa, wine, beer, non-alcoholic drinks, vinegar, spirits,
drugs. See the chapter _For Manufacturers of Foods_.

The following is an alphabetical list of the principal articles on foods
and beverages:

 Absinthe
 Aerated Waters
 Ale
 Arrack
 Aspic
 Bacon
 Bannock
 Barm
 Beef
 Beer
 Benedictine
 Biltong
 Biscuit
 Bitters
 Bohea
 Brandy
 Bread
 Brewing
 Butter
 Calipash and Calipee
 Caudle
 Caviare, or Caviar
 Chartreuse
 Chasse
 Cheese
 Chocolate
 Chupatty
 Chutney
 Cider
 Claret
 Confectionery
 Cookery
 Couscous
 Curaçoa
 Curry
 Food Preservation
 Ghee
 Gin
 Gravy
 Haggis
 Hippocras
 Jams and Jellies
 Junket
 Kava (Cava, or Ava)
 Kedgeree
 Ketchup
 Kirsch
 Koumiss
 Kvass, or Kwass
 Lard
 Liqueurs
 Loaf
 Macaroni
 Malmsey
 Malt
 Marchpane, or Marzipan
 Margarine
 Marmalade
 Mate
 Mead
 Mealie
 Meat
 Milk
 Molasses
 Mulligatawny
 Negus
 Omelette
 Pemmican
 Perry
 Pilau
 Porridge
 Pudding
 Pulque
 Punch
 Raisin
 Ratafia
 Rum
 Saké
 Salad
 Scone
 Sherbet
 Sherry
 Spirits
 Steak
 Suet
 Syrup
 Tapioca
 Tart
 Tea
 Toast
 Treacle
 Venison
 Vermicelli
 Vermouth
 Vinegar
 Vodka
 Whisky
 Wine
 Yeast

[Sidenote: Costume and Ornament]

Turning sharply from the useful to the ornamental—from the kitchen to
the boudoir—the woman who uses the Britannica will find in it not merely
the interesting information to which clues are given in the chapter for
the jeweller and in the section on embroidery (Ch. 66) but many other
articles about costume and dress, with illustrations which make the text
far clearer and more valuable. With the constant turns of Fashion’s
wheel, dress, and especially women’s dress, is always reverting to an
earlier style or to a more primitive and semi-barbaric style of the
present day—now Empire styles, Robespierre collars, close-fitting gowns
of the pseudo-Greek style of the Napoleonic era, and now a quasi-folk
style, Bulgarian, or Oriental, and again a hint of the ecclesiastical
surplice, dalmatic, stole, or collar. The result is that the study of
the styles of the past, especially when properly illustrated, may be not
only interesting but actually valuable to a woman planning a new gown or
a “novel” ornament for head or throat.

The article COSTUME (Vol. 7, p. 224), equivalent in length to 80 pages
of this Guide, is written by T. A. Joyce of the Department of
Ethnography, British Museum; by Stanley Arthur Cook, editor for the
Palestine Exploration Fund, on Egyptian and Semitic costume; by Henry
Stuart Jones, late director of the British School at Rome, on Aegean,
Greek and Roman costume; by Oswald Barron, late editor of the
_Ancestor_, on medieval and modern costume; and by W. Alison Phillips,
author of _Modern Europe_, etc. Its 51 illustrations are chosen with
great care from original sources, tombs, wall-paintings, seals, statues
and statuettes, brasses, and portraits of many periods, and they are
supplemented by illustrations in other articles:—AEGEAN CIVILIZATION
(Vol. 1, p. 245), see Plate III, Fig. 7 and Plate IV, Fig. 7, for
multiple or flounced skirts and basques—like those of the early
’80’s—with short overskirt scalloped high on either side; GREEK ART,
Figs. 2, 3, 21, 40, 42, 75; TERRACOTTA (Vol. 26, p. 653), see both
plates and especially Fig. 4 of Tanagra and other figurines; ROMAN ART
(Vol. 23, p. 474), see Figs. 11, 12, 16, 24, 28; BRASSES, MONUMENTAL
(Vol. 4, p. 434), see all illustrations; ILLUMINATED MANUSCRIPTS (Vol.
14, p. 312), see Plates III and V; PAINTING (Vol. 20, p. 459), see Figs.
7, 10, 11, 14, 25, 27; LACE (Vol. 16, p. 37), see Figs. 4, 6, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 33; MINIATURES (Vol. 18, p. 523), see both plates.
One of the most interesting sources for the text of the article COSTUME
is in the writings of satirists, who from period to period have praised
the simplicity and frugality of the preceding generation and bewailed
the extravagance in style and material of dress during the satirists’
own day.

Besides this general article on costume there is special treatment of
Chinese costume in the article CHINA (Vol. 6, p. 173) and a section on
costume in the article INDIA (Vol. 14, p. 417), equivalent to 18 pages
of this Guide, written by Col. Charles Grant, formerly inspector of
military education in India, illustrated with 16 pen-and-ink drawings by
J. Lockwood Kipling, who is best-known to most people as the father of
Rudyard Kipling, and the illustrator of _Kim_, his son’s story of native
life in India. On Celtic dress see the article CLAN (Vol. 6, p. 421); on
that of the Hittites the article HITTITES (Vol. 13, p. 537); on modern
Egyptian the article EGYPT (Vol. 9, p. 31), on Persian, the article
PERSIA (Vol. 21, p. 193), etc.

And see the following articles on costume and similar topics:

 Aigrette
 Aiguillette
 Apron
 Backscratcher
 Baldric
 Bandana, or Bandanna
 Beard
 Beaver
 Blouse
 Bonnet
 Braid
 Burnous
 Buskin
 Caftan
 Chape
 Chatelaine
 Costume
 Cravat
 Crinoline
 Cuff
 Cummerbund
 Depilatory
 Dolman
 Doublet
 Dress
 Farthingale
 Frock
 Gaberdine
 Girdle
 Glove
 Golosh, or Galosh
 Gown
 Haik
 Hat
 Hood
 Hose
 Jerkin
 Kaross
 Kilt
 Kohl
 Mantle
 Mitten
 Moccasin
 Moustache
 Muff
 Parasol
 Patten
 Pelisse
 Peruke
 Petticoat
 Plaid
 Pomade
 Pomander
 Poncho
 Puttee
 Queue
 Razor
 Robes
 Sandal
 Scarf
 Shampoo
 Shirt
 Sleeve
 Snowshoes
 Sombrero
 Sporran
 Stockings
 Tabard
 Tarbush
 Toilet
 Towel
 Trousers
 Tunic
 Turban
 Veil
 Whisker
 Wig

[Sidenote: Biographical Study]

A study of the lives of great women will interest any one, and if this
study is pursued by means of the Britannica the reader will have the
double advantage of getting full and authoritative material presented in
the most attractive and excellent style. From the lists that follow of
articles on women in the Britannica, interesting groups may easily be
chosen, such as:

Famous American Women:—ANNE HUTCHINSON, ALICE AND PHOEBE CARY, MARGARET
O’NEILL EATON, MARGARET FULLER, the GRIMKÉ sisters, HARRIET BEECHER
STOWE.

Women of Ancient Times:—ACCA LARENTIA, LUCRETIA, AGRIPPINA, ARTEMISIA,
ASPASIA, CLEOPATRA, CORNELIA, FAUSTINA, MESSALLINA, VIRGINIA, ERINNA,
CORINNA, SAPPHO, HYPATIA, ZENOBIA.

Heroines of Fiction in History: compare Kingsley’s _Hypatia_ with the
real woman, Ware’s _Zenobia_ with the queen as she is represented by a
historian in the Britannica; the women of Dumas and of Scott in their
historical novels and their originals as seen in the Britannica, for
instance Mary Queen of Scots as portrayed by Sir Walter in _The Abbot_
and by Swinburne in the Britannica, Elizabeth and Amy Robsart in
_Kenilworth_ and in the Britannica, Catherine de’ Medici in _Chicot the
Jester_ and in fact; or the women of Shakespeare’s historical plays as
compared with their true place in history.

Women in American political reform:—AMELIA B. BLOOMER, SUSAN B. ANTHONY,
ELIZABETH CADY STANTON, LUCRETIA MOTT and LUCY BLACKWELL STONE.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following is a partial list of articles in the Britannica dealing
with Women, who may, for convenience, be booked under the broad head of
_History_ as distinct from Literature, the Arts and Science:—

 Acca Larentia
 Accoramboni, Vittoria
 Acland, Lady Harriett
 Adelaide
 Agnes of Meran
 Agreda, Abbess of
 Agrippina
 d’Aiguillon, Duchesse
 Albany, Louise, countess of
 Alice, Princess
 Amalasuntha
 Anna Amalia of Saxe-Weimar
 Anna Leopoldovna
 Anne of Brittany
 Anne of Cleves
 Anne of Denmark
 Anne of England
 Anne of France
 Anne (of Russia)
 Arria
 Arsinoë
 Artemisia
 Aspasia
 Barton, Elizabeth
 Berenice
 Blanche of Castile
 Boadicea
 Boleyn, Anne
 Borgia, Lucrezia
 Brunhilda
 Cappello, Bianca
 Caroline, Amelia Augusta
 Caroline of England
 Castro, Inez de
 Catherine of Aragon
 Catherine of Braganza
 Catherine de’ Medici
 Catherine I and II (Russia)
 Catherine of Valois
 Châteauneuf, La Belle
 Christina, Maria
 Christina of Sweden
 Clarke, Mary Anne
 Cleveland, Duchess of
 Cleopatra
 Clotilda, St.
 Colonna, Vittoria
 Corday, Charlotte
 Cornelia
 Cornaro, Caterina
 Diane de France
 Diane de Poitiers
 Du Barry
 Eaton, Margaret O’Neill
 Eleanor of Aquitaine
 Elizabeth of Austria
 Elizabeth (Carmen Sylva)
 Elizabeth, Electress Palatine
 Elizabeth of England
 Elizabeth (princess)
 Elizabeth of France
 Elizabeth Petrovna
 Este, Beatrice d’
 Estrées, Gabrielle d’
 Etampes, Duchesse d’
 Eudocia
 Eudoxia
 Eugénie
 Euphrosyne
 Elizabeth Farnese
 Faustina
 Feuchères, Baronne de
 Fredegond
 Gilbert, M. D. E. R. (“Lola Montez”)
 Godiva
 Gontaut, Duchesse de
 Grey, Lady Jane
 Hachette, Jeanne
 Henrietta Maria of England
 Howard, Catherine
 Ida of Bernicia
 Irene
 Isabella of Bavaria
 Isabella of Castile
 Isabella of Hainaut
 Isabella II of Spain
 Jacoba
 Joan of Arc
 Joan (Pope)
 Joanna the Mad
 Joanna of Naples
 Josephine
 Junot, Laure
 Kingston, Elizabeth, Duchess of
 La Fayette, Louise de
 Lamballe, Princesse de
 La Sablière, Marguerite de
 La Vallière, Louise de
 Lenclos, Ninon de
 Lennox, Countess of
 Lisle, Alice
 Livia Drusilla
 Longueville, Duchesse de
 Louise of Prussia
 Louise of Savoy
 Lucretia
 Macdonald, Flora
 Maintenon, Mme. de
 Maine, Duchesse du
 Mailly, Comtesse de
 Margaret of Austria
 Margaret of Denmark
 Margaret Maultasch
 Margaret (Maid of Norway)
 Margaret of Scotland, St.
 Margaret of Scotland
 Maria Stella
 Marie Antoinette
 Marie Leszczynska
 Marie Louise
 Marie de’ Medici
 Marie Amelie Thérèse
 Marie Thérèse
 Matilda of Tuscany
 Mary of Burgundy
 Mary I and II of England
 Mary of Lorraine
 Mary of Modena
 Mary of Orange
 Mary, Queen of Scots
 Masham, Lady
 Matilda
 Messallina
 Mignot, Claudine
 Marquise de Montespan
 Marquise de Montesson
 Montpensier, Duchesse de
 Octavia
 Olga
 Orkney, Countess of
 Orleans, Henrietta of
 Parr, Catherine
 Perrers, Alice
 Philippa of Hainaut
 Phryne
 Pompadour, Marquise de
 Portsmouth, Duchess of
 Prie, Marquise de
 Radegunda, St.
 Rich, Penelope
 Robsart, Amy
 Rosamond (“The Fair”)
 Rothelin, Marquise de
 Roxana
 Semiramis
 Serres, Olivia
 Sforza, Caterina
 Shore, Jane
 Snell, Hannah
 Sophia Aleksyeevna
 Sophia of Hanover
 Sophia Dorothea of Hanover
 Sorel, Agnes
 Stanhope, Lady Hester
 Stuart, Arabella
 Swynford, Catherine
 Talbot, Mary Anne
 Tanaquil
 Tarpeia
 Theodora
 Theophano
 Ursins, Princess des
 Victoria
 Virginia
 Walter, Lucy
 Wilhelmina
 Zenobia

Quite as long and much more impressive is the list of women who have
produced _literature_—excluding the heroines of mythology and
literature—on whom there are separate articles in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica.

 Ackermann, Louise
 Adam, Juliette
 Agoult, Comtesse d’
 Aguilar, Grace
 Aisse, Mlle.
 Alcott, Louisa May
 Anna Commena
 Arnim, Elisabeth von
 Aulnoy, Baronne d’
 Austen, Jane
 Austin, Sarah
 Baillie, Lady Grizel
 Baillie, Joanna
 Bartauld, Lady Anne
 Barnard, Anna Letitia
 Bashkirtseff, Maria
 Behn, Aphra
 Bekker, Elizabeth
 Bernauer, Agnes
 Berners, Juliana
 Blamire, Susanna
 Blessington, Marguerite, Countess of
 Blind, Mathilde
 Bosboom-Toussaint, Anna
 Braddon, Mary Elizabeth
 Bremer, Frederika
 Brontë, Charlotte and Emily
 Brooke, Frances
 Browning, Elizabeth Barrett
 Brunton, Mary
 Burnett, Frances E. Hodgson
 Carter, Elizabeth
 Cary, Alice and Phoebe
 Cenci, Beatrice
 Centlivre, Susanna
 Charrière, Agnes de
 Child, Lydia Maria
 Cockburn, Alicia
 Coleridge, Sara
 Colet, Louise
 Cook, Eliza
 Cooke, Rose Terry
 Corelli, Marie
 Corinna
 Cork, Mary, countess of
 Cottin, Marie
 Cowley, Hannah
 Craddock, Charles Egbert
 Craigie, Pearl (“John Oliver Hobbes”)
 Craik, Dinah Maria
 Craven, Pauline
 D’Arblay, Frances
 Dashkov, Catherina
 Deffand, Marquise du
 Delany, Mary Granville
 Dickinson, Anna Elizabeth
 Droste-Hülshoff, Freiin von
 Duff-Gordon, Lucie
 Edgeworth, Maria
 Edgren-Leffler, Anne Charlotte
 Edwards, Amelia Ann Blandford
 Eliot, George
 Engelbrechtsdatter, Dorthe
 Épinay, Louise d’
 Erinna
 Ewing, Juliana
 Ferrier, Susan E.
 Flygare-Carlén, Emilie
 Foote, Mary Hallock
 Fuller, Margaret
 Fullerton, Lady
 Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn
 Gay, Marie F. S.
 Genlis, Comtesse de
 Girardin, Delphine de
 Godwin, Mary Wollstonecraft
 Gore, Catherine G. F.
 Gyllembourg-Ehrensvärd, Baroness
 Gyp
 Hahn-Hahn, Ida von
 Havergal, Frances Ridley
 Hamilton, Elizabeth
 Haywood, Eliza
 Hemans, Felicia Dorothea
 Houdetot, Comtesse de
 Howe, Julia Ward
 Hrosvitha
 Hypatia
 Inchbald, Elizabeth
 Ingelow, Jean
 Jackson, Helen Maria (“H. H.”)
 Jameson, Anna Brownell
 Jewett, Sarah Orne
 Kavanagh, Julia
 Krüdener, Baroness von
 Lamb, Mary
 Lazarus, Emma
 Lee, Sophia
 Levy, Amy
 Lewald, Fanny
 Lyall, Edna
 Malet, Lucas
 Marguerite de Valois
 Marie de France
 Markham, Mrs.
 Martineau, Harriet
 Meynell, Alice C.
 Mitford, Mary Russell
 Molesworth, Mary Louise
 Monk, Maria
 Montagu, Elizabeth R.
 Montagu, Mary Wortley
 More, Hannah
 Morgan, Lady Sydney
 Moulton, Louise Chandler
 Mundt, Klara (Luise Mühlbach)
 Naden, Constance
 Nairne, Baroness
 Negri, Ada
 Norton, Caroline E. O.
 Oliphant, Margaret
 Opie, Amelia
 Orzeszko, Eliza
 Ouida
 Pardoe, Julia
 Pardo-Bazan, Emilia
 Philips, Katharine
 Piozzi, Hester Lynch
 Pisan, Christine de
 Ploennies, Luise von
 Porter, Jane
 Praxilla
 Radcliffe, Ann
 Reeve, Clara
 Rossetti, Christine
 Sablé, Marquise de
 Sand, George
 Sappho
 Schelling, Karoline
 Schreiber, Charlotte Elizabeth
 Scudéry, Madeleine de
 Serao, Matilda
 Sévigné, Marquise de
 Seward, Anna
 Sherwood, Mary Martha
 Sigourney, Lydia H.
 Smith, Charlotte
 Southworth, Emma
 Staal, Baronne de
 Stael, Mme. de
 Steele, Flora Annie
 Stein, Charlotte von
 Stowe, Harriet Beecher
 Strickland, Agnes
 Tautphoeus, Baroness von
 Taylor, Ann and Jane
 Thaxter, Celia
 Tighe, Mary
 Tucker, Charlotte Maria
 Ward, Elizabeth Stuart Phelps
 Ward, Mrs. Humphry
 Wardlaw, Lady
 Wiggin, Kate Douglas
 Wilkins, Mary E.
 Winchelsea, Countess of
 Wood, Mrs. Henry
 Wordsworth, Dorothy
 Yonge, Charlotte Mary

Although women have appeared on the stage only in the last two centuries
the list of actresses and singers on whom there are articles in the
Britannica is a long one. A partial list in alphabetical order follows:

 Abbott, Emma
 Abington, Frances
 Albani, Mme.
 Albert, Mme.
 Alboni, Marietta
 Anderson, Mary
 Ashwell, Lena
 Bartet, Jeanne Julia
 Bernhardt, Sarah
 Birch-Pfeiffer, Charlotte
 Bracegirdle, Anne
 Campbell, Beatrice Stella
 Calvé, Emma
 Cary, Anna Louise
 Celeste, Mme.
 Chaminade, Cécile
 Clairon, La
 Clive, Catherine
 Coghlan, Rose
 Cushman, Charlotte
 Després, Suzanne
 Drew, Louisa Lane
 Dumesnil, Marie
 Duse, Eleanora
 Elssler, Fanny
 Farren, Elizabeth
 Faucit, Helena
 Félix, Lia
 Fenton, Lavinia
 Fiske, Minnie Maddern
 Gilbert, Ann
 Grisi, Giulia
 Guilbert, Yvette
 Guimard, Marie Madeleine
 Gwyn, Nell
 Hading, Jane
 Horton, Christiana
 Jordan, Dorothea
 Keeley, Mary Anne
 Kellogg, Clara Louise
 Keene, Laura
 Klafsky, Katharina
 Lacy, Harriette Deborah
 Langtry, Lillie
 Lecouvreur, Adrienne
 Lind, Jenny
 Mara, Gertrude E.
 Marlowe, Julia
 Mars, Mlle.
 Melba
 Menken, Adah Isaacs
 Modjeska, Helena
 Morris, Clara
 Neilson, Adelaide
 Nethersole, Olga
 Nisbett, Louisa C.
 Nordica, Lilian
 Oldfield, Anne
 O’Neill, Eliza
 Patey, Janet Monach
 Philips, Adelaide
 Pope, Jane
 Porter, Mary
 Raabe, Hedwig
 Rachel
 Raucourt, Mlle.
 Rehan, Ada
 Réjane, Gabrielle
 Ristori, Adelaide
 Robinson, Mary
 Sacher, Rosa
 Sainton-Dobly, C. H.
 Schröder, Sophie
 Schröder-Devrient, Wilhelmine
 Seebach, Marie
 Siddons, Sarah
 Smithson, Henrietta C.
 Sterling, Antoinette
 Sterling, Fanny
 Taglioni
 Tempest, Marie
 Terry, Ellen
 Tietjens, Thérèse
 Verbruggen, Susanna
 Vestris, Lucia Elizabeth
 Vincent, Mary Ann
 Vokes, Rosina
 Woffington, Peg
 Yates, Mary Ann

Both in Great Britain and in the United States the great social reform
movements of the last century numbered among their most able advocates
brilliant and devoted women. This is true of temperance, abolition of
slavery, prison reform, the treatment of the insane and defectives, and
nearly every branch which this Guide has enumerated, especially in Part
4, where there is a general outline of these reforms. For the part
played by women see the biographies of the women just mentioned and,
among many others, JANE ADDAMS, CLARA BARTON, BARONESS BURDETT-COUTTS,
DOROTHEA LYNDE DIX, EMILY FAITHFUL, ELIZABETH FRY, OCTAVIA and MIRANDA
HILL, MARY A. LIVERMORE and LUCRETIA MOTT. More particularly the
following list of names of women connected with educational progress
will supplement what has been said in the chapter of this Guide _For
Teachers_ and in the part of the Guide dealing with advances in
education and educational problems in the chapter _Questions of the
Day_:

 Astell, Mary
 Beale, Dorothea
 Bodichon, Barbara L. S.
 Brace, Julia
 Bridgman, Laura
 Bass, Frances Mary
 Carpenter, Mary
 Clough, Anne Jemima
 Crandall, Prudence
 Keller, Helen
 Lyon, Mary
 Shirreff, Emily
 Swanwick, Anna

And see also the articles CO-EDUCATION and articles on different
colleges for women, e.g., MOUNT HOLYOKE, VASSAR, BRYN MAWR, SMITH, etc.
One who wishes to realize the extent of feminine talent or genius should
read the lives in the Britannica of the sculptor HARRIET HOSMER and of
women painters including CECILIA BEAUX, ROSA BONHEUR, ARTEMISIA
GENTILESCHI, KATE GREENWAY, ANGELICA KAUFFMANN, TERESA SCHWARTZE and
MME. VIGÉE-LEBRUN. But the reader who is eager rather to know whether
woman’s intellectual powers—not her talent and her genius—compare
favourably with those of the male, will find material in the
biographical sketches of the physicist MME. CURIE; the geologist MARY
ANNING; the travelers ISABELLA BIRD BISHOP and ALEXANDRINA TINNÉ; the
biologists MARIANNE NORTH and ELEANOR ORMEROD; the American ethnologist
ALICE C. FLETCHER; and above all—since mathematics has always been
considered above the capacity of women—the mathematicians MARIA GAETANA
AGNESI and SOPHIE KOVALEVSKY and the astronomers AGNES MARY CLERKE,
MARIA CUNITZ, CAROLINE HERSCHEL, MARIA MITCHELL and MARY SOMERVILLE.

It is pertinent to add that the present 11th edition of the Britannica
indicates the advance of women not only by embodying their collaboration
to an unprecedented extent and devoting an unprecedented amount of its
space to biographies of women, but by the circumstance that it has, to a
far larger extent than any previous edition, been purchased by women.




                                PART VI
          READINGS IN CONNECTION WITH RECREATION AND VACATIONS




                              CHAPTER LXVI
                        RECREATION AND VACATION


“Laying out your work” is a familiar phrase, and describes a common
practice. But hardly one man in a hundred deliberately “lays out” his
play, planning his recreation so as to get the best value out of every
hour of his leisure time. Yet when he consults a doctor because his work
is not running smoothly, one of the first questions he has to answer is
about the amount and form of recreation he takes.

[Sidenote: Recreative Reading about Recreation]

An important branch of the art of playing is to learn the value of
reading about play. The more a man knows about any form of amusement,
the more he will enjoy the hours he devotes to it, and the better he
will succeed in keeping his mind off his business during these hours.
But there is another and an even greater advantage in this kind of
reading: _it will take your mind out-of-doors during hours of leisure
that you are compelled to spend in-doors_. Everyone recognizes that
out-door recreations, involving some degree of bodily activity, are the
most wholesome for men whose work is sedentary, as is the case with
nearly every reader of this Guide, and the best forms of out-door
recreation are those in which the contrast with your work is accentuated
by the complete change of scene and of habits which most men can only
hope to get once a year, at vacation time.

Turn to the next best form of relaxation, the out-door amusements that
lie close at hand. Here, again, your opportunities are limited, for all
these pleasures require daylight, which, during a great part of the
year, ends before your work is done; and most of them require weather
conditions that you can only get at certain seasons. An hour spent in
reading and thinking about out-door amusements and travel, and in making
plans for such delights, even if the planning must be for a future that
seems far away, is therefore always refreshing.

It is not the purpose of the present chapter to suggest a course of
reading, in the strict sense of the phrase, for it cannot be assumed
that everyone who would like to read about lawn-tennis would also like
to read about tarpon-fishing. But a general account of the Britannica
articles that afford information about recreation and vacations will
give the reader a choice among subjects in which he is already
interested and among others which may offer him new possibilities.


                                MOTORING

In connection with motoring, the possessor of the Britannica will not be
surprised to find in it, as might be expected from its universal
comprehensiveness, much fuller technical information in regard to the
structure and operation of his engine, the fuel he employs, and the
friction and other resistances he must overcome, than in any of the
ordinary manuals on the subject. But it may not occur to him that in
planning either a long or a short tour, he can find in the volumes
information of other kinds that will give added interest and
significance to everything he sees. It is not only when he crosses the
Atlantic for his motoring trip that cities and villages and mountains
and rivers have stories to tell. In our own country, place-names which
may at first suggest nothing, are found, on reference to the Britannica,
to be associated with episodes of early exploration, of Indian
hostilities, of local agitation, of one or another war, with the lives
of famous men, the growth of industries and of commerce, the first
success in a new branch of farming, the early days of railroad and canal
construction, or the development of transportation by river, lake or
sea. And what is being done to-day, in these places, is often quite as
interesting, and quite as difficult to ascertain from any source other
than the Britannica. This use of the work as a guide-book, or rather as
doing a great deal that guide-books lamentably fail to do, is discussed
later in this chapter in connection with travel in general as a form of
recreation; but motoring gives especial opportunities for observation
enriched by knowledge.

The value of the Britannica in connection with the planning of a
motoring trip may be illustrated by brief notes on some of the articles
you might read if you were about to make, for example, the run from New
York through the Berkshire Hills and on to the White Mountains. _The
following information is all from the Britannica, and from articles to
which you would naturally turn in this connection._

  _A Specimen Tour from New York to the White Mountains_

[Sidenote: Along the Hudson]

  Leaving New York by Broadway, your first point is YONKERS (Vol. 28, p.
  922), where, as the Britannica tells you, stands “one of the best
  examples of colonial architecture in America,” Philipse Manor Hall,
  now a museum of Revolutionary relics. Frederick Philipse, owner in
  1779 of the Hall and of an estate extending for some distance along
  the bank of the Hudson, was suspected of Toryism, and all his property
  was confiscated by act of legislature. A mile and a half beyond
  Yonkers you get a magnificent view of the Hudson, disclosing the
  Palisades, of lava rock (Vol. 13, p. 852) which, in cooling, formed
  joints like those of the Giant’s Causeway in Ireland. The impressive
  breadth of the Hudson and its navigability throughout the 151 miles to
  Troy, notwithstanding that in all that distance it falls only five
  feet (a good many New Yorkers would be amazed to be told that fact),
  is due to the low grade of the river bed, permitting the tide to enter
  and to back up the water, so that this long stretch of the river is
  really a fjord, not a stream. The article Fjord (Vol. 10, p. 452)
  tells you how such a rock basin or trough is formed by geological
  action. The article HENRY HUDSON (Vol. 13, p. 849) tells you how the
  great navigator, himself an Englishman, although employed by the Dutch
  East India Company in 1608 to find a westward route to China, sailed
  the little “Half Moon” as far up the river as Albany before he was
  convinced that the Pacific did not lie ahead of him.

  The next point after Yonkers, DOBBS FERRY (Vol. 8, p. 349), was a
  strategic centre of great importance during the Revolutionary War.
  “The American Army under Washington encamped near Dobbs Ferry on the
  4th of July, 1781, and started thence for Yorktown in the following
  month,” and it was there that Washington and Governor Clinton, in
  1783, “met General Sir Guy Carleton to negotiate for the evacuation by
  the British troops of the posts they still held in the United States.”

[Sidenote: Sleepy Hollow]

  In TARRYTOWN, as the article under that title (Vol. 26, p. 433)
  recounts, Washington Irving, who made the legends of the Hudson
  immortal, built his home at “Sunnyside,” and was buried in the old
  Sleepy Hollow Cemetery. The article IRVING (Vol. 14, p. 856), by the
  late Dr. Richard Garnett, the famous literary critic, tells you all
  about Irving’s life; and Professor Woodberry of Columbia, in his
  article on AMERICAN LITERATURE (Vol. 1, p. 831), reminds you that,
  although Irving spent 21 of his adult years in Europe, he is the one
  American writer who has “linked his memory locally with his country so
  that it hangs over the landscape and blends with it forever.”
  “Kaakoot,” one of the large estates at Tarrytown, recalls the
  extraordinary career of its owner, described in the article JOHN D.
  ROCKEFELLER (Vol. 23, p. 433); and “Lyndhurst,” that of Jay Gould, of
  whom and of whose daughter, the well-known philanthropist, the
  Britannica tells in the article GOULD (Vol. 12, p. 284). On the post
  road near Tarrytown is the bronze statue of a Continental soldier,
  erected to commemorate the capture of Major André, whose life is told
  in the article ANDRÉ (Vol. 1, p. 968).

  As you mount the hill and leave the Hudson, you enter the beautiful
  region of hills, lake and streams, upon which the city of New York
  long depended for its water; and you will be interested in comparing
  what New York has accomplished in this connection with what has been
  done by other great cities, as described in the article WATER SUPPLY
  (Vol. 28, p. 387), by G. F. Deacon. Many of the large country places
  you pass are the property of prominent New York men, of whom there are
  biographies in the Britannica.

  Your brief run through the hilly northwestern corner of Connecticut,
  of which the physical features are described and the history narrated
  in the article CONNECTICUT (Vol. 6, p. 951), takes you through
  SALISBURY (Vol. 24, p. 78), near Bear Mountain (2355 feet), “the
  highest point in the State.” A few miles more and you cross the line
  into Massachusetts and enter the enchanting region of the Berkshire
  Hills. The article MASSACHUSETTS (Vol. 17, p. 851) says that “the
  Berkshire country—Berkshire, Hampden, Hampshire and Franklin
  counties—is among the most beautiful regions of the United States. It
  is a rolling highland, dominated by long, wooded hill-ridges,
  remarkably even-topped in general elevation, intersected and broken by
  deep valleys. Scores of charming lakes lie in the hollows.”

[Sidenote: Great Barrington]

  GREAT BARRINGTON (Vol. 12, p. 397) “was a centre of disaffection
  during Shays’s Rebellion,” an episode for which you may consult the
  article DANIEL SHAYS (Vol. 24, p. 815), and the account in the
  historical section of the article MASSACHUSETTS (Vol. 17, p. 860). In
  1786 Shays was known as having been “a brave Revolutionary captain of
  no special personal importance.” The State finances were in a bad
  condition and taxes were heavy. Mobs of discontented citizens, under
  Shays’s leadership, assembled to prevent the courts from sitting, so
  that the collection of taxes and other debts might be obstructed. “The
  insurrection is regarded as having been very potent in preparing
  public opinion throughout the country for the adoption of a stronger
  national government.” WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT (Vol. 4, p. 698),
  “earliest of the master-poets of America,” practiced law at Great
  Barrington for nine years.

[Sidenote: Stockbridge]

  Leaving Great Barrington, you cross Monument Mountain (1710 feet) on
  your way to STOCKBRIDGE (Vol. 25, p. 929) with its famous avenue of
  elms—perhaps the most characteristic New England scene in all the
  Berkshire country. The conspicuous bell-tower was erected by DAVID
  DUDLEY FIELD (Vol. 10, p. 321), the law reformer, whose proposed code
  of laws for the State of New York was the model on which most of the
  existing state codes have been based. The park was the gift of his
  brother, CYRUS W. FIELD (Vol. 10, p. 320), born at Stockbridge, to
  whom we owe the first Atlantic cable. In 1834, at the age of 15, he
  became a clerk in the great New York store described in the article A.
  T. STEWART (Vol. 25, p. 912); later embarked in the wholesale paper
  business in New York, failed, formed the firm of Cyrus W. Field & Co.,
  and in 1853, at the age of 34, had made a quarter of a million, a
  large fortune in those days, paid off the debts of the paper business,
  and nominally retired. From that time he was chiefly occupied with the
  cable scheme, of which the early difficulties are described in the
  cable section of the article TELEGRAPH (Vol. 26, p. 527), although he
  operated actively in stocks, was associated with JAY GOULD (Vol. 12,
  p. 284) in completing the Wabash Railroad, and had a controlling
  interest in the New York Elevated Railroad, besides being chief
  proprietor of the New York _Mail and Express_.

  When, in 1750, JONATHAN EDWARDS (Vol. 9, p. 3), the famous New England
  theologian, had to leave his church at Northampton, he became pastor
  at Stockbridge and missionary to the Housatonic Indians, remaining
  there until 1759. It was there that he wrote his famous treatise on
  the _Freedom of the Will_. In a cleft on Bear Mountain, just outside
  the village, is the curious Ice Glen, with caverns ice-lined even in
  midsummer.

[Sidenote: Lenox]

  On the road from Stockbridge to Lenox you pass the beautiful lake
  called the Stockbridge Bowl, on the shore of which NATHANIEL
  HAWTHORNE, in 1851, wrote _The House of the Seven Gables_. His reason
  for adopting literature as a vocation is quaintly stated in a letter
  to his mother quoted in this Britannica biography. “I do not want to
  be a doctor and live by men’s diseases, nor a minister to live by
  their sins, nor a lawyer and live by their quarrels. So I don’t see
  that there is anything left for me but to be an author.” LENOX (Vol.
  16, p. 421) is surrounded by high hills, famous for their vivid
  coloring when the leaves change their hues in the fall, Yokun Seat
  (2080 feet), South Mountain (1200 feet), Bald Head (1583 feet) and
  Rattlesnake Hill (1540 feet). “The surrounding region contains some of
  the most beautiful country of the Berkshires—hills, lakes, charming
  intervales and woods. As early as 1835 Lenox began to attract summer
  residents. In the next decade began the creation of large estates,
  although the great holdings of the present day, and the villas
  scattered over the hills, are comparatively recent features.” The
  township was named after the third Duke of RICHMOND AND LENNOX (Vol.
  23, p. 307), “a firm supporter of the colonies in the debates on the
  policy that led to the War of American Independence; and he initiated
  the debate of 1778 calling for the removal of the troops from
  America.”

  Among other names associated with Lenox and with its famous schools
  are those of the actress FRANCES KEMBLE—“Fanny” Kemble (Vol. 15, p.
  724); HENRY WARD BEECHER (Vol. 3, p. 639); HARRIET HOSMER (Vol. 13, p.
  791), the sculptor; MARK HOPKINS (Vol. 13, p. 684), the famous
  president of Williams College; ALEXANDER H. STEPHENS (Vol. 25, p.
  887), vice-president of the Confederate States, who, the article
  CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA (Vol. 6, p. 899), says, was “during the
  war a strong antagonist of President Davis’s policy;” and WILLIAM H.
  YANCEY (Vol. 28, p. 902), whose fortunes were influenced by a singular
  event. A lawyer, and editor of a little anti-nullification weekly in
  South Carolina, he married a wealthy woman; but a few years later, in
  1839, the accidental poisoning of all the slaves on the estate forced
  him to return to the law; and he subsequently became one of the
  political leaders of the Confederacy.

[Sidenote: Pittsfield]

  PITTSFIELD (Vol. 21, p. 682) is both a popular resort and a prosperous
  manufacturing town, with ample water power supplied by the east and
  west branches of the Housatonic on either side of it. It was here that
  HENRY W. LONGFELLOW (Vol. 16, p. 977) wrote _The Old Clock on the
  Stairs_ at “Elm Knoll,” the house of his father-in-law, NATHAN
  APPLETON (Vol. 2, p. 224), a reference to whose biography in the
  Britannica discloses the interesting fact that his son, Thomas Gold
  Appleton, a famous wit in his day, originated the saying, “Good
  Americans when they die, go to Paris,” which is generally attributed
  to Oliver Wendell Holmes. Just outside Pittsfield lies the village of
  the SHAKERS (Vol. 24, p. 771), the curious sect founded by Ann Lee,
  daughter of a blacksmith in Manchester, England, who came to America
  with a small party of her adherents in 1714. The road through ADAMS
  (Vol. 1, p. 181), affords a view of Greylock Mountain (3535 feet), the
  highest point in Massachusetts; and at NORTH ADAMS (Vol. 19, p. 760),
  there is a natural bridge 50–60 feet high across Hudson Brook; and you
  can see the ruins of Fort Massachusetts, captured in 1746 by the
  French with the aid of the Indians. Here is also the western end of
  the Hoosac Tunnel, 5¾ miles long. The article TUNNELS (Vol. 27, p.
  405) says that the piercing of this tunnel, begun in 1835 and not
  finished until 1876, was marked by the first American use of air
  drills and nitroglycerin; and the article POWER TRANSMISSION (Vol. 22,
  p. 232) describes the influence which this successful employment of
  compressed air had in furthering its use for the noisy “gun” tools now
  so familiar.

[Sidenote: Williamstown]

  WILLIAMSTOWN (Vol. 28, p. 685), the last town in Massachusetts on your
  route, is the seat of Williams College; and the “Haystack Monument” in
  Mission Park, stands where the prayer meeting was held which was the
  forerunner of the American foreign missionary movement described in
  the article MISSIONS (Vol. 18, p. 583), which contains the interesting
  statement that in the 3rd century the proportion of Christians to the
  whole human race was one to 150, while it is now one to three. The
  article VERMONT (Vol. 27, p. 1025) contains an interesting summary of
  the early disputes over state boundaries in this part of New England.

[Sidenote: Bennington]

  BENNINGTON (Vol. 3, p. 743) lies at the foot of the Green Mountains,
  near Mt. Anthony (2345 feet). “The Bennington Battle Monument, a shaft
  301 feet high, is said to be the highest battle monument in the world.
  It commemorates the success gained on the 16th of August, 1777, by a
  force of nearly 2000 ‘Green Mountain Boys’ and New Hampshire and
  Massachusetts militia ... over two detachments of General Burgoyne’s
  army,” of whom 700 were taken prisoners. The article AMERICAN WAR OF
  INDEPENDENCE (Vol. 1, p. 842) shows how important an effect this
  victory had on Burgoyne’s campaign. In 1825 WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON
  (Vol. 11, p. 477), the anti-slavery leader, edited a paper at
  Bennington, leaving it when BENJAMIN LUNDY (Vol. 17, p. 124), the
  Quaker abolitionist, determined to secure Garrison’s co-operation on a
  Baltimore abolitionist magazine, “walked through the ice and snow of a
  New England winter from Boston to Bennington, 125 miles,” and
  persuaded Garrison to join him. Bennington was the home of ETHAN ALLEN
  (Vol. 1, p. 691), the frontier hero who led the “Green Mountain Boys”
  and of SETH WARNER (Vol. 28, p. 327), who subsequently became their
  colonel.

[Sidenote: Hanover]

  On leaving Bennington you can choose any one of several routes to
  bring you over to the Connecticut River, but, whichever you take, you
  will be fairly on the main route to the White Mountains (by which you
  would have gone from New York through Waterbury, Springfield and
  Greenfield if you had not included the Berkshires in your itinerary)
  when you reach HANOVER, N. H. (Vol. 12, p. 927). Here, “ranges of
  rugged hills, broken by deep, narrow gorges and by the wider valley of
  Mink Brook, rise near the river and culminate in Moose Mountain, 2326
  feet above the sea.” Near the foot of that peak is the birthplace of
  LAURA D. BRIDGMAN (Vol. 4, p. 559), the first blind deaf-mute to be
  successfully educated. Dr. S. G. HOWE (Vol. 13, p. 837), who was head
  of the Perkins Institute for the Blind in Boston, heard of her case in
  1837, took charge of her in October of that year, and by June, 1840,
  at eleven years of age, her mind had become as well developed as that
  of a normal child of her age. Charles Dickens saw her when he was in
  America in 1842, and his account of her case led to the introduction
  in England, and afterwards in all parts of Europe, of the Howe system
  of training.

[Sidenote: Dartmouth College]

  The attractions which Hanover owes to its picturesque site are
  enhanced by the fine buildings and the notably beautiful campus of
  DARTMOUTH COLLEGE (Vol. 7, p. 838). The purpose for which this college
  was originally founded is quaintly expressed in its charter, granted
  by George III in 1769. See the article on INDIANS, NORTH AMERICAN
  (Vol. 14, p. 452). This document ordains “that there be a college
  erected in our Province of New Hampshire by the name of Dartmouth
  College, for the education and instruction of youth of the Indian
  Tribes in this Land in reading, writing and all parts of Learning
  which shall appear necessary and expedient for civilizing and
  christianizing children of pagans ... and also of English youth and
  any other.”

  With the name of Dartmouth College will always be associated that of
  DANIEL WEBSTER (Vol. 28, p. 460), not only because he was graduated
  there in 1801, but because the famous “Dartmouth College case,” in
  which Webster appeared for the college before the United States
  Supreme Court, was the first in which that august tribunal fully
  asserted its power to support the Federal constitution by nullifying
  any usurpatory statutes passed by state legislatures.

  When you turn away from the Connecticut River to go up the valley of
  the Ammonoosuc, you are fairly in the White Mountain region, which the
  Britannica (Vol. 19, p. 490) describes in part as follows:

[Sidenote: The White Mountains]

    “The White Mountains, a continuation of the Appalachian system, rise
    very abruptly in several short ranges and in outlying mountain
    masses from a base level of 700–1500 ft. to generally rounded
    summits, the heights of several of which are nowhere exceeded in the
    eastern part of the United States except in the Black and the Unaka
    mountains of North Carolina; seventy-four rise more than 3000 ft.
    above the sea, twelve more than 5000 ft., and the highest, Mount
    Washington, attains an elevation of 6293 ft.

    The principal ranges, the Presidential, the Franconia and the
    Carter-Moriah, have a north-eastern and south-western trend. The
    Presidential, in the north-eastern part of the region, is separated
    from the Franconia on the south-west by the Crawford, or White
    Mountain Notch, about 2000 ft. in depth, in which the Ammonoosuc and
    Saco rivers find a passage, and from the Carter-Moriah, parallel to
    it on the east, by the Glen-Ellis and Peabody rivers, the former
    noted for its beautiful falls. On the Presidential range, which is
    about 20 m. in length, are Mount Washington and nine other peaks
    exceeding 5000 ft. in height: Mount Adams, 5805 ft.; Mount
    Jefferson, 5725 ft.; Mount Sam Adams, 5585 ft.; Mount Clay, 5554
    ft.; Boot Spur, 5520 ft.; Mount Monroe, 5390 ft.; J. Q. Adams Peak,
    5384 ft.; Mount Madison, 5380 ft.; and Mount Franklin, 5028 ft. On
    the Franconia, a much shorter range, are Mount Lafayette, 5269 ft.;
    Mount Lincoln, 5098 ft.; and four others exceeding 4000 ft. The
    highest peak on the Carter-Moriah range is Carter Dome, 4860 ft.,
    but seven others exceed 4000 ft. Loftiest of the isolated mountains
    is Moosilauke noted for its magnificent view-point, 4810 ft. above
    the sea. Separating Franconia and Pemigewasset ranges is the
    romantic Franconia Notch, overlooking which from the upper cliffs of
    Profile Mountain is a remarkable human profile, _The Great Stone
    Face_, immortalized by Nathaniel Hawthorne; here, too, is the
    Franconia Flume, a narrow upright fissure, 60 ft. in height, with
    beautiful waterfalls.

    The whole White Mountain region abounds in deep narrow valleys,
    romantic glens, ravines, flumes, waterfalls, brooks and lakes....
    The headwaters of the rivers are for the most part mountain streams
    or elevated lakes; farther on their swift and winding
    currents—flowing sometimes between wide intervales, sometimes
    between rocky banks—are marked by numerous falls and fed by lakes.

    The lakes and ponds, numbering several hundred, were formed by
    glacial action and the scenery of many of them is scarcely less
    attractive than that of the mountains. The largest and most widely
    known is Lake Winnepesaukee on the S. border of the White Mountain
    region; this is about 20 m. long and from 1 to 8 m. wide, is dotted
    by 274 islands, mostly verdant, and has clear water and a rather
    level shore, back of which hills or mountains rise on all sides.
    Among the more prominent of many others that are admired for their
    beauty are Squam, New Found, Sunapee and Ossipee, all within a
    radius of a few miles from Winnepesaukee; Massabesic farther S.; and
    Diamond Ponds, Umbagog and Connecticut lakes, N. of the White
    Mountains. The rivers with their numerous falls and the lakes with
    their high altitudes furnish a vast amount of water power for
    manufacturing, the Merrimac, in particular, into which many of the
    larger lakes, including Winnepesaukee, find an outlet, is one of the
    greatest power-yielding streams of the world.”

After exploring the country thus described in the Britannica, you can
take for your return trip to New York, the route by Portland, Me., that
by Lake Winnepesaukee and Portsmouth, or, that by Plymouth and
Manchester, N. H. By any of these ways, you will visit Boston, and its
famous suburbs, Concord, Lexington, Brookline, Salem and Marblehead,
whose historical and literary associations are fully described in the
Britannica.

[Sidenote: Automobiles]

The article MOTOR VEHICLES (Vol. 18, p. 914), with 37 illustrations, is
by the late C. S. Rolls, the famous builder and driver of motor cars,
with a special section on commercial vehicles, by Edward Shrapnell
Smith, editor of _The Commercial Motor_. The story of the development of
the car, told at the beginning of the article, is full of human
interest, for it shows how national characteristics affect industries.
From 1802, when Richard Trevithick built, in England, the first
practical road carriage, until 1885, all the most promising efforts to
further mechanical road traffic were made by English inventors. As early
as 1824 there was a regular motor-omnibus service between Cheltenham and
Gloucester, at a speed that sometimes (perhaps down a hill) reached 14
miles an hour; and if inventors had been encouraged, the effort to
lighten road engines would have produced the tubular boiler long before
it actually appeared. But the influence of the landowning,
horse-breeding, horse-loving English aristocracy was too strong, and one
act of Parliament after another imposed destructive restrictions,
culminating in the law passed in 1865, making 4 miles an hour the
maximum speed, and requiring that a man showing a red flag should march
ahead of the engine! Of course this drove every engine off the road
except a steam roller or the heaviest type of traction engine. In 1885
Daimler invented the internal combustion engine, and for a moment
Germany seemed likely to lead the world. But Daimler failed to hit upon
a satisfactory system of transmission, and although his engine worked
well in motor boats, the risk of starting a car on the road was too
great. His boat, shown at the Paris Exposition of 1887, attracted the
attention of the French firm of Panhard & Levassor, makers of
wood-working machinery. They bought the French rights, and Levassor
devised the clutch, the gear-box and the whole system of connecting the
engine with its work, which, save for improvements in detail, are all in
use to-day. In 1895 the French car which won the race from Paris to
Bordeaux covered the 744 miles at a mean speed of 15 miles an hour, and
the world realized that the motor car was a practical means of
transportation. But it was not until 1896 that the English parliament
gave cars the freedom of the roads, and that English manufacturers could
see a future for themselves.

In the United States, the industry began under great difficulties. The
roads, except in the immediate outskirts of the larger cities, were
abominable, and no system of suspension that could make them tolerable
had yet been discovered. But though starting late, by 1906 the United
States overtook and passed France, becoming the foremost car building
and car using nation of the world. Nowhere else are factories worked
upon so large a scale, and nowhere else are really serviceable cars so
light and so cheap. And the greatest recent improvement in the gasolene
engine, the Knight sleeve-valve, is an American invention. It is,
altogether, a curious story, this struggle in which England, Germany and
France, one after another, seemed destined to attain the leadership
which in the end fell to the United States.

Turning to the subsidiary articles which relate to motoring, the
gasolene engine is elaborately discussed in OIL ENGINE (Vol. 20, p. 35),
by Dugald Clerk, an expert engineer and himself the inventor of the
Clerk cycle engine. This article shows how complete a change in
engineering practice was effected in 1883, when it was demonstrated that
small engines could be run at a thousand revolutions a minute, a speed
four times as great as any previously contemplated. All the types of
carburetter are described, with mechanical diagrams. Other diagrams show
the action of the inner and outer sleeves of the Knight valves.
Gasolene, and the experiments made in search of a less costly fuel, are
dealt with in the article FUEL (Vol. 11, p. 274), by Prof. Georg Lunge,
of the Zurich Polytechnic, the greatest of all authorities on the
subject. Tires, the bugbear of every car-owner, form the subject of a
separate article Tire (Vol. 26, p. 1006), by Archibald Sharp, which
contains a number of curious and instructive diagrams showing the
direction of the stress on a tire at the point where the road slightly
flattens it. RUBBER (Vol. 23, p. 795), by W. R. Dunstan, president of
the International Association of Tropical Agriculture, is well worth
reading for its information as to the effect upon tires of exposure to
air and light, apart from wear. The materials used, and the mechanical
principles involved, in the construction of cars are discussed in a
number of separate articles under obvious titles.


                              PHOTOGRAPHY

A large place, in any review of recreations, must be given to
photography, which, even in its most elementary form, provides a record
and an echo of an infinite variety of amusements, and, after a little
study, not only does this all the better, but becomes a delightful art
in itself, to be enjoyed in-doors as well as out-doors, at all hours and
at all seasons. The amateur can find no more authoritative, full and yet
concise manual of the subject than the Britannica article PHOTOGRAPHY
(Vol. 21, p. 485), equivalent to about 125 pages of this Guide. The
first section on History and Technique is by Sir William de Wiveleslie
Abney, author of _Instruction in Photography_, _Colour Vision_, etc.
Next is a section on photographic apparatus by Major-Gen. James
Waterhouse, whose photographic work in India is known throughout the
world. And then comes a discussion of pictorial photography by A.
Horsley Hinton, author of _Practical Pictorial Photography_. The
following is an outline of the article:

  History.—Eighteenth century experiments of Scheele, Senebier and Count
  Rumford. Early 19th century discoveries. The Daguerreotype and its
  improvements by Goddard, Claudet and Fizeau. The Fox-Talbot process.
  Albumen process on glass. Collodion process. Positive pictures by the
  collodion process. Moist collodion process. Dry-plates; alkaline
  developers with formulae for some of the most effective; developers of
  organic salts of iron; developer restrainers. Dry-plate bath process
  of R. Manners Gordon, with formula for preservative. Collodion
  emulsion processes—work of Bolton and Sayce and of M. C. Lea and W.
  Cooper; Bolton’s modification; Col. Wortley introduces strongly
  alkaline developer. Formula for alkaline developer for collodion
  plates. Gelatin emulsion process—Maddox (1871), King (1873), Burgess
  (1873), Stas (1874), Bennett (1878), Abney (1879), van Monckhoven
  (1879) and his use of hydrobromic acid on silver carbonate with
  ammonia. Heating the emulsion—Wortley (1879), Mansfield (1879).

Relative rapidities of the processes described.

          Daguerreotype, originally, Half an hour’s  exposure.
          Calotype                   2 or 3 minutes’     „
          Collodion                  10 seconds’         „
          Collodion emulsion         15 seconds’         „
          Rapid gelatin emulsion     ¹⁄₁₅ second         „

The second part of the article deals with the technique of photography.
The major topics in it are:

  Gelatin emulsions: formulae and directions for emulsion with and
  without ammonia. Coating the plates. Exposure. Development, with
  formula for alkaline developer. Intensifying and varnishing the
  negative.

  Printing processes. Albumen method of Fox-Talbot. Sensitizing bath.
  Toning and fixing the print—formulae for toning-bath.
  Collodio-chloride silver printing process: Simpson’s formula.
  Gelatino-citrochloride emulsion: Abney’s formula. Printing with
  uranium salts: an early formula. Self-toning papers. Printing with
  chromates: carbon prints—work of Ponton, Becquerel, Dixon, Fox-Talbot,
  Poitevin, Pouncey, Fargier, Swan, Johnson and Sawyer. Printing with
  salts of iron. Photo-mechanical printing processes: discoveries of
  Oreloth, de Motay, Marechal and Albert; “Lichtdruck” and heliotype.
  Woodbury type. Photolithography: the work of E. J. Asser, J. W.
  Osborne and Sir H. James.

Photographs in natural colours are next described, and their history is
traced from 1810 when Seebeck of Jena made experiments described in
Goethe’s famous work on _Colours_. _The first successful colour
photography was by Becquerel in 1848_ on a daguerreotype plate,
chlorinized. The later methods of Lippmann and Lumière, respectively,
with collodion dry plates prepared with albumen and with dyed gelatin
plates (orthochromatic), produce pictures in which the colours show only
from an angle.

The section on the _Action of Light on Chemical Compounds_, with a plate
showing spectra and graduation scales, contains valuable diagrams and a
chronological table of observers of the action of light on different
substances. The paragraphs of particular interest to the practical
photographer are those on:

  Measurement of the Rapidity of a Plate.

  Effect of Temperature on Sensitiveness.

  Effect of Small Intensities of Light on a Sensitive Salt.

  Effect of Very Intense Light on a Sensitive Salt.

  Intermittent Exposure of a Sensitive Salt.

  Effect of Monochromatic Light of Varying Wave-Lengths on a Sensitive
  Salt.

  Reproduction of Coloured Objects by 3 Photographic Positives: Ives’
  process; Joly’s process; Autochrome of Lumière; Positives in 3
  Colours.

Another division (equivalent to 60 pages at least in this Guide) of the
article is on Apparatus. It deals especially with the hand camera as
developed from 1855 to 1888 when the Eastman Kodak came out. And it has
separate paragraphs on Focusing; Plate-holders or Dark-slides (1
illustration); Studio cameras; Portable and Field cameras; Hand cameras
(7 illustrations); Twin-lens and Reflex cameras (2 illustrations);
Panoramic cameras (2 illustrations); 3 Colour cameras (1 illustration);
Enlarging cameras and cinematographs.

A separate section deals with objectives, and contains 45 illustrations,
giving special attention to: single achromatic (landscape) lens,
including aplanatic; unsymmetrical doublets; symmetrical doublets;
triple combinations; anastigmatic combinations; telephotographic
objectives; anachromatic lenses; diaphragm apertures.

Then follows a discussion of instantaneous shutters (with 9
illustrations) and a discussion under “lateral” and “central” of flap,
drop, drop and flap, rotary, roller blind, focal plane, moving blade,
central and iris shutters.

Exposure meters (4 illustrations) with a discussion of the actinic power
of light; sensitive plates, films and papers: sensitive dry plates,
plates for colour photography, celluloid films, photographic printing
papers, apparatus for development (with 4 illustrations); photographic
printing apparatus; bibliography.

The last division of this great article is on _Pictorial Photography_,
and this is illustrated by three full-page plates. It deals not merely
with portrait photography but with “artistic” landscape work, and
combination printing, which “is really what many of us practiced in the
nursery, that is, cutting out figures and pasting them into white spaces
left for that purpose in the picture book.”

In addition to this comprehensive treatise, in itself a complete manual
of photography, there are other articles which will be useful to the
advanced amateur who desires either to study the scientific aspects of
the subject or to undertake the reproduction of his work by processes
other than the ordinary printing. The production of chemical changes by
the action of light are discussed in PHOTOCHEMISTRY (Vol. 21, p. 484).
LENS (Vol. 16, p. 421) is by Dr. Otto Henker, of the staff of the Zeiss
factory at Jena, Germany. ABERRATION (Vol. 1, p. 54) is by Dr.
Eppenstein, another expert of the same establishment. The making of
blocks from your own negatives is covered by the article PROCESS (Vol.
22, p. 408), by Edwin Bale, art director of Cassell & Co., and contains
coloured plates showing the stages of superimposed printing. SUN COPYING
(Vol. 26, p. 93), by F. Vincent Brooks, a practical printer, describes
direct-contact printing without the use of a camera.


                             OUT-DOOR GAMES

The authority which is back of the articles in the Britannica and the
fact that its articles are on a larger scale than those of other works
of reference make its articles on sports and games singularly valuable.
The reader who is interested in FOOTBALL, for instance, will find an
article (Vol. 10, p. 617), of more than 12,000 words, part of it written
by Walter Camp, the famous American expert. It includes a historical
sketch; a description of the Rugby Union game by Charles James Nicol
Fleming, inspector in the Scotch Education Department, and Charles John
Bruce Marriott, secretary of the Rugby Football Union; of the
Association game, by Charles William Alcock, late secretary of the
Football Association, London, and Frederick Joseph Wall, secretary of
the Football Association; and of the game in the United States, by
Walter Camp and Edward Breck. The article GOLF is by H. G. Hutchinson,
amateur golf champion in 1886–87, and author of _Golf_, _Book of Golf
and Golfers_, etc. In the same way there are authoritative and full
articles on the following subjects:

 Athletic Sports
 Acrobat
 All-Round Athletics
 Amateur
 Archery
 Ball
 Base-ball
 Battledore and Shuttlecock
 Botori
 Bowls
 Boxing
 Bull-fighting
 Caber-Tossing
 Caestus
 Camping-Out
 Children’s Games
 Circus
 Cricket
 Croquet
 Cycling
 Discus
 Football
 Game
 Games, Classical
 Golf
 Gymkhana
 Hammer Throwing
 Hurdle-Racing
 Jumping
 Kite-Flying
 Lacrosse
 Lawn-Tennis
 Long Fives
 Marbles
 Matador
 Palaestra
 Pall-Mall
 Pallone
 Pelota
 Pigeon Flying
 Pole Vaulting
 Potato Race
 Pugilism
 Pushball
 Putting the Shot
 Quarter Staff
 Quintain
 Quoits
 Rackets
 Ringgoal
 Rounders
 Rowing
 Running
 Scull
 Skittles
 Sport
 Stadium
 Stool-Ball
 Swimming
 Toreador
 Tournament
 Tug-of-War
 Walking-Races
 Water Polo
 Weight-Throwing

And among active indoor games on which the Britannica contains articles,
are FENCING, CANE FENCING, EPÉE-DE-COMBAT, FOIL-FENCING, SABRE-FENCING,
SINGLE-STICK, BASKET BALL, BADMINTON, BOWLING, TENNIS, STICKÉ, FIVES,
LONG FIVES, ROLLER-SKATING, SQUAILS, SHUFFLE-BOARD, TRAPEZE, WRESTLING.

[Sidenote: Athletics]

The distinction between games and athletic sports is an arbitrary one,
and the articles on athletics have been included in the list of those on
out-door games; but a few of them seem to call for special mention. The
article ATHLETIC SPORTS (Vol. 2, p. 846) gives a general account of
amateur associations and of national and international meetings; and
contains a special section on the revived Olympic Games. ATHLETE (Vol.
2, p. 846) and GAMES, CLASSICAL (Vol. 11, p. 443) deal with the ancient
Greek and Roman contests. ALL-ROUND ATHLETICS (Vol. 1, p. 709) describes
the championship, instituted in this country, for the highest awards
attained by one athlete in eleven different branches of sport. AMATEUR
(Vol. 1, p. 782) is a very full and impartial discussion of the
interminable controversies regarding the distinction between
professionals and amateurs. Among the articles on special sports are
RUNNING (Vol. 23, p. 853), dealing with every form of race from the
100–yard dash to the Marathon run; HURDLE-RACING (Vol. 13, p. 958);
JUMPING (Vol. 15, p. 533); POLE VAULTING (Vol. 21, p. 977);
WEIGHT-THROWING (Vol. 28, p. 494); PUTTING THE SHOT (Vol. 22, p. 672);
HAMMER THROWING (Vol. 12, p. 899); CABER-TOSSING (Vol. 4, p. 917);
DISCUS (Vol. 8, p. 312); and TUG-OF-WAR (Vol. 27, p. 365).

[Sidenote: Hunting]

The reader interested in hunting will turn first to the articles on
sporting weapons. GUN (Vol. 12, p. 717), by Sir Henry Seton Karr, one of
the world’s most famous big game shots, describes the modern shot gun in
great detail, with full particulars as to barrels, locks and ejectors.
RIFLE (Vol. 23, p. 325) of course includes full descriptions of the
military rifles of all armies, and the sections on sporting rifles and
target rifles (p. 334) are by the contributor of the article on shot
guns just mentioned. PISTOL (Vol. 21, p. 654) gives a full account of
the modern automatic pistol, with diagrams showing the mechanism of the
Mauser and Colt types. A useful table shows the length-over-all,
barrel-length, weight and composition of cartridges, of the eleven
standard types of Colt and Smith & Wesson revolvers. AMMUNITION (Vol. 1,
p. 864) deals with the cartridges used for guns, rifles and pistols. The
“propellants” employed are discussed in GUNPOWDER (Vol. 12, p. 723), by
Prof. Hodgkinson; EXPLOSIVES (Vol. 10, p. 81); and CORDITE (Vol. 7, p.
139). SHOOTING (Vol. 24, p. 995), by Percy Stephens, deals with the
pursuit of birds, ground game and big game in all parts of the world.
Among the varieties of American big game mentioned are the huge
grizzlies of Alaska, the wapiti, moose, caribou, antelope, big horn and
puma or mountain lion. The section on the hunter’s personal equipment
contains excellent practical hints as to outfit. Among other articles of
interest in this connection are BIRD (Vol. 3, p. 959), by Prof. Hans
Gadow; RABBIT (Vol. 22, p. 767), by Sir William Flower and Richard
Lyddeker; DEER (Vol. 7, p. 923); ANTELOPE (Vol. 2, p. 89); ELK (Vol. 9,
p. 290); BEAR (Vol. 3, p. 573); PUMA (Vol. 22, p. 644); and CARNIVORA
(Vol. 5, p. 366). There is a separate article on PIGEON SHOOTING (Vol.
21, p. 597). On each species of African and Asiatic big game there is an
elaborate article. The dogs used in sports of all kinds are described in
the article DOG (Vol. 8, p. 374), by Walter Baxendale, kennel editor of
the London _Field_, and Prof. Chalmers Mitchell, with five full-page
plates.

Riding to hounds, including fox-hunting, stag-hunting, hare-hunting and
the drag hunt, is covered by the article HUNTING (Vol. 13, p. 946), by
A. E. T. Watson, editor of the _Badminton Library_. Other forms of the
chase are dealt with in COURSING (Vol. 7, p. 321) and FALCONRY (Vol. 19,
p. 141), by Lieut.-Col. Delmé Radcliffe.

[Sidenote: Fishing]

The key article on line fishing is ANGLING (Vol. 2, p. 21), in length
equivalent to 35 pages of this Guide. It begins with a most interesting
historical section, showing that, before the days of the earliest hooks,
the cave-men used on their lines a little flake of flint or strip of
stone, fixed in the bait, with a groove in the middle of it, around
which the line was so fastened that when the pull came the instrument
turned crossways in the fish’s stomach and could not be disgorged. A
delightful section on angling literature follows this historical matter;
and then comes treatment of fresh water fishing, with fly-casting and
the use of surface baits; live-baiting and spinning; and bottom-fishing;
each of the three fully treated. A detailed study is then made of the
habits of the salmon and of the tackle and methods devised for his
beguiling. Trout, muskelunge, bass, perch and roach are successively
discussed; and then comes the section on sea-angling, the tarpon, tuna,
jewfish and the giant black bass. The article ends with a complete
bibliography of the subject. There are 96 articles on individual fish,
all listed on p. 891 of Vol. 29, if the reader desires to refresh his
memory as to the varieties. FISHERIES (Vol. 10, p. 429), by Prof.
Garstang and Prof. Chalmers Mitchell is concerned with the industry
rather than with sport, but it contains much information about sea fish
which will be of use to the sea-angler.

[Sidenote: Taxidermy]

A thoroughly practical article is TAXIDERMY (Vol. 26, p. 464), by
Montague Browne, author of a manual of the art. His book and Dr. W. T.
Hornaday’s _Taxidermy and Zoological Collecting_ are the most important
special books on the subject, and Mr. Browne in this article constantly
refers to the improved methods introduced by Hornaday and other
Americans. He points out the dangers of using arsenical soap and gives
the formula for the substitute, quite safe except when hot, which he
himself invented. Minute directions are given for skinning, mounting,
etc. And the article also treats of the advantages of modelling as
compared with the old method of “stuffing”; and the placing of specimens
in natural surroundings, with panoramic back-grounds, top- and
side-lighting, etc.

[Sidenote: Sailing and Boating]

On sailing, boating and kindred subjects the reader should first consult
the article YACHTING (Vol. 28, p. 890), equivalent to 26 pages of this
Guide, by B. Heckstall-Smith, yachting editor the _Field_, and secretary
of the Yacht Racing Association and of the International Yacht Racing
Union. The historical part of this article traces yachting in England
back to the state-barges of the Anglo-Saxon kings and through the
pleasure ship of Elizabeth (1588), which was built at Cowes in the Isle
of Wight, so that this place has been associated with the sport for more
than three centuries. Charles II in 1660 received the present of a yacht
from the Dutch, and at this time the Dutch word “yacht” first found its
way into the English language. Yachting clubs date from the
establishment in 1720 of the Cork Harbour Water Club, now the Royal Cork
Yacht Club. At Cowes races were sailed as early as 1780 and a yacht club
was organized there in 1812. The first yacht club in the United States
was formed in 1844 and the first race in the United States was at New
York in 1846 to Sandy Hook light-ship and back. The first important
alteration in type was in 1848 when the “Mosquito” was built—a 50–ton
vessel, 59 ft. 2 in. at water line, 15 ft. 3 in. beam, with a long
hollow bow and a short and rather full after-body. The first races in
the United States resulted in the building of the “America,” which in
1851 crossed the ocean and won a race round the Isle of Wight, bringing
back to the New York Yacht Club the “America’s” cup. The later races for
this cup are described in detail at the close of the article, with
elaborate tables showing the exact tonnage or sailing length of
competing yachts, dates of races, time allowance, elapsed time,
corrected time, and margin by which each race was won. The article
describes 1870–1880 as the first great era of yachting. Changes in the
method of reckoning length, introduced in 1879, resulted in the “lead
mine” or plank-on-edge type. In 1887 the system of tonnage measurement
was introduced and a method of rating by water-line length and sail
area—and this “crushed the plank-on-edge type completely. There was not
another boat of the kind built.” The era of big cutters followed—in
America notably the Herreshoff boats. The success of the bulb keels in
the small classes threatened the use of “skimming dishes” in the larger
classes—and a consequent lack of head room and cabin accommodation. New
linear rating rules were therefore adopted—one in 1896 and another in
1901, followed in 1904 by international rating rules. The English types
of Fife and Nicholson were succeeded by such boats from the Krupp yard
at Kiel as the “Meteor” and “Germania.” See also the article MODEL
YACHTING (Vol. 18, p. 640).

Other articles on the subject of boating are CANOE (Vol. 5, p. 189);
MACGREGOR, JOHN (Vol. 17, p. 232) (for the famous “Rob Roy”); CATAMARAN
(Vol. 5, p. 502); and ROWING (Vol. 23, p. 783), by Charles Murray
Pitman, formerly stroke of the Oxford University eight, with a special
treatment of rowing in the United States and a comparison of English and
American “styles.” The articles SWIMMING (Vol. 26, p. 231) by William
Henry, author of _Swimming_ in the Badminton Library, and DROWNING AND
LIFE SAVING (Vol. 8, p. 592) are of practical value.

[Sidenote: Mountaineering]

The article MOUNTAINEERING (Vol. 18, p. 937) is by Sir W. Martin Conway,
famous for his ascent to a height of 23,000 feet in the Kara Koram
Himalayas, for the High Level route through the Alps which he
originated, and for his climbs in Spitsbergen. It contains paragraphs on
the dangers from falling rocks, falling ice, snow avalanches, falls from
rocks, ice slopes, crevasses, and weather; and an outline of history of
the sport, which has been systematically pursued only since 1854.
GLACIER (Vol. 12, p. 60), by E. C. Spicer is another article of great
interest to those who love climbing. Among the articles on individual
mountains and on the great ranges, the first place must be given to the
scene of the classic exploits of the early mountaineers. The relevant
part of the article ALPS (Vol. 1, p. 737) is by W. A. B. Coolidge who,
although an American by birth, is more at home in the Alps than any
other living writer. This magnificent article, which would fill nearly
40 pages of this Guide, contains a table giving the heights of no less
than 1,317 separate peaks and passes, and also a consecutive narrative
of Alpine exploration. HIMALAYA (Vol. 13, p. 470) is by Sir Thomas H.
Holdich, superintendent of Frontier Surveys in India. The best
mountaineering section of the Rockies is described in a section of the
article CANADA (Vol. 4, p. 145). ANDES (Vol. 1, p. 960) describes the
peaks of the Southern Cordillera. Full articles on the mountaineering
sections of our own country, such as the Appalachians, the Adirondacks,
the Catskills and White Mountains will be found under the obvious
titles.

[Sidenote: Winter Sports]

SKATING (Vol. 25, p. 166) deals with both speed skating and figure
skating, and tells of the exploits at Newburgh, N. Y., of Charles June
and of the famous Donoghue family. A table of amateur records is also
given. Ice hockey is treated in a section of the article HOCKEY (Vol.
13, p. 554). CURLING (Vol. 7, p. 645) describes the “rink” and stones,
as well as the game, and contains a glossary of technical terms. ICE
YACHTING (Vol. 14, p. 241) explains the mechanical paradox which makes
it possible for a boat propelled by the wind to move faster than the
wind is blowing. Ski-running and jumping, with the new development of
military skiing in France and Italy, are described in SKI (Vol. 25, p.
186); and it will surprise many readers to learn that a clear jump of
more than 130 feet has been made. Other articles dealing with winter
sports are SNOWSHOES (Vol. 22, p. 296), COASTING (Vol. 6, p. 603) and
TOBOGGANING (Vol. 26, p. 1042).

[Sidenote: Driving, Riding and Polo]

For information in regard to sports connected with the horse the reader
should first study the article HORSE and particularly that part which
concerns the history of horse breeding (pp 717–723 of Vol. 13), written
by E. D. Brickwood, an English authority on sport, and the sections on
“breeds of horses” by the late William Fream, agricultural correspondent
of the London _Times_, and Prof. Robert Wallace, of Edinburgh
University, who also wrote the section on management.

HORSE-RACING (Vol. 13, p. 726) contains a section on racing in the
United States, including the development of trotting races and the
stress put upon time records, pacing races, racing centres, the
predominance of dirt-tracks as contrasted with the turf courses of
England; a section on the history of English racing, including the
institution of the St. Leger, the Derby, the Oaks, the Ascot races, the
Goodwood, Two Thousand Guineas, etc., present conditions, including
classic races, handicaps, with scale of weight for age, the £10,000
races, the two-year-old races, Newmarket, Ascot and other meetings,
value of horses, trainers and jockeys, foreign horses, time, the Jockey
Club and steeple-chasing, the Grand National; a section on racing in
Australia; a section on racing in France, where, as in England, American
owners and jockeys have for some years past been much to the front; and
also a mention of the chief meetings in other European countries and in
Australia. HORSEMANSHIP (Vol. 13, p. 726) is chiefly concerned with
exhibition riding. DRIVING (Vol. 8, p. 585), by R. J. McNeill, discusses
the intricacies of tandem and four-in-hand coachmanship, and contains a
section on the use of the whip. The importance of acquiring a light
hand, and the extent to which this depends on the proper use of the
three joints in the arm, are clearly explained. COACH (Vol. 6, p. 574)
tells about the amateur road coach and the four-in-hand clubs in America
and elsewhere. The coaching horn or “post-horn,” as it used to be
called, is treated under HORN (Vol. 13, p. 697) by Kathleen Schlesinger,
the great authority on musical instruments. CARRIAGE (Vol. 5, p. 401),
by J. A. McNaught, notes that, although the buggy and rockaway are the
characteristic pleasure vehicles of this country, the heavier dog-cart
and ralli-cart are much used with horses of a certain type.

The article POLO (Vol. 22, p. 11), by Thomas F. Dale, steward of the
Polo and Riding Pony Society, describes the twelve varieties of the game
played during its existence of at least 2,000 years. The three modern
forms are the Indian, the English and the American, the game in England
dating from 1869 when it was introduced from India by the 10th
Hussars—and more definitely from 1873 when it was adopted by the
Hurlingham Club. The rules of the game are given, and its development is
traced, and there is a section on the polo pony and the much discussed
systems of measurement.

[Sidenote: Gardening]

Out-door recreation in the garden may be fully studied in the article
HORTICULTURE (Vol. 13, p. 741), which is a book in itself, for its
contents are the equivalent of about 140 pages of this Guide. It is
written by Liberty Hyde Bailey, director of the College of Agriculture,
Cornell University, who contributes a valuable gardeners’ calendar for
the United States, M. T. Masters, editor of _Gardeners’ Chronicle_, and
W. R. Williams, superintendent of the London County Council Botany
Centre, who write on “principles”; and John Weathers, author of
_Practical Guide to Garden Plants_, who writes on the “practice” of
gardening. The following is a partial list of the topics treated in this
article:

  Roots, Root-Pruning and Lifting, Watering, Bottom-Heat; Stem; Leaves;
  Buds; Propagation by Buds; Layering; Grafting or “Working”; Planting;
  Pruning; Training; Sports or Bud Variations; Formation of Flowers;
  Forcing; Retardation; Double Flowers; Formation of Seed,
  Fertilization, Hybridization, Reversion, Germination, Selection—all to
  be supplemented by the article BOTANY (Vol. 4, p. 299) for more
  scientific and less practical discussion of these topics.

  The Practice of Horticulture.

  Formation and Preparation of the Garden—Site, Soil, Subsoil, Shelter,
  Water Supply, Fence, Walks, Edgings.

  Garden Structures—Walls, Espalier Rails and other means of training;
  Plant Houses (with 12 illustrations), including Conservatory,
  Greenhouse, Fruit House, Vinery, Peach House, Forcing House, Pits and
  Frames, Mushroom House, Fruit Room, Heating Apparatus, Pipes, Boilers,
  Water Supply, Solar Heat, Ventilation, etc.

  Garden Materials and Appliances—Soil, Loam, Sand, Peat, Leaf Mould,
  Composts. Manures, with descriptions and appraisals of different
  varieties, organic and inorganic. Tools, Tallies and Labels.

  Garden Operations—Propagation—by seeds, offsets, tubers, division,
  suckers, runners, proliferous buds, grafts, with description and
  diagrams of different methods—buds, branch cutting, leaf cutting, root
  cutting, single-eye cutting, with 12 illustrations.

  Planting and Transplanting; Watering; Pruning (with 9 illustrations);
  Ringing; Training—horizontal, fan, trellis, etc.

  Flowers—Flower Gardens, Pleasure Grounds, Lawns; Hardy Annuals, with
  long list and description of plants recommended; Hardy Biennials, with
  list; Herbaceous Perennials, with classified list (containing more
  than the equivalent of 18 pages of this Guide); Hardy Trees; Bedding
  Plants, etc.

  Vegetables.

  Calendar for the United States.

  A list of other articles on special aspects of gardening will be found
  in the chapter _For Farmers_.


                              INDOOR GAMES

For learning indoor games—excluding indoor athletic games which have
been listed above—the Britannica is particularly valuable, because of
its elaborate treatment by noted authorities and because the handy and
convenient form of the India paper volume makes an article on any indoor
game as easy to consult as a hand-book dealing with only one game.

For example, the article on BRIDGE (Vol. 4, p. 528) is by William Henry
Whitfeld, card-editor of _The Field_. The article is the equivalent of
15 pages in this Guide; and it describes both auction and ordinary
bridge, with paragraphs on advice to players, declarations, doubling,
redoubling, play of the hand, playing to the score; and other forms of
bridge,—three-handed bridge, dummy bridge, misery bridge, and draw or
two-handed bridge; and contains a list of authorities.

Even more elaborate, as befits the subject, is the article CHESS (Vol.
6, p. 93), equivalent to 45 pages of this Guide. It contains diagrams
showing the arrangement of pieces and the English and German methods of
notation and a vocabulary of terms of the game; it treats the
comparative value of the pieces—“pawn 1, bishop 3.25, knight 3.25, rook
5, queen 9.5. Three minor pieces may more often than not be
advantageously exchanged for the queen. The knight is generally stronger
than the bishop in the end of the game, but two bishops are usually
stronger than two knights, more especially in open positions.” English,
French and German modes of notation and names of pieces are given. The
treatment of chess problems is accompanied by eight typical problems
with diagrams and analyses. The section on the history of chess gives
not merely very interesting early material but a study critical and
biographical, of the great chess masters—for example: Ruy Lopez, the
first chess analyst Greco; Philidor, a great blindfold and simultaneous
player of the 18th century; Allgaier; Mahé de la Bourdonnais; the
English school of the 19th century, Sarratt, Lewis, Mac Donnell, Evans
(of the gambit), Staunton (on whom there is a separate article) and
Buckle, the historian of civilization; the Berlin “Pleiades” and the
Hungarians, Grimm, Szen and Löwenthal; Morphy, the American; and among
the great players of the last half century, Steinitz, Paulsen,
Blackburne, Zukertort, Horwitz, Mason, Teichman, Pillsbury, Lasker,
Mieses, Marshall, Tarrasch, Tchigorin, etc. The results of international
tournaments are given from 1851 on; and modern tournament play is
criticised. The article closes with an elaborate bibliography.

The article on DRAUGHTS or Checkers (Vol. 8, p. 547) is by J. M. M.
Dallas, late secretary of the Edinburgh Draughts Club, and Richard
Jordan, former draughts champion of the world, and gives the history of
the game, with a study of the different openings.

The usefulness of the Britannica for card games in general may be easily
tested. Let us turn for instance to the article POKER (Vol. 21, p. 899).
It is equivalent in its contents to seven or eight pages of this Guide,
and among other interesting features it contains a vocabulary of
technical terms, including “big dog”, “little dog”, “cold feet”,
“splitting”, and the following mathematical table of approximate
chances.

To improve any hand in the draw, the Britannica tells us, the chances
are:

 ┌──────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────┐
 │Having in Hand│To make the Hand below                 │The Chance is │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │1 pair        │To get two pairs (3-card draw)         │1 in 4 ½      │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │1 pair        │To get three of a kind (3-card draw)   │1 in 9        │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │1 pair        │To improve either way average value    │1 in 3        │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │1 pair and 1  │To improve either way by drawing two   │1 in 7        │
 │  odd card    │  cards                                │              │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │2 pairs       │To get a full hand drawing one card    │1 in 12       │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │3’s           │To get a full hand drawing two cards   │1 in 15 ½     │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │3’s           │To get four of kind drawing two cards  │1 in 23 ½     │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │3’s           │To improve either way drawing two cards│1 in 9 ⅖      │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │3’s and 1 odd │To get a full hand by drawing one card │1 in 15 ⅓     │
 │  card        │                                       │              │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │3’s and 1 odd │To improve either way by drawing one   │1 in 11 ¾     │
 │  card        │  card                                 │              │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │4 straight    │To fill when open at one end only or in│1 in 11 ¾     │
 │              │  the middle as 3 4 6 7, or A 2 3 4    │              │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │4 straight    │To fill when open at both ends as 3 4 5│1 in 6        │
 │              │  6                                    │              │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │4 flush       │To fill the flush drawing one card     │1 in 5        │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │4-straight    │To fill the straight flush drawing one │1 in 23 ½     │
 │  flush       │  card                                 │              │
 ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────┤
 │3-card flush  │To make a flush drawing two cards      │1 in 24       │
 └──────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────┴──────────────┘

Among indoor games and kindred topics, each in a separate article, in
the Britannica, are:

 Ace
 Acrostic
 All-Fours
 Ambigu
 Boston
 Bouillotte
 Brag
 Bridge
 Calabresella
 Cards, Playing
 Casino
 Catch the Ten
 Charades
 Checkers
 Chess
 Children’s Games
 Commerce
 Conjuring
 Consolation
 Conundrum
 Crambo
 Cribbage
 Deuce
 Dice
 Doll
 Dominoes
 Draughts
 Ecarté
 Euchre
 Fantan
 Faro
 Fast and Loose
 Gaming and Wagering
 Go, or Go-bang
 Goose
 Halma
 Hazard
 Hearts
 Hoyle
 Jones, Henry (“Cavendish”)
 Juggler
 Knucklebones
 La Grâce
 Legerdemain
 Loo
 Lotto
 Matrimony
 Mora
 Napoleon
 Nine Men’s Morris
 Old Maid
 Ombre
 Pachisi
 Patience
 Petits-Chevaux
 Ping-Pong
 Pinochle
 Piquet
 Poker
 Pope Joan
 Prestidigitation
 Primero
 Puzzle
 Raffle
 Rebus
 Riddles
 Roulette
 Salta
 Shio-ghi
 Skat
 Snip Snap Snorem
 Solitaire
 Solo Whist
 Speculation
 Spelling Bee
 Spillikins
 Spoil-Five
 Top
 Toy
 Trent et Quarante
 Ventriloquism
 Vingt-et-Un
 Vint
 Whist

[Sidenote: Needlework, etc.]

Needlework as treated in the Britannica has one element of peculiar
value and novelty. In this department, as throughout the book, the
illustrations have been chosen upon a principle unusual in works of
reference: they really illustrate; they throw light on the text; they
are not mere pretty pictures intended to catch the eye and inserted in
the book haphazard. Turn for instance to the article LACE (Vol. 16, p.
37). Among its 61 illustrations are not only small diagrams explaining
different stitches and meshes and patterns and larger halftone
illustrations of “Bone Lace” “Reticella Needlepoint”, “Gros Point de
Venise”, “Point de Flandres à Brides” “Point de Venise à Brides
Picotées,” “Réseau Rosacé,” etc., but there are reproductions of
portraits of the 16th, 17th and early 18th centuries, showing not merely
patterns of lace but the method in which it was used and how it
“combined” and harmonized with styles of costume, and of hair dressing.
These “lace portraits” are: one from the Louvre, about 1540 of Catherine
de’ Medici, wearing a linen upturned collar of cut work and needlepoint
lace; one by Morcelse, about 1600, of Amelie Elisabeth, comtesse de
Hainault, wearing a ruff of needlepoint reticella lace; one, 1614, of
Mary, countess of Pembroke, wearing a coif and cuffs of reticella lace;
one by Le Nain, about 1628, of Henri II, duc de Montmorency, wearing a
falling lace collar; one by Riley, about 1685, of James II, wearing a
jabot and cuffs of raised needlepoint lace; one, about 1664, of Mme.
Verbiest, wearing pillow-made lace _à reseau_; one, about 1695, of
Princess Maria Teresa Stuart, wearing a flounce or tablier of delicate
needlepoint lace with small relief clusters; and one of de Vintimille,
about 1730, wearing needlepoint of the _Point de Venise à brides
picotées_. This article on Lace, equivalent in length to 60 pages of
this Guide, is by A. Summerly Cole, author of _Ancient Needle Point and
Pillow Lace_. EMBROIDERY (Vol. 9, p. 309) is by Mr. Cole and A. F.
Kendrick, keeper of the Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington;
and is illustrated with 18 figures showing many styles of early
embroidery. There are also articles on Tapestry, Needlework, Knitting,
Yarn, etc.

[Sidenote: Dancing, the Stage, etc.]

On dancing and the stage there is much of interest in the Britannica.
The article on the DANCE (Vol. 7, p. 794) distinguishes dancing as an
expression of emotion, whether social joy or religious exultation;
dancing for pleasure to the dancer or the spectator; and mimetic
dancing, “to represent the actions or passions of other people.” A
section on primitive and ancient dancing describes various early dances,
many of them not unlike the “trots” and “hugs” so notorious during the
last few years. At an Aztec feast, “called Huitzilopochtli, the noblemen
and women danced tied together at the hands, and embracing one another,
the arms being thrown over the neck.” Primitive imitative dances, the
attitude of the ancient Romans towards the dance, religious dances and
the attacks on the dance of such Puritan sects as the Albigenses and
Waldenses close the section on ancient dancing.

“Modern dancing” describes the branle (or brawl), the pavane, saraband,
minuet, gavotte, écossaise, cotillon, galop, lancers, schottische,
bourrée, waltz, fandango, bolero, jota, Morris dances, hornpipe, and
other English dances of the 17th and 18th centuries. In treating of
present-day dancing the article deals especially with the waltz,
quadrille, country-dance, lancers, polka, galop, Washington Post and
other American barn-dances, polka-mazurka, Polonaise, Schottische and
Sir Roger de Coverley. And it discusses ballet dancing (on which there
is also a separate article) and musical gymnastics. There are separate
articles on the following dances: ALLEMANDE, BERGAMASK, CHACONNE,
CHASSE, COURANTE, GAVOTTE, JIG, MAZURKA, MORRIS DANCE, PASSACAGLIA,
PAVANE, POLKA, POLONAISE, QUADRILLE, SARABAND, SCHOTTISCHE.

For a sufficient knowledge of the theatre and the drama to heighten his
enjoyment of a play, the theatre-goer should read up the subject, the
period and the author in the Britannica. For a more serious and thorough
study of opera, music in general and the drama as a literary form, he
may turn to special chapters of this Guide.


                       TRAVEL AT HOME AND ABROAD

If the traveler would make the most of his vacation journeys—as has
already been suggested—he should “read up” in the Britannica, even if he
does not wish to make a systematic study of the literature, art,
architecture, music, etc., of the country he is to visit. If he does
wish to pursue systematic study he can use the Britannica to better
advantage than a whole library of books of travel or special treatises.

The Britannica has often and successfully been used in this way. A
single instance: The Rev. Dr. George R. Van DeWater of St. Andrews
Church, New York City, in a letter addressed to the publishers of the
new Britannica, wrote:

“I have recently had occasion to look up South America with a view to
obtaining needed information for a proposed tour there, and I found all
that I wanted to know and found it readily.”

Among the general classes of valuable information for the traveler are:

The excellent maps, newly made with the greatest care from the best
sources;

Articles on the great countries of the world. Particularly valuable
sections are those at the beginning of each of these articles on
physiography, climate, etc., and those on transportation by rail and
water;

Articles on the states of the Union, similarly arranged, and like them
accompanied by maps and with full descriptions of the surface of the
country and the means of communication, climate, etc.;

Articles on regions, rivers, mountains, etc.,—for instance on the
RIVIERA, ALPS, NILE, RHINE, HUDSON, YOSEMITE, YELLOWSTONE.

Articles on cities and towns, with descriptions of the principal places
of interest, historical sketches, diagrams of battle-fields, etc.;

General articles such as ARCHITECTURE, PAINTING, MUSEUMS, which give
critical and related accounts of great art treasures of different
periods and schools. To this information, as bearing on the particular
place the traveler intends to visit, he will be guided by the Index;

Biographical articles related to the special vicinity to be visited—as
for instance, WORDSWORTH, COLERIDGE and DEQUINCEY for the Lake District.

This survey, already too long for the limited space of this Guide, yet
far too brief to represent properly the aspect of the Britannica with
which it deals, will have accomplished its purpose if it induces the
possessor of the volumes to go to them when he needs relaxation.
Articles of the kind described in this chapter, showing you how to make
the most of leisure hours, are doubly serviceable, giving pleasure while
they are being read, and again when their suggestions are carried into
effect.

But it is not only in the articles dealing with recreation that
Britannica reading insures future as well as present enjoyment. Lafcadio
Hearn said it was worth while to visit Japan if only because what one
sees there makes one’s dreams more beautiful all through later life. And
so the fascination of history, of science, of biography, does not end,
but only begins, with the reading which opens for you a gate leading
into fresh fields. What you read this coming year, in any department of
the Britannica, will be still, ten years from now, a source of pleasure,
for knowledge, once acquired, brings continually renewed delight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold font in =equals=.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE READER'S GUIDE TO THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


