The Project Gutenberg eBook of The flying carpet
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The flying carpet

Editor: Lady Cynthia Asquith

Release date: January 28, 2025 [eBook #75229]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1925

Credits: Richard Tonsing, Tim Lindell, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLYING CARPET ***





[Illustration: THE FLYING CARPET]




[Illustration]

                                  THE
                             FLYING CARPET


                   Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York




                          COPYRIGHT, 1925, BY
                        CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

                Printed in the United States of America

[Illustration: [Colophon]]




                   LIST OF THOSE WHO HAVE WOVEN THIS
                             FLYING CARPET

[Illustration]


                                                                    PAGE
 _THOMAS HARDY_
     _A POPULAR PERSONAGE AT HOME_                                     9

 _ADELAIDE PHILLPOTTS_
     _THOMAS HENRY TITT_                                              11
     _THEOPHANIA_                                                    160

 _JOHN LEA_
     _THE TWO SAILORS_                                               108
     _THE SIMPLE WAY_                                                198

 _ALFRED NOYES_
     _INVITATION TO THE VOYAGE_                                       16

                           _DESMOND MACCARTHY_
     _I WISH I WERE A DOG_                                            18

 _A. A. MILNE_
     _WHEN WE WERE VERY, VERY YOUNG_                                  32

 _DAVID CECIL_
     _THE SHADOW LAND_                                                35

 _CYNTHIA ASQUITH_
     _THE BARGAIN SHOP_                                               38
     _OLAF THE FAIR AND OLAF THE DARK_                               184

 _HENRY NEWBOLT_
     _THE JOYOUS BALLAD OF THE PARSON AND THE BADGER_                 54
     _VICE-VERSA: ANY FATHER TO ANY DAUGHTER_                        118
     _SERMON TIME_                                                   183
     _FINIS_                                                         200

 _A. PEMBURY_
     _THE SPARK_                                                     158
     _THE RHYME OF CAPTAIN GALE_                                     182

 _G. K. CHESTERTON_
     _TO ENID_                                                        57

 _CHARLES WHIBLEY_
     _SCENES IN THE LIFE OF A PRINCESS_                               60

 _J. M. BARRIE_
     _NEIL AND TINTINNABULUM_                                         65

 _HERBERT ASQUITH_
     _STORIES_                                                        15
     _THE DREAM_                                                      96
     _EGGS_                                                          107

 _ELIZABETH LOWNDES_
     _MR. SNOOGLES_                                                   99

 _HUGH LOFTING_
     _DR. DOLITTLE MEETS A LONDONER IN PARIS_                        110

 _MARGARET KENNEDY_
     _KITTEEN_                                                       120

 _CLEMENCE DANE_
     _GILBERT_                                                       122

 _HILAIRE BELLOC_
     _JACK AND HIS PONY, TOM_                                        129
     _TOM AND HIS PONY, JACK_                                        131

 _WALTER DE LA MARE_
     _PIGTAILS, LTD._                                                133

 _SIR WALTER RALEIGH_
     _THE PERFECT HOST_                                              157

 _EDWARD MARSH_
     _THE WEASEL IN THE STOREROOM_                                   167

 _W. H. DAVIES_
     _LOVE THE JEALOUS_                                              168

 _DENIS MACKAIL_
     _THE MAGIC MEDICINE_                                            170




               List of those who have helped to adorn the
                             Flying Carpet

[Illustration]


                         _MABEL LUCIE ATTWELL_
                         _J. R. C. BODLEY_
                         _L. R. BRIGHTWELL_
                         _H. M. BROCK_
                         _HAROLD EARNSHAW_
                         _DAPHNE JERROLD_
                         _E. BARNARD LINTOTT_
                         _HUGH LOFTING_
                         _GEORGE MORROW_
                         _SUSAN PEARSE_
                         _T. HEATH ROBINSON_
                         _ERNEST H. SHEPARD_
                         _DUDLEY TENNANT_
                         _A. H. WATSON_




[Illustration]

                      A POPULAR PERSONAGE AT HOME

                            BY THOMAS HARDY


             “I live here: ‘Wessex’ is my name,
                 I am a dog known rather well:
             I guard the house; but how that came
                 To be my lot I cannot tell.

             “With a leap and a heart elate I go,
                 At the end of an hour’s expectancy,
             To take a walk of a mile or so,
                 With the folk who share the house with me.

             “Along the path amid the grass
                 I sniff, and find out rarest smells
             For rolling over as I pass
                 The open fields towards the dells.

             “No doubt I shall always cross this sill,
                 And turn the corner, and stand steady,
             Gazing back for my mistress till
                 She reaches where I have run already.

             “And that this meadow with its brook,
                 And bulrush, just as it appears
             As I plunge past with hasty look,
                 Will stay the same a thousand years.”

             Thus “Wessex.” Yet a dubious ray
                 At times informs his steadfast eye,
             Just for a trice, as though to say:
                 “Will these things, after all, go by?”

[Illustration]




                           Thomas Henry Titt

[Illustration]

                                                     ADELAIDE PHILLPOTTS


In the South West of London stands a cathedral, which, from outside,
looks like a child’s castle of bricks. But when you go inside you see
nothing at first but a large emptiness—a ceiling somewhere up in the
clouds supported by huge marble columns. There is always a smell of
incense in the air, and there is a little painted figure before which,
night and day, burn three rows of candles. Sometimes, on Saints’ Days,
other rows of candles are lighted before other painted figures—St.
Andrew, St. Patrick, St. George—making centres of bright light in the
dimness of the great interior.

Near this cathedral are blocks of tenement buildings where families
dwell, one on top of the other, like books in a bookcase. These
buildings are full of children: boys and girls and babies.

On the top floor of one of these blocks lived Thomas Henry Titt, aged
twelve. Thomas Henry’s father kept a shop round the corner where you saw
sausages and onions frying in the window. His mother was dead. He had an
elder sister who mended his clothes and helped their father in the shop.
Thomas was known as Tom-Tit; and he looked rather like a bird, for he
had thin arms and legs, sharp little eyes, a crest of bright hair, and a
pointed nose.

Like every imaginative child, Tom-Tit had a secret: a passion for the
sea, which he had never seen. His ocean was in his mind’s eye, and he
hoped as no one ever hoped before that one day he might behold the
reality of his dream. In the darkness of night Tom-Tit, alone in his
attic, lying awake on his mattress, gazed out upon a heaving
cornflower-blue coloured ocean—as blue as the flowers which the woman
sold at the end of his street. And this ocean was full of shining
fishes. There was no land in sight—ever.

Thomas Henry Titt loved the candles that burned before the painted
figure in the cathedral. In the winter, when he was small, he had often
held his little frozen hands to the warmth of them, when nobody was
looking. But as he grew older the candles began to have for him a deeper
significance. During evening service he would creep into a corner by one
of the pillars, listening to the organ and watching the kneeling people
in the distance near the shining altar. Then, when the music stopped and
the people were gone, he would steal out and patter along to the rows of
candles. There his heart would light up, even as they, and he would
thrill with a strange, unaccountable happiness.

Gradually Tom-Tit began to connect these candles with his desire for the
sea. The two facts became one in his mind. It was as if, by the light of
the former, he could see the blue waves of the other.

Underneath the rows of burning candles was a rack full of new ones. Tom
often saw people drop a coin into a box, take one, fix it upon a spike
among the rest, and light it. And a longing overcame him to possess for
his own one of these new candles. Perhaps, at the bottom of his mind,
was the idea that if he took it home and lighted it, it would bring him
nearer to his ultimate ambition—to see the sea. He determined to realise
his desire.

Then came a winter day when Tom-Tit’s head ached, shivers ran up and
down his spine, and he felt very ill. Therefore his sister bade him stay
in bed, and he did so until she had left the house with her father. But
then, despite his fever, the craving to possess that candle overcame
obedience. So, gripping a penny, he rose, staggered downstairs, and out
into the road. The cold air cooled his body and numbed his pains. He
slipped unnoticed into the cathedral and leaned for a moment against the
wall, for his head was swimming and he could not see. Then he recovered,
and his eyes sparkled as he beheld the candles flickering like golden
flowers before the wooden figure at the end of the aisle. The
surrounding air was a golden haze. The smell of incense was sweet.

He tottered to the box of new candles, dropped in his penny, and took
one. Then he dragged himself home, feeling worse and worse at every
step, but gloriously glad within, because of the candle in his pocket.

All day he lay on his bed, too ill to sit up, nursing his treasure. “I
shall be well to-night,” he thought, “and when it’s dark I’ll light it.”

In the evening his father and sister returned, found him in a state of
high fever, and sent for the doctor. He, when he saw Tom-Tit, said that
he would come back in the morning and remove him to the hospital if he
were not better.

He gave Tom a sleeping draught before he left.

When his father and sister had gone to bed, Thomas Henry, feeling drowsy
and less hurt with pain, pulled out his candle half melted already by
the heat of his hands, lit it, and set it on a chair by his side. Then
he lay gazing at it, until the whole world was but a golden flame with a
blue root.

Then a wonderful thing happened. He did not see the candle any more. His
first idea was that the wind must have blown it out, for a great wind
was blowing. Where could he be? He opened his eyes, which must have been
closed, and lo! he was in a little wooden boat on a cornflower-blue sea!
The boat was rocking from side to side like the baby’s cradle on the
floor below—a mechanical rock, rock, rock, rock, from side to side. He
scooped up a handful of the sea, and, just as he had expected, it was
bright blue. He could see blue shining fishes swimming round the boat,
so he caught them in his fingers where they wriggled about and made blue
reflections until he threw them back again into the blue water.

And all the time, though he could not see it, the candle was burning at
his side—burning lower, and lower, and lower.

From horizon to horizon the cobalt ocean stretched around him—not a
speck of land anywhere. He was perfectly happy there staring down
through the blue fathoms and feeling the wind blow. He had never been so
happy in his life before.

Then the candle went out.

In the morning they found a little pool of grease on the chair—and
Tom-Tit was dead.

But this is not really a sad story, because Thomas Henry did what many
thousands of people never do, even though they live to be a hundred and
three—he realised his ambition. He saw the sea. And he was not
disillusioned; for the sea that he saw was just as beautiful as the sea
which he imagined: the reality matched the dream.




                                Stories

                                                         HERBERT ASQUITH


                When lights are out and Pat’s in bed,
                He tells a story from his head
                Of men who fight by sea and land
                With cutlasses in either hand.
                Who make their mouths into a sheath
                And sharpen dirks upon their teeth;
                And schooners heeling to the breeze
                That blows across the coral seas,
                With kegs of rum and bars of gold
                And corpses rolling in the hold.
                Then far below the dining-room
                Pours out its voices: through the gloom
                Borne on tobacco-laden air
                The roar of talk comes up the stair,
                But where are now the coral seas
                And where is Pat? Lost on the breeze
                With streaming flag the schooner fades
                And takes her captain to the shades.




                        Invitation to the Voyage

                           (_A New Version_)

                                                            ALFRED NOYES


              A rambling cherry-petalled stream;
                A bridge of pale bamboo;
              A path that seemed a twisted dream
                Where everything came true;
              A crimson-lanterned garden-house
              With jutting eaves below the boughs;
                The slant-eyed elves in blue
              With soft slip-slapping heels and toes
              Dancing before the Daimyōs:

              “_And is it Old Japan_,” you cry
                “That half-remembered place”—
              I see beneath an English sky
                A child with brooding face.
              The curious realm he chose to build
              And paint with any hues he willed
                Is all I strive to trace,
              Where odds and ends of memory smile
              Like bits of heaven, through clouds awhile.

              And some for charts and maps would call,
                But here, beside the fire,
              The kakemono on the wall
                Is all that we require.
              A chanty piped by bosun Lear
              May float around us while we steer
                Our hearts to their desire—
              The Nonsense Land beyond the sun
              Where West and East, at last, are one.

              Then let the rigging hum the tales
                That Tusitala[1] told
              When first we spread our purple sails
                In quest of pirate gold;
              For, though he waved us all good-bye
              Beneath the deep Samoan sky,
                His heart was blithe and bold,
              And hailed across a darker main
              The shadowy hills of home again.

              So we, who now adventure far
                Beyond the singing foam,
              May see, in every dipping star,
                The harbour lights of home;
              And, finding still, as all have found,
              That every ship is homeward bound,
                (For none could ever roam
              A sea too wide for heaven to span)
              Sail on—sail on—to Old Japan.

Footnote 1:

  Robert Louis Stevenson.




                          I Wish I Were a Dog

                                                       DESMOND MACCARTHY


There were five in the family and Dicky, nearly nine, was the youngest
but one. Dicky’s father was a country doctor, and, like many country
doctors, he led rather a hard life. The sick people he visited lived
miles apart, and many were too poor to pay him properly.

Dr. Brook was a tall, pale man with grizzled hair turning to grey. He
was clever, and he had a quick, short way of talking. He seemed to make
up his mind about everything in a moment, and if you asked him a
question, he answered as though it ought not to have been necessary to
explain.

Dicky would have been surprised to hear that his father was a kind man,
but kind he was. He hated attending upon well-to-do people who had
nothing much the matter with them, though he knew he must visit them to
make enough money to bring up his own children properly.

He would remember this while he was driving miles out of his way to see
some poor cottager, and so, when he arrived at the cottage, he was
usually in a bad temper. On the other hand, when he was calling on old
Mrs. Varden at The Grange, who was sound as a bell and would probably
live to be ninety, he was always thinking of those who really wanted
looking after. Then, instead of smiling sympathetically, while she told
him how queer she had felt in the middle of the night three weeks ago,
or how well her nephews were doing, he would stand in front of the fire
in her cosy sitting-room, look up at the ceiling with a stern
expression, and rattle the keys in his pocket in a manner which said
plainly, “How much longer shall I have to listen to this stuff?” So,
although everybody thought Dr. Brook “a very clever doctor,” few people
were fond of him.

All day he went bumping and rushing along the country lanes and roads in
his shabby, muddy car, which he never had time to clean properly; and
when he got home his day’s work was not over. In the evening he turned
schoolmaster and taught his children.

Dicky’s mother had died when his brother Peregrin was born. Ella, the
eldest of the children, a grown-up girl, kept house and taught Dicky and
Peregrin in the morning. She was very like her father in many ways, only
her cleverness had turned to music. She played the violin beautifully,
and she was dying to get away from home and become a famous musician.
Dr. Brook knew this and was very sorry for her; but he could not let her
go till Dicky and Peregrin went to school. She had to be a governess
till then. The other two boys had done very well. They had both got
scholarships, and little Peregrin was as sharp as a needle.

Altogether the doctor had to admit he was very blessed in his children.
But there was Dicky! Dicky was a dunce, there was no doubt about it—at
least, so Ella reported. And when Dicky showed his smudgy exercise-books
to his father in the evenings, his father thought it only too true.

Dicky dreaded the evening every day. He did not much mind his sister
Ella’s crossness. He was used to it. But there was something awful about
the weary quiet way his father used to ask, “Do you understand _now_?”
Dicky had then to say “Yes,” and presently his father would find out he
hadn’t understood at all. There would be a still longer pause, and at
last his father would sigh, “Unhappy boy, what will become of you!”

This was far worse than being slapped by Ella, though her ring sometimes
really did hurt. His father would then repeat what he had said before,
twice, very slowly, as though he were dropping the words drop by drop
into a medicine glass, looking at Dicky all the time, till Dicky’s lips
began to quiver and his eyes to fill, when his father would say hastily,
pulling out his watch, “There, there. It’s time for bed. Run along. Kiss
me.” Then Dicky’s one desire was to get out of the room before bursting
into tears. He did not mind if it happened outside the door or upstairs.
Indeed, it was rather a comfort to cry, especially if he could only get
hold of Jasper, the black spaniel, to hug and talk to while he was
crying. But he was terrified at breaking down before his father. He
somehow felt if he did, he might never stop sobbing, or that something
else dreadful would happen. One evening it did happen.

The day had been altogether a bad day. Dicky had got up that morning
feeling as if his head was rather smaller and lighter than usual. It
felt about the size of an apple. Ella had had a fat letter that morning
from her bosom friend, at the Royal College of Music in London. Lessons
were always worse on the days she heard from her, and that morning it
was true also, for once in a way, that Dicky had really _not_ been
“trying.” He had begun by making thirty-four mistakes in his French
dictation—and he was rather glad. During arithmetic he had amused
himself by imagining that the numbers had different characters, and that
some of them were very pleased to find themselves side by side in the
sums. The result was that all his sums were wrong, and he had
exasperated Ella by telling her that it was the fault of number 8, who
was a quarrelsome widow and wore spectacles.

When left alone to do his Latin Prose, while Ella went to her bedroom to
practise furiously on the fiddle, he had spent the time in teasing a
beetle by hemming it in between canals of ink on the schoolroom table.
He liked the beetle, but he enjoyed imagining its disgust and
perplexity, and he enjoyed feeling that he could, but wouldn’t, drown
it. When Ella came back and found that he had only written one Latin
word, “Jam” (already), on the paper, she tore the exercise book from him
and said that he could do what he liked: she would tell his father and
never teach him again—never, never, never.

[Illustration: “SHE WOULD NEVER TEACH HIM AGAIN—NEVER, NEVER”]

But the evening was a long way off, and Dicky walked into the garden, in
a gloomy sort of way rather proud of himself. He found, however, he
could not amuse himself, so he devoted himself to amusing Jasper,
chasing him in circles about the lawn and throwing sticks for him to
fetch. When the dog had had enough, and lay down on the grass with his
paws out in front of him like a lion, Dicky did not know what to do
next. He went down himself on all fours and kissed Jasper, who
responded, between quick pants, with a hasty slobber of his pink
quivering tongue, as though he were snapping at a fly. Ah, if only he
were as happy as Jasper! Dicky suddenly remembered that an old gentleman
had once given him a sort of blessing, saying, “May you be as happy as a
good dog.” What an easy time Jasper had! Of course he got into trouble
if he rolled in things, but if Dicky were in his shoes—or perhaps he
ought to say on his paws—_he_ wouldn’t want to. (Jasper certainly had a
very odd taste in scent.) Examinations, scholarships—those awful things
meant nothing to him. Dicky thought he could have easily managed to be a
good dog. And since he wanted to stop thinking about himself, he began
to play a favourite game of imagining what Jasper said to other dogs
about his home and the family. How he would boast to them of the
excellent rabbit-hunting in the copse near by, of the good bones he had
and the warm fires; and how he would tell them about jumping on Dick’s
bed in the morning and how perfectly Dick and he understood each other.
But the worst of it was that unless one were tired and a little sleepy,
one could not go on with that game very long. It soon began to seem
silly. It was not a good morning game.

Ella was very grim at lunch and only spoke to Peregrin. After luncheon
Dicky felt very inclined to work—anything to stop thinking. He said
something about learning grammar, but Ella took all the books away and
locked them up. She said he could do _whatever he liked_. This had never
happened before and it frightened him.

He went for a walk by himself. The sky was grey and the hedges were
dripping and his feet felt heavy. He actually tried to remember what
cases the different prepositions governed in Latin, as he walked along,
in the hope of surprising his father in the evening; but the fear that
he might be repeating them to himself all wrong made him hopeless. It
was never safe to learn without the book. Only once, when a red stoat
ambled with arched back across the lane, did he forget himself. A stoat,
too, must have a jolly life, he thought, even if it ended by being
nailed up on a door by a keeper. He stayed out till it was dark and past
tea time.

His father’s hat and coat were not in the hall when he returned, so
Dicky knew he had not yet come back. Upstairs he could hear the wailing
of Ella’s violin. He went up and knocked at her door. She did not say
“Come in,” or stop bowing away or frowning at the music on the stand in
front of her. “If you’re hungry get milk in the kitchen,” she said, her
chin still on the fiddle, “and—shut the door.”

Dicky did so, and stood for a minute outside it. Then he went slowly to
the schoolroom and sat down at the table. Peregrin was already in bed,
and there was nothing to do but to wait.

Time passed very slowly, and if Dicky had not known that he was dreading
something, he would have thought he must be ill. He did, indeed, feel
very queer. At last he heard the front door slam and the tramp of his
father’s stride in the hall. The same instant the sound of the violin
stopped and Ella walked rapidly along the passage; and before Dicky knew
what he was doing he had started to run after her. At the head of the
stairs he stopped himself, and peeping over the bannisters he saw that
his father had hesitated in the middle of pulling off his coat, and was
staring at Ella, who was talking vehemently in front of him. Dicky heard
her raised voice saying, “It is hopeless. Father, I won’t; I really
can’t. He....” His father finished getting out of his coat without a
word; then they both went into the study. The door closed behind them,
and Dicky crept back to the schoolroom.

Presently, he heard Ella calling him to come down. A few minutes before,
his legs had carried him to the top of the stairs without his wanting
it, now they refused to move. “Father wants you in the study at once,”
she shouted, and she continued to call, “Dick, Dick, Dick, Dick.” There
was a long pause and Ella herself stood in the doorway.

“Father is coming to whip you,” she said, and walked off to her room.

But he did not come. Dicky waited with beating heart, but he did not
come. He waited till he almost forgot he was waiting, and yet his father
did not come. And when at last he heard soft shuffling steps coming
along the passage, his heart almost stopped. To his astonishment he saw
in the darkness beyond the door two small round orange lamps shining
about a foot from the ground. It was only Jasper, who padded quietly
into the room and lay down on the hearthrug with a quiet sigh of
satisfaction. Having settled himself in the shape of a large foot-stool,
Jasper did not lift his nose again, but he turned up his eyes at
Dicky—they were brown eyes now, exquisitely humble and kind—and wagged
his stumpy tail. Dicky had flung himself on the floor beside the dog and
embraced him. Were these the terrible sobs which would never leave off?
No, presently they did stop; and gradually Dicky even forgot that he was
waiting for something awful. The occasional dab of the dog’s cold nose
on his hot cheeks was comforting, and so it was to curl all round him.
Dicky felt almost as though he were a dog himself when he was curled up
like that.

“Do you know, Jasper, if I were a dog, I should be a very clever dog?
Much, much cleverer than you,” he whispered with his face buried in the
black fur. His head felt swollen and confused. “A re-markable dog,” he
repeated, “I should be a very re-markable dog.”

Downstairs Dr. Brook was sitting close up to the fire and staring
gloomily into it. He had forgotten that he held a short switch in his
hand, and that it still hung down between his knees. He was thinking in
pictures and the pictures were not of Dicky. He had forgotten Dicky; he
had even forgotten himself. They say the whole of life passes before a
drowning man’s eyes. The doctor ever since he sat down had felt like a
man drowning in a sea of troubles. If not the whole of his own life,
still, much of it, had passed before his eyes. Only when at last he was
eating his cold solitary dinner in the dining-room, did he remember
again that Dicky had been naughty that morning, and that Dicky was
probably incurably stupid. But even if he were it did not seem now to
matter much, or to matter in a different way. Ella, too, he thought,
must go to her College of Music; things could somehow be managed. The
doctor sat a very long time over his dinner.

But upstairs still stranger things were happening to Dick. First he felt
hot and large, then cold and small. He kept on shivering. Was this silky
hair his own or Jasper’s? And where was he? He was apparently in a wet,
grey place. What he touched with his hands and feet felt rough and
gritty. Suddenly he saw a brown stoat with an arched back ambling
rapidly in front of him—it was as big as a fox. Yes, he was on a
road—the very road he had walked along that very afternoon, only now the
wet hedges were ever so much higher. And before Dicky knew what he was
doing he was dashing after the stoat, right into the quickset hedge
after it. What was he doing? He smelt a queer strong smell which excited
him; and he pushed and struggled through the roots and thorns, following
the smell. He seemed, too, to be wearing a very odd cap with long flaps,
which kept catching in the brambles and dragging him back. This did not
hurt, but it was a nuisance, and he had constantly to shake his head. He
traced the smell of stoat to a rabbit hole and thrust his head down it.
Hullo! Dicky had no idea rabbits smelt so deliciously, as nice as
pineapples or peaches! Dicky had wanted to kill the stoat, but he would
have liked to eat the rabbit. He tried to make the hole larger, by
tearing away the earth with his hands, but, although he got on much
faster than he expected, he soon saw that was no use; and dragging
himself violently backwards out of the hedge, he found himself in the
road again with nothing to do.

Yes, there was nothing, absolutely nothing to do. The sensation was a
strange one, for he couldn’t even think of anything. He just stood there
snuffing the wet wind. Then suddenly he found himself trotting towards
home. He had not gone very far when he was aware of another smell which
he somehow recognised instantly as “The Sacred Smell.” He knew what it
was, though he had never smelt it properly before. It reminded him of a
feeling he had sometimes had in church—how long ago that seemed!—and
partly of a feeling he had had when once an old general in scarlet and
covered with medals had patted him on the head. Only this time The
Sacred Smell was mixed with other smells; with smells of horse, leather,
onions and smoke. This, Dicky knew, was not as it should be, and he was
distinctly alarmed. However, he thought he had better stand still. It
was always better, something whispered to him, not to run away from The
Sacred Smell—unless the danger was terrific.

Of course, having smelt The Sacred Smell, he was not at all surprised to
see next a huge pair of muddy boots coming towards him, and a pair of
huge knees in dirty trousers moving up and down. When they were a short
distance off, they stopped; and Dicky, looking up, saw what he had
expected; an unshaven, dark-skinned Man in a cap, with a spotted
handkerchief knotted round his neck. The Man made a squeaking noise with
his pursed-up lips, such as rats make, and slapped his thigh once or
twice. Dicky knew what this meant, but even when the Man called in a
croaking voice, “E-e-e-’ere good boy,” Dicky still thought it was best
not to move. He stood and turned his face instead to the hedge, looking,
no doubt, as absent-minded and miserable as he felt. (It was odd, but
_now_ when Dicky felt wretched and miserable that feeling was strongest,
not just under the middle of his ribs, but at the end of his spine where
his legs began; there now was the seat of anguish.) The Man took a step
or two nearer, then another step. Still Dicky did not stir. Suddenly the
Man dashed forward and made a grab at him. Dicky ducked, started aside
and bumped right into the road-bank. He saw the Man’s hand outstretched
above him, and he knew there was now only one thing to do: to roll right
over on to his back, in order to show he wouldn’t resist and hoped for
mercy. The Man stroked Dicky’s head and made soothing noises; and then,
suddenly, put an arm under him, lifting him up and holding him tight to
his side.

[Illustration: “THE MAN DASHED FORWARD AND MADE A GRAB AT HIM”]

Dicky felt perfectly miserable, but what could he do? He knew it would
be folly to try to escape, and that it would be wiser to wait for an
opportunity. The Man tucked him with a jerk still more firmly under his
arm, and started to walk slowly on. He walked on for more than an hour,
till they came to a gorse common, where a caravan was standing with
empty shafts and a pair of steps behind. Gripping Dicky tighter than
ever the Man gave a whistle, and a Woman came out of the caravan.

“Where did you find him, Joe?” said the Woman, looking at Dicky.

“’Long road,” said the Man, jerking his head backwards.

“You ain’t been and thrown away his collar, ’ave you, Joe?”

“’Adn’t any,” said the Man. Dicky was very dazed, but he did think they
were talking about him in an odd way.

“Better take ’im where he belongs,” said the Woman. “The cops won’t
believe as such as ’e is ours. He looks well cared for. Might get five
bob.”

Dicky did not try to tell them where he lived; he felt somehow it would
be no use to try.

Instead of answering the Man just threw him into the caravan and shut
the door. Although it was nearly dark, Dicky found he could see
surprisingly well. Presently a tin bowl full of scraps of meat and bones
was thrust in. Dicky would have been revolted by such a mess a short
time ago, but now, though he was too scared to feel hungry, he could not
resist putting his face close to it and giving a sniff. It really smelt
uncommonly good. He put out the tip of his tongue and touched a
brown-looking, ragged bit of gristle. Yes, it was good. Then all of a
sudden he understood what must have happened. He had changed into a dog!
Into a black spaniel!

He dashed at the door, shouting at the top of his voice, “Let me out!
Let me out!” Alas, the only word which sounded at all like what he
wanted to say was, “Out.” “Out, out, out, out,” he kept barking, hoping
that the Man and Woman would understand. They took no notice; but he
could not stop. “Out, out, out,” he barked. He shook the door by jumping
at it; he tore at the wood with his nails. There was a latch just within
his reach when he sprang up, but his paws—yes, it was only too true, his
hands were round, black and feathery—could not lift it. “Out, out, out.”
No answer. At last he gave it up, and lay down on the floor, feeling
very tired. It occurred to him presently that he might think better
while gnawing a bone. So he went to the bowl and pulled out the largest.
It was a slight comfort to him. With his head on one side and his teeth
sliding along the bone, he found he could think a little more calmly.
How was he to let them know that he was not a real dog, but a boy called
Dicky Brook? He tried again to talk. After a lot of practice he
succeeded in making a sound rather like “Brrr-ook,” but it was also too
sadly like the noise Jasper made when he was too lazy to bark or had
been told to stop barking. Dicky was afraid they would never understand.
But surely a very clever dog could make people understand somehow?

At last the door opened and the Man appeared, black against the starry
sky. He stumbled over Dicky, swore and lit a stinking lamp-flame the
size of the blade of a pocket knife. He was followed by the Woman.
Outside Dicky could see the red glow of the fire which had cooked their
dinner. Now was his chance. What should he do to astonish them? That was
the first thing to do, to astonish them till they began to understand.
But all Dicky could think of was a doggy thing after all: he sat up and
begged. The Woman grinned at him, but the Man, who was pulling off his
great boots, flung one at him, which Dicky dodged. He at once sat up on
his hind-legs again, this time joining his paws and holding them up high
in front of him.

“Bli’my Joe, look at the dawg!” exclaimed the Woman. “It’s saying its
prayers!”

The Man, too, stared in astonishment.

“I don’t like it,” said the Woman.

Dicky felt greatly encouraged. At home he was fond of turning
somersaults. Now, down went his head and over went his hind-legs. It was
not a good somersault (he was too short in the legs for somersaults now)
but it was one. The Man gave a shout of laughter, and his face lit up
with joy and cunning.

“S’truth, it’s a performing dawg! I ain’t taking ’im back, no fear.
He’ll make our fortunes.”

At these words Dicky saw he had made a terrible mistake. If he was a
dog, he had better not be a re-markable dog.

[Illustration: “HE COULD NOT FALL ANY FURTHER”]

The door was still open, and through it he dashed, taking the steps at a
leap. Now he was falling, falling, falling. What a height! Oh, would he
never reach the bottom? Stars were flying above him like bees. The awful
thing was that he was beginning to fall slowly, while a huge arm with a
hand at the end of it was stretching out, longer and longer, after him.
He was not even falling slowly now; he was floating. He tried to force
himself down through the air, but though there was nothing to keep him
up he could not fall any further. Suddenly the arm gripped him. In an
agony of terror he yelled: “I’m not a dog.” He heard his own voice, and,
to his amazement, he saw his father’s face close to his; it was his
father’s arm lifting him from the hearthrug. He felt a hand cool on his
forehead. “Dick, you’re feverish. My little Dick.” His father’s voice
had never sounded like that before, and he felt himself being
carried—deliciously safe—to bed.

“After all,” he said to himself, as he snuggled down, “I’m glad I’m not
a dog.”




[Illustration]

                     When We Were Very, Very Young

                                                             A. A. MILNE


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

      I think I am a Muffin Man. I haven’t got a bell,
      I haven’t got the muffin things that muffin-people sell.
      Perhaps I am a Postman. No, I think I am a Tram.
      I’m feeling rather funny and I don’t know _what_ I am—

                      BUT

          _Round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about I go—
          All round the table,
          The table in the nursery—
          _Round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about I go:

          I think I am a Traveller Escaping from a Bear;
          I think I am an Elephant
          Behind another Elephant
          Behind _another_ Elephant who isn’t really there....

                                        SO

          _Round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about and _round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about
                              I go.

      I think I am a Ticket Man, who’s selling tickets-please,
      I think I am a Doctor who is visiting a Sneeze;
      Perhaps I’m just a Nanny who is walking with a pram.
      I’m feeling rather funny and I don’t know _what_ I am—

                                    BUT

          _Round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about I go—
          All round the table
          The table in the nursery—

          _Round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about I go:
          I think I am a Puppy, so I’m hanging out my tongue:
          I think I am a Camel Who
          Is looking for a Camel Who
          Is looking for a Camel who is Looking for its Young....

                                  SO

          _Round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about and _round_ about
          And _round_ about
          And _round_ about
                        I go.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                            THE SHADOW LAND

                                                             DAVID CECIL


             Night falls upon a day of storm,
                 Of mist and gust and rain,
             And still wind howls along the sands,
             And sleet with myriad tiny hands,
                 Slaps at the window pane.

             Awake in bed lay Jack and Jane,
                 They watched the shadows play;
             Their eyes roved round from wall to floor
             And then they stopped and roved no more.
             A lady standing by the door
                 Looked at them as they lay.

             Her skin was smooth as ivory,
                 Her hair was like pale silk
             All spells and secrets seemed to lie
             Beneath each slanting emerald eye,
                 And eyelid white as milk.

             Her stiff skirts gleamed in the firelight
                 And the ceaseless hurrying shadows.
             Her voice was high and far away
             Like distant voice at close of day,
                 Calling across the meadows.

             “Come!” she said, “Come!”; the children came,
                 They had nor voice nor will.
             Round her the hurrying shadows skim,
             She struck one with her knuckles slim,
                 It fluttered and stood still.

[Illustration: WILDER YET THE SHADOWS WHIRL]


              Wilder yet the shadows whirl.
                  As nailed to wall and floor,
              Stood firm this one; she whispered “Follow.”
              Then swiftly swooping like a swallow,
                  Slipt through as through a door.

              And she led them to far shadowland,
                  Where the shadows stand upright;
              And walk and talk, while on the ground,
              The live men trail without a sound,
                  Solid and pink and white.

              Where the echo is heard before the song,
                  And in the pools you see
              Reflected houses steady stand,
              While real ones built upon the land
                  Tremble continually.

              All night long stayed Jack and Jane,
                  But when the dawn grew red,
              They crept back through the shadow door,
              Across the firelight-chequered floor,
                And scrambled back to bed.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                            THE BARGAIN SHOP

                                                     BY CYNTHIA ASQUITH.


                                   I

Once upon a time there lived a man called Anselm, who used several times
an hour to stamp his foot and cry out: “I _must_ be rich! I _must_ be
rich!” He was married to the most beautiful woman he had ever seen, and,
since he had enough to eat and a weatherproof house, and had neither
aches nor pains, he should have been happy for 365 days in each year.
But his unceasing longing for great wealth spoilt everything, and even
on fine days he went about looking as discontented as though he were
hungry.

As for his wife, Jasmine, she had long red-gold hair and great green
eyes set wide apart in her flower-like face, and she possessed a mirror
in which she could see her shimmering loveliness. So she ought to have
been very happy and very grateful. She was so beautiful that when she
walked abroad, men would lean far out of their windows to watch her pass
and then wonder why their own wives and daughters should look so much
like suet puddings.

But, though you will scarcely believe it, Jasmine was quite as
discontented as her husband, and pouted and sighed through the days.

For she, too, was consumed by this perpetual craving for riches. Whether
she had caught this uncomfortable sort of illness from her husband, or
whether she had given it to him, I do not know, but there they were both
wasting their youth, their beauty, and their love for one another, in
foolish, petulant longing.

Whenever Jasmine saw other women clad in rich raiment and adorned with
jewels, envy would blight her loveliness as frost blights a flower.

“Of what use is my beauty if I cannot adorn it?” she cried. “I _must_
have pearls—ropes of pearls, crowns of glittering diamonds, emeralds,
rubies, and sapphires!”

“Yes,” said Anselm, “and I must have a hundred horses, a thousand
slaves, and fountains that spout forth wines!”

One day, as Jasmine walked sadly through a deep, dark forest she
suddenly saw a very strange looking house moving slowly towards her. The
roof of the house was most beautifully thatched with brightly-coloured
feathers, and across its face in rainbow letters ran the queer
inscription:

                           THE BARGAIN HOUSE

                  MONEY FOR SALE.      ENQUIRE WITHIN.

“Money for sale?” read the wondering Jasmine. “What can this mean? Some
foolish jest, no doubt.”

Three times the house sped round her; then it quivered and stood still.
She stared at the glass door that held a myriad reflections of herself.
As though her gaze had power to push, it slowly opened. She now saw into
a vast hall, and heard a gentle but compelling voice say: “Come in.”
Trembling, Jasmine walked through the door. The light was dim and
flickering as though from a fire, but no fireplace could be seen. Across
the whole length of the hall ran a counter, such as you see in large
shops, and behind this counter there rose up a wall made of rows of
boxes piled high the one upon the other, and on these boxes were rainbow
letters and figures. Between the boxes and the counter there stood a
tall, sweetly-smiling woman, whose face, though unrecognisable, seemed
somehow familiar to Jasmine.

“I was expecting you, beautiful Jasmine,” spoke the stranger in a voice
that was soft but decided, like the fall of snow. “You would buy money,
would you not?”

“Can one buy money?” faltered Jasmine. “Save _with_ money, and, alas! I
have none.”

“Though you were penniless, yet from me you could purchase boundless
wealth,” replied the stranger. “Behold, a purse,” she continued, holding
up a red-tasselled bag, “which, spend as you may, will always contain
one thousand golden guineas. This purse is yours if in exchange you will
give me one part of yourself.”

“A part of myself?” gasped the astonished Jasmine. “What would you have?
My hair?”

“No,” smiled the woman. “Lovely as are your tresses, in time they would
grow again, and no one may own unlimited wealth and pay no price
therefor. Your beauty shall remain untouched. It is your Sense of Humour
that I require.”

“My Sense of Humour?” laughed Jasmine. “Is that all? Just that part of
me which makes me laugh? Humour? What was it my mother used to call
Humour? I remember—she said it was Man’s consolation sent to him by God
in sign of peace. God’s rainbow in our minds. But with boundless wealth
what need of consolation shall I have? Besides, I have often been told I
had but little Sense of Humour. The more gladly will I give it to you.
The purse, I pray,” and Jasmine held out both her trembling hands.

“Stay a while,” said the solemn, smiling woman. “I must warn you of two
conditions. First, I would have you know, the money this purse yields
can be spent only upon yourself. Would you still have it?”

“Yes! Yes! Yes!” clamoured Jasmine.

“I must also tell you that should you ever repent of your bargain and
wish to buy back the precious sense you sell, it will, alas, not be in
my power to help you. I can never buy back from the person to whom I
have sold. The only chance of recovering your Sense of Humour is, that
another customer, unasked by you, should buy it back with a similar
purse, and I warn you that it may be hard to find anyone willing to give
up boundless wealth for the sake of your laughter.”

“What matter?” exclaimed Jasmine. “Never, never shall I wish to return
my purse.”

“You are determined?” asked the strange saleswoman.

“Yes, yes, yes!”

“Hold out your arms, then.”

Eagerly Jasmine stretched out her arms.

The smiling woman touched her on both her funny-bones, drew forth her
Sense of Humour, laid it away in a box, on which she wrote Jasmine’s
name, and the date, and then placed it on a shelf between two other
boxes.

“Now it is mine, until redeemed by the return of a purse, fellow to this
that I give thee,” said the woman, handing the tasselled red bag to
Jasmine. “And while it is in my careful keeping, this despised sense of
yours will grow and grow. Farewell, Jasmine. Leave me now and go forth
into a bleak world.”

Clasping the marvellous purse to her heart, Jasmine fled from the house
and hastened through the deep, dark forest till she reached the city. At
once she went to the great jewel-merchants, against whose windows she
had often pressed her face in wistful longing.

“I want the biggest pearl necklace you have got,” she cried,
breathlessly bursting into the gorgeous showroom.

“I’m afraid goods of such value can only be supplied in exchange for
ready money,” said the merchant with an uncivil smile.

“How much?” asked Jasmine.

[Illustration]

“Seven thousand guineas.”

Jasmine opened the purse and holding it upside down, shook it.
Glittering guineas poured out in a golden stream, but the purse remained
just as full as before.

As the clinking coins bounded and rolled the merchant’s eyes grew
rounder and rounder, and he had to shout for six small black slaves to
come to help him to count the money, now lying scattered all over his
shop. With the lowest bow he had ever bowed he handed the long rope of
glistening pearls to Jasmine. Feverishly she clasped them round her
throat, where they scarcely showed against the whiteness of her skin.
They reached down to her knees.

“Now some emerald ear-rings, a crown of diamonds, ten ruby bracelets for
each arm, and all the opals you possess!” ordered Jasmine, scattering
guineas as she spoke, and putting on all the jewels as fast as they were
produced.

At last she went away, hung with jewels as a Christmas tree is hung with
ornaments. Proud as a peacock she strutted through the streets, and
everyone laughed at the absurd sight of so many gaudy ornaments crowded
on to one ordinary-sized woman. She heard titters and wondered what
might be the cause of the laughter.

She now went to the grandest Fashion House in the city, ordered one
thousand costly garments, and came out wearing the richest raiment she
had found in stock. Next she bought a most magnificent coach, made of
mother o’ pearl, and sixteen piebald horses to draw it; and then she
engaged an enormous coachman with a face gilt to match his golden
livery.

On her way home she stopped at seven merchants to buy all manner of rare
and costly foods, and before long the great coach was crammed with
dainties. In it were piled every fruit and vegetable that happened to be
then out of season, bottles of wonderful wine, jars of caviare, pots of
roseleaf jam, tiny birds in aspic, and sugar plums of every colour. Last
of all—because it looked so grand and expensive—she bought an immense
wedding-cake, sixteen stories high. The confectioners laughed. They
seemed to think it funny that she should buy the wedding-cake. She
wondered why they were amused.

When Anselm saw his wife stagger into the room, swaying beneath the
weight of so many gaudy jewels, thinking them to be all sham and worn in
jest, he burst into a great roar of laughter.

Annoyed at his merriment, Jasmine told him breathlessly of the
marvellous purse. Her husband laughed and laughed, partly at her story,
partly at her absurd appearance. He laughed until he got hiccoughs.

“Oh, how funny! How funny! What has come over you?” he cried, rolling on
the floor.

“This is no jest, Anselm, I swear; it is the solemn truth. Just look
inside and you will see all the golden coins.”

Incredulously Anselm peered into the bulging purse. He rubbed his eyes.
Slowly his unbelief gave way to amazed joy.

“Praise be to God!” he cried at last. “We’re rich, rich, rich beyond the
dreams of man. Give it to me that I may go and buy gorgeous apparel,
fine horses, and rarest wines.” Feverishly he snatched the purse from
his wife’s hand.

“What’s this?” he cried. “I knew it was some trickery. Your precious
purse is as empty as an egg that has been eaten.” And in truth, the
tasselled bag now dangled from his hand flat and light as a leaf.

“Oh!” screamed Jasmine, in dismay, “give it back to me!” No sooner had
she touched the purse than once more it became rounded and heavy with
the weight of a thousand guineas.

“Praise be to God!” she sighed. “I remember now. The woman from whom I
bought it warned me that the guineas were only for my own use.”

“Tut, tut, that’s very troublesome,” said Anselm ruefully. “But what
matter? You will be able to buy gifts for me. It will come to the same
thing. But, wife, what mean you when you say you _bought_ the purse?
With what can one buy money?”

Jasmine told him of the weird house, the mysterious saleswoman and the
strange bargain she had driven.

“Your Sense of Humour?” cried Anselm. “_Your_ Sense of Humour! Well, she
didn’t get much for her money, did she? Ha! ha! ha!”

With grave eyes Jasmine stared at her husband, offended at his display
of merriment.

Then she said: “You little guess what a banquet I have prepared for you.
Come now and I will show you how I have ransacked the city for its
choicest dainties. Let us now feast.” Together they entered the
dining-hall and at sight of the gorgeous banquet spread before them
Anselm smacked his lips and promised himself great delight.

But bitter disappointment awaited him. For, no sooner did he touch the
iced grape-fruit with which he intended to begin his feast, than,
behold, it shrivelled in his hand, and became an empty rind. With an
oath he stretched out his hand to grasp a goblet of purple wine. It
broke in his hand, and of the rich vintage nothing remained but a stain
on the damask tablecloth.

“Alas!” cried Jasmine. “It seems that with the magic gold I may buy
nothing for your use!”

In truth, everything that poor Anselm touched, before it reached his
eager lips, disappeared like a bubble that has burst. In nothing that
had been purchased with the magic gold could he share. For him, all the
rich viands were spread in vain, and finally, he was obliged to fall
back on their accustomed fare of bread and cheese and last Friday’s
mutton.

“’Tis funny to watch one’s wife quaffing the wines one dreams of and to
be on prison-fare oneself,” laughed Anselm, trying to make the best of
things.

“Funny?” asked his wife. “Why is it funny? I think it is very sad. These
humming birds and this sparkling juice of the grape are most delicious.”

To keep up his spirits Anselm, who was famed for his wit, cracked many
jokes, but no smile ever lifted the corners of Jasmine’s perfect mouth;
no twinkle appeared in the depth of her great green eyes. Discouraged at
last, Anselm fell into silent sulks, whilst his wife continued to eat
and drink, until a stitch came in both her sides.

Days passed. Every evening, Jasmine, clad in new raiment and gorgeous
jewels, regaled herself with rich dainties.

“Alas, husband!” she cried one night, “I have no pleasure in feasting
that you cannot share.”

“In truth, this is no life!” angrily exclaimed Anselm. “To sit at a
banquet one may not taste with a wife who cannot see one’s jokes. I can
bear it no longer. Why should not I seek this strange woman and make the
same bargain? If husband and wife may not share their jokes, they must
at least share their dinner. Tell me quickly where I may find this
‘Bargain House.’”

Jasmine told her husband the way through the deep, dark forest, and
early the next morning he set forth in search of the mysterious
building. An hour’s walking brought him within sight of just such a
house as his wife had described. It moved nearer, sped three times
around him and then stood still. As he stared at it, the door slowly
opened, the gentle, commanding voice bade him enter, and there stood the
tall, smiling woman of his wife’s description.

“Good morning, Anselm,” she said, in the voice that was soft like the
fall of snow. “Would you have a purse that shall always bear a thousand
guineas?”

“Indeed I would!” cried Anselm. “Have you one for me?”

“Yes, if you consent to my terms.”

“What is it that you want? My Sense of Humour? Of what use is it to me
now? I will gladly part with it.”

“No,” said the woman. “’Tis not your Sense of Humour I require of you,
it is your Sense of Beauty.”

“Take what you will from me,” cried Anselm. “I care not so I have one of
those wondrous purses.”

“Listen first, Anselm,” said the woman, and solemnly, as she had warned
Jasmine, so she warned him that the magic money could be spent on none
save himself, and that the sense he sold could be bought back only by
the owner of such another purse.

“Remember, you can never reclaim it yourself,” she repeated.

“I care not! I care not!” exclaimed Anselm. “Quick, the purse!”

“Come hither,” said the woman, “and close your eyes.” Gently she touched
him on both eyelids, and drew forth his Sense of Beauty. Then she handed
him a red-tasselled bag exactly the same as Jasmine’s and as heavy with
golden guineas.

“Now farewell, Anselm. Go forth into a bleak world.”

Wild with joy and excitement, Anselm dashed from the Bargain House and
hastened through the deep, dark forest to that part of the city where
dwelt the grandest merchants. Here he bought gorgeous apparel, costly
wines, and magnificent horses. Astride the finest of the horses, a
gleaming chestnut, said to be the swiftest steed alive, he then rode
home through the forest. As he went, he met an old man clad in wretched
rags, who looked very hungry and tired. Feeling pleased with life Anselm
plunged his hand into the magic purse, and, drawing forth a golden
guinea, flung it at the poor man, who joyfully stooped to pick it up.
But no sooner had his hand touched the coin than it vanished. Anselm
remembered the woman’s warning.

[Illustration: “ANSELM DREW FORTH A GOLDEN GUINEA”]

“Sorry, my good fellow,” he said, shamefacedly handing the beggar two
coppers—all that he could find in his old purse.

“Thanks, noble master. Now I can buy bread for my supper. I never
thought to eat to-night.”

“For one who sups on dry bread you look strangely cheerful,” said
Anselm. “At what can you rejoice?”

“’Tis the beauty of the sunset, master. It seems to warm my heart. Never
have I seen one like to it in glory. Who could look and not be
comforted?”

And, in truth, a radiant smile lit up the old man’s suffering face as he
gazed on the flaming splendours of the western sky. Anselm turned and
looked where the beggar pointed, but he could see nothing that seemed
worth the turning of the head, and with a shrug of the shoulders he rode
home.

Now Jasmine, rejoicing that Anselm would share her feasting, arrayed
herself that she might look her fairest for their banquet. She brushed
her red-gold hair until it shone, and gazed at herself in the mirror
until her beauty glowed. Then she attired herself in a dress of
dragon-flies’ wings, covered all over with hearts made of tiny little
diamonds like dewdrops.

“Never, never have I looked so fair. When Anselm sees me he will love me
more than ever. How joyfully we shall feast together, and how glad am I
that he will no longer want me to laugh at the things he says! I shall
love him far more without his Sense of Humour.”

Her heart beat as she heard footsteps hastening up the stairs. Radiant
with excitement in burst Anselm. “I’m rich!” he cried. “Rich! rich!
Rejoice with me, Jasmine.”

Grey disappointment crushed into Jasmine’s heart, for not one word did
her husband say of her especial beauty or her wonderful dress.

“There’s nothing like wealth!” he cried. “How did we ever endure our
poverty? And fancy, I met a beggar-man, who said he was cheerful because
he looked at the sunset! Ha! ha! ha!”

“Why do you laugh, Anselm? Have you then not sold your Sense of Humour?
How came you then by that purse?”

“No. I may still laugh. I have but parted with my Sense of Beauty.”

“Your Sense of Beauty?” echoed Jasmine, icy fear entering her heart. “Is
that why your eyes no longer seek my face?”

“Why ever do you look so doleful?” laughed Anselm. “Let us hasten down
and feast. My lips thirst for the wines I have bought.”

Trembling, Jasmine pleaded: “Look on my face, husband, the face you have
so often called your glory. What think you of my face to-night?”

“Your face? Let me look. It seems all right: two eyes, one nose, one
mouth. Yes, it seems just as other faces are.”

It was with a sad heart poor Jasmine sat at the feast that night. Loving
her husband, she rejoiced to see him revel, but that he should no longer
gaze at her with the admiration which had been her delight was pain past
bearing. Anselm enjoyed his feasting, but the wine made jokes rise in
his mind, to flutter from his lips, and it vexed him that no smile ever
widened his wife’s mouth, set for ever in still solemnity.

Days, weeks, months passed. Anselm and Jasmine now lived in a gorgeous
palace. They were clad in the finest raiment and they feasted like
emperors, but in their hearts all was becoming as dust and ashes.

“Ah me!” sighed Jasmine. “I know now why it was that I longed for
wealth. It was that I might add to my beauty and see even more
admiration in my beloved’s eyes. Of what use to me are my gorgeous
gowns, my jewels, my flower-like face, since Anselm no longer delights
to see me.”

And for Anselm the pleasures of feasting and luxurious living soon
palled. His wife could not laugh at his jokes, and in the wide world
there was nothing for him to admire. Neither sunsets, nor courage, nor
self-sacrifice. He could see no beauty in any face, thought or action.
Lost to him were the delights of Poetry and all the loveliness of
Nature.

“What is there in life,” he cried, “but feasting and laughter? If only
Jasmine could join with me in mocking at the absurdities of Man!”

Desperately he strove to restore laughter to his mirthless wife. He
engaged a thousand jesters and promised a fortune to him who should make
her laugh. Everything human beings consider funny was shown to her.
Orange peel was plentifully scattered outside the palace windows, and
aged men encouraged to walk past, that they might step on the orange
peel and fall. Then, by means of huge bellows purposely placed, their
hats were blown from off their heads, in the hope that Jasmine would
smile to see the poor old fellows vainly chasing their own headgear. But
all in vain. Nothing amused Jasmine, neither physical misfortune nor the
finest wit. Her mouth remained set. Daily Anselm laughed louder and
longer, but into his laughter an ugly bitterness had come. It was now
the laughter of mockery, no longer softened by admiration.

During that summer a child was born to Jasmine. For years she had longed
for a baby, but now that the funny little creature squirmed in her arms,
yawning, and making faces, she thought it merely ugly and turned from it
in disgust.

A few months later the coachman’s wife gave birth to a baby, and Jasmine
went to visit her. She found her by the fire, nursing a red, hairless,
wrinkled daughter that seemed to Jasmine the ugliest morsel in all the
world. In speechless horror she stared at it. Opening wide its shapeless
mouth, the baby stretched its tiny arms and gave a great yawn. With a
joyful laugh, the mother clutched it to her heart. “Oh, you darling,
darling!” she cried. “Could anyone not love anything so _funny_?”

“Is Love then born of Laughter?” cried poor Jasmine, and, full of bitter
envy, she rushed from the room.

That same year a terrible war was waged and thousands of soldiers went
forth to die. One day, Jasmine gazed out of the window. Brave music was
playing, and with colours flying, a gallant host of youths marched past,
their weeping mothers and sweethearts waving farewell.

“A disgusting sight, is it not?” said Anselm. “All these boys striding
off to be killed simply because their foolish kings have quarrelled!”

“Yes,” replied Jasmine, her eyes full of tears. “But beautiful, too.”

“Beautiful?” jeered her husband with a harsh, discordant laugh. “You
fool! What beauty can there be in senseless sacrifice?” And, as now
often happened, these two fell into loud and bitter wrangling.

Thus daily life became more and more unbearable to Anselm and Jasmine.
In spite of all their wealth, boredom pressed heavily upon them. Since
she could not laugh, and he could not admire, to both the world seemed
full of senseless suffering.

“I can no longer bear this life,” said Jasmine, one day. “Of what use is
the beauty to which Anselm is blind? I will seek the Bargain House and
buy back the Sense he sold. He will still have his purse with which to
buy the luxuries he loves.” And forth she went into the deep, dark
forest.

An hour later, Anselm exclaimed:

“I can no longer bear this life. I will buy back Jasmine’s humour that
at least we may together mock at this senseless life. She will still
have her purse to buy the fineries she loves.” And forth he went into
the deep, dark forest.

That evening Jasmine returned without her magic purse, rejoicing that
her husband would once more delight in her beauty. She went to say good
night to her little son, who lay in his cot, struggling to draw his tiny
toes up into his mouth. The window was open. Suddenly he stretched forth
his arms towards the shining moon. It looked so good to suck; he longed
to grasp it. He struggled and bubbled and clutched, his crinkled face
growing crimson with effort. How funny he looked! Suddenly, Jasmine
found herself laughing—laughing—laughing until her whole body shook, and
happy peals broke through her astonished lips. “Oh, you darling, darling
little joke,” she cried, joyfully kissing her child.

At that moment in rushed Anselm, and stood transfixed at the dazzling
beauty of his wife.

“Jasmine, Jasmine,” he cried, “what has happened. Why are you so
dazzlingly beautiful?”

“Because I have no longer a magic purse. I have bought you back your
Sense, husband.”

“You too?” cried Anselm; “and I have bought back your laughter.”

“Then we are both poor! Oh, how funny!” cried Jasmine, her laughter
growing louder and louder as they fell into one another’s arms.

Thus Anselm and Jasmine parted with their magic purses, and had to work
for their daily bread, but they lived happily ever afterwards in a world
that was blessedly beautiful and blessedly funny.




[Illustration]

             The Joyous Ballad of the Parson and the Badger

                                                           HENRY NEWBOLT


      Not far from Guildford town there lies
          A house called Orange Grove,
      And there his trade a Parson plies,
          Whom all good people love.

            Sing up, sing down, for Guildford town,
                And sing for the Parson too!
            I’ll wager a penny you’ll never find any
                That’s more of a sportsman true.

      A neighbour came in haste one day
          With a piteous tale to tell,
      But “A badger, a badger,” was all he could say,
          When they answered the front door bell.

            Sing in, sing out, there’s a badger about,
                Send word to the County Police.
            He’s playing the dickens with all the spring chickens,
                And gobbling up the geese.

      Forth to the fray the Parson goes
          Beneath the midnight sky,
      He threads the wood on the tip of his toes
          And he climbs a fir-tree high.

            Sing never a word, it’s quite absurd
                To expect a badger to come
            And sit to be shot like a bottle or pot
                To the sound of an idiot’s hum!

      The clock has struck both twelve and one,
          His eyes are heavy as lead,
      He heartily wishes the deed were done
          And himself at home in bed.

            Sing ho! Sing hey! the badger’s away,
                The Parson’s up the tree:
            It’s horribly damp and he’s got the cramp
                And there’s nothing at all to see.

      The clock struck two, and then half-past,
          The day began to break;
      The badger came back to his earth at last
          And found our friend awake.

            Sing boom and bang! the welkin rang,
                The Parson, “Hurrah!” he cried:
            The badger lay there with his legs in the air
                And an ounce of shot inside.

      Happy at heart, though in pitiful plight,
          The victor crawled away;
      He slept the sleep of the just all night
          And half of the following day.

            Sing loud and strong, sing all day long,
                Sing Yoicks! and Hullabaloo!
            But I’ve had enough of this doggerel stuff
                And so, I should think, have you!

[Illustration: “HE CLIMBED A FIR-TREE HIGH”]




[Illustration]

                                To Enid
                             who acted the
                                  Cat
                          in private Pantomime

                                                        G. K. CHESTERTON


              Though cats and birds be hardly friends,
                  We doubt the Maeterlinckian word
              That must dishonour the White Cat,
                  Even to honour the Blue Bird.

              And if once more in later days
                  His baseless charge the Belgian brings,
              Great ghosts shall rise to vindicate
                  The right of cats to look at kings.

              The Lord of Carabas shall come
                  In gold and ermine, silk and furs,
              To tell of that immortal cat
                  That wore its boots and won its spurs.

[Illustration]

                THE LORD OF CARABAS SHALL COME
                  IN GOLD AND ERMINE, SILK AND FURS,
                TO TELL OF THAT IMMORTAL CAT
                  THAT WORE ITS BOOTS AND WON ITS SPURS

               Great Whittington shall show again
                   The state that London lends her Lord,
               Where the great golden griffins bear
                   The blazon of the Cross and Sword.

               And hear the ancient bells anew,
                   And talk and not ignobly brag
               What glorious fortunes followed when
                   He let the cat out of the bag.

               And Gray shall leave the graves of Stoke
                   To weep over a gold-fish bowl—
               Cowper, who, beaming at his cat,
                   Forgot the shadow on his soul.

               Then shall I rise and name aloud
                   The nicest cat I ever knew,
               And make the fairy fancies pale
                   With half a hundred tales of you:

               Till Pasht upon his granite throne
                   Glare with green eyes to hear the news
               Jealous; and even Puss in Boots
                   Will wish that he were in your shoes.

               When I shall pledge in saucers full
                   Of milk, on which the kitten thrives,
               Feline felicities to you
                   And nine extremely prosperous lives.




                    Scenes in the Life of a Princess

                                                         CHARLES WHIBLEY


                               _Ashridge_

When Queen Mary was persuaded, falsely, that her throne could be made
safe only by the death of her sister, then but eighteen years old, the
Princess Elizabeth lay sick at Ashridge. One spring morning, as she
tossed abed, ’twixt sleeping and waking, in the weariness of fever, she
heard in the courtyard beneath her window the tramp of men, the clatter
of horses’ hoofs. Her affrighted servants brought her word that a guard
of two hundred and fifty horsemen attended the Lords, who came with
messages from the Queen, a guard larger than enough to keep watch over
so frail a Princess. The house being thus begirt, Lord Thame and his
companions, thrust their way into the presence of the Princess. To her
demand that if not for courtesy, yet for modesty’s sake, they should put
off the delivery of their message till the morrow, they answered that
their commission was to bring her to London, alive or dead.

“A sore commission,” said the Princess, but a commission not to be
gainsaid. And the Queen’s doctors showed her little pity. She might be
removed, said they, not without danger, yet without death.

So on the morrow, the sad cavalcade set forth. The Princess, that she
might be the more darkly shielded from the public gaze, was borne in the
Queen’s own litter, which she presently bade to be opened, and thus she
made her progress to Whitehall in the full view of the people. It was a
tedious and a painful journey. From Ashridge, by St. Alban’s, she came
to South Mymms, where again she rested her weary body, and not until
four suns had set did she reach the inhospitable Court of Mary, her
Queen and her sister.


                              _Whitehall_

When she came to Whitehall, she was still a prisoner. It was as though
she carried her dungeon with her. Whitehall was less kind even than the
white high road, where at least she had found solace in the pity of the
humble folk, who wept as she passed, and offered prayers for her safety.
Fourteen days she spent in unfriended seclusion, with “no comfort but
her innocence, no companion but her book.” Not for her the freedom of
the open air, the chatter of tongues, the laughter of friends. Her
oft-repeated request to see her sister fell upon the deaf ears of her
jailers. A princess of less courage would have quailed before the
ill-omened silence which enwrapped her. And how could she hope to regain
the Queen’s affection, so long as the cunning servants of the Emperor
and the King of France, Renard and Noailles, were there to distil the
poison of hate and dread in Queen Mary’s ear?

Knowing well that her foes were the Queen’s friends, her friends the
Queen’s foes, she was still of a stout heart. When Gardiner, the Bishop
of Winchester, resolute to entrap her, urged her to confess and to
submit herself to the Queen’s Majesty, “submission,” said she proudly,
“confessed a crime, and pardon belonged to a delinquent.” For her part
she had no crime to confess, and she asked no pardon. So for her
temerity she was told that two hundred Northern Whitecoats should guard
her lodging that night, and that in the morn she should be secretly
conveyed to the Tower, without her household, there to be kept a close
prisoner.


                              _The Tower_

It was a Palm Sunday when she set forth, under a guard, to that place of
ill-omen, the Tower of London. Hers was no triumphal progress; neither
palm nor willow was carried in her honour. And well might she dread the
journey, which she was forced to make. Within the dark walls of the
Tower her mother had laid her fair head down upon the block; and what
cause had she to hope for a happier destiny? As she left Whitehall, to
her a place of durance, she looked up to the window of the Queen’s
bedchamber, hoping there to see some mark of favour, some signal of
affection. The hope was vain, and in cold despair she came to the
Stairs, where the barges awaited her. When she reached the Tower, she
was bidden to enter at the Traitor’s Gate, which at first she refused,
and then stepping short so that her foot fell into the water, she spake
these words to her obdurate jailer:

“Here landeth as true a subject, being prisoner, as ever landed at these
stairs, since Julius Cæsar laid the first foundations of the Tower.”

The Constable, a wry-faced ruffian, lurched forth savagely to receive
her, and in a harsh voice told her that he would show her her lodging.
Then she, being faint, “sat down,” we are told, “upon a fair stone, at
which time there fell a great shower of rain: the heavens themselves did
seem to weep at such inhuman usage.”

[Illustration:

  SCENES IN THE LIFE OF A PRINCESS

  “They answered that their commission was to bring her to London, alive
    or dead.”
]

  _Drawn for “The Flying Carpet”
          by H. M. Brock_

Presently she was locked and bolted in the Tower; her own servants were
taken from her; to open her casement, that she might enjoy the fresh air
of heaven, to walk in the garden—these were pleasures denied her. One
sole thing was constantly demanded of her, that she should confess
herself a rebel and submit herself to the Queen. Nobly did she refuse,
and was left to silence and her own proud thoughts.


                            _Hampton Court_

She changed her prison, and kept unchanged her high courage. From the
Tower she was carried to Woodstock. But what mattered it where the
dungeon lay? The locks and bolts were no more easily burst asunder at
Woodstock than at the Tower. And then of a sudden her keeper was bidden
to bring her to Hampton Court, not as a free Princess, but as a guarded
malefactor. At Colnbrook, where on the way she sojourned at the sign of
the George, certain gentlemen, devoted to her service, came to do her
homage. Instantly, at the Queen’s command, they were sent about their
business, and the Princess was bidden to enter Hampton Court, without an
escort, and by the back gate, like the humblest menial. Again for many
days she was left solitary and in silence, when she was summoned one
night into the presence of the Queen, her sister, whose heavy hand she
had felt unceasingly, whose face she had not seen for two long years.
The Queen, sitting on her chair of State, took up her promise of loyalty
sharply and shortly.

“Then you will not confess yourself,” said she, “to be a delinquent, I
see, but stand peremptorily upon your truth and innocence; I pray God
they may so fall out.”

To which the Princess replied: “If not, I neither require favour nor
pardon at your Majesty’s hands.”

“Well,” said the Queen, “then you stand so stiffly upon your faith and
loyalty, that you suppose yourself to have been wrongfully punished and
imprisoned.”

“I cannot,” replied the Princess, “nor must not say so to you.”

“Why then belike,” retorted the Queen, “you will report it to others.”

“Not so,” said the Princess. “I have borne and must bear the burden
myself.”

The two sisters never met again, but the Princess’s courage in facing
her fate was not in vain. Thenceforth she was eased of her imprisonment,
and went to Ashridge in free custody, where she remained at her
pleasure, until Queen Mary’s death.


                      _A Progress through London_

In 1558 the Queen died, and the Princess Elizabeth, justified of her
patience and her courage, was proclaimed Queen of England. In the loyal
enthusiasm of her subjects, who had long since acclaimed her in their
hearts, the years of solitude and imprisonment were forgotten. To the
Tower, which she had left a captive, she returned a monarch, and passed
in triumph through her City of London to Westminster. Everywhere she was
welcomed by pageants and loyal discourse, until she came to the famous
Abbey where she was crowned, to the contentment of her loyal lieges and
to the honour and glory of her realm.




                         Neil and Tintinnabulum

                        AN INTERLUDE FOR PARENTS

                                                         BY J. M. BARRIE


                            1. _Early Days_

In writing a story a safe plan must be to imitate your favourite author.
Until he was nine, when he abandoned the calling, Neil was my favourite
author, and I therefore decide to follow his method of dividing the
story into short chapters so as to make it look longer.

When he was nine I took him to his preparatory, he prancing in the
glories of the unknown until the hour came for me to go, “the hour
between the dog and the wolf,” and then he was afraid. I said that in
the holidays all would be just as it had been before, but the newly-wise
one shook his head; and on my return home, when I wandered out unmanned
to look at his tool-shed, I found these smashing words in his writing
pinned to the door:

             THIS ESTABLISHMENT IS NOW PERMANENTLY CLOSED.

I went white as I saw that Neil already understood life better than I
did.

Soon again he was on the wing. Here is interesting autobiographical
matter I culled years later from the fly-leaf of his _Cæsar_: “Aetat 12,
height 4 ft. 11, biceps 8¼, kicks the beam at 6-2.”

The reference is to a great occasion when Neil stripped at his
preparatory (clandestinely) for a Belt with the word “Bruiser” on it. I
am reluctant to boast about him (this is untrue), yet must mention that
he won the belt, with which (such are the ups and downs of life) he was
that same evening gently belted by his preceptor.

It is but fair to Neil to add that he cut a glittering figure in those
circles: captain of the footer, and twenty-six against Juddy’s.

“And even then,” his telegram to me said, “I was only bowled off my
pads.”

A rural cricket match in buttercup time with boys at play, seen and
heard through the trees; it is surely the loveliest scene in England and
the most disarming sound. From the ranks of the unseen dead, for ever
passing along our country lanes on their eternal journey, the Englishman
falls out for a moment to look over the gate of the cricket field and
smile. Let Neil’s 26 against Juddy’s, the first and perhaps the only
time he is to meet the stars on equal terms, be our last sight of him as
a child. He is walking back bat in hand to the pavilion, an old railway
carriage. An unearthly glory has swept over the cricket ground. He tries
to look unaware of it; you know the expression and the bursting heart.
Our smiling Englishman who cannot open the gate waits to make sure that
this boy raises his cap in the one right way (without quite touching it,
you remember), and then rejoins his comrades. Neil gathers up the glory
and tacks it over his bed. “The End,” as he used to say in his letters.

I never know him quite so well again. He seems henceforth to be running
to me on a road that is moving still more rapidly in the opposite
direction.


                          2. _The First Half_

The scene has changed. Stilled is the crow of Neil, for he is now but
one of the lowliest at a great public school, where he reverberates but
little. The scug Neil fearfully running errands for his fag-master is
another melancholy reminder of the brevity of human greatness.

Lately a Colossus he was now infinitely less than nothing. What shook
him was not the bump as he fell, but the general indifference to his
having fallen. He lay there like a bird in the grass winded by a
blunt-headed arrow, and was cold to his own touch. The Bruiser Belt and
his score against Juddy’s had accompanied him to school on their own
legs, one might say, so confident were they of a welcome from his
mantelshelf, but after an hour he hid them beneath the carpet. Hidden by
him all over that once alluring room, as in disgrace, were many other
sweet trifles that went to the making of the flame that had been Neil;
his laugh was secreted, say in the drawer of his desk; his pranks were
stuffed into his hat-box, his fell ambitions were folded away between
two pairs of trousers, and now and then a tear would mix with the soapy
water as he washed his cheerless face.

In that dreadful month or more I am dug up by his needs and come again
into prominence, gloating because he calls for me, sometimes unable to
do more than stand afar off on the playing field, so that he may at
least see me nigh though we cannot touch. The thrill of being the one
needed, which I had never thought to know again. I have leant over a
bridge, and enviously watching the gaiety of two attractive boys, now
broken to the ways of school, have wished he was one of them, till I
heard their language and wondered whether this was part of the necessary
cost.

Leaden-footed Neil in the groves that were to become so joyous to him.
He had to refashion himself on a harsher model, and he set his teeth and
won, blaming me a little for not having broken to him the ugly world we
can make it. One by one his hidden parts peeped out from their holes and
ran to him, once more to make his wings; stronger wings than of yore,
though some drops of dew had to be shaken off.

By that time my visits were being suffered rather than acclaimed. It was
done with an exquisite politeness certainly, but before I was out of
sight he had dived into some hilarious rumpus. Gladly for his sake I
knew my place.

His first distinct success was as a gargler.

[Illustration: “WE GENERALLY GARGLE A SONG”]

“You remember how I used to hate gargling at home,” says an early
letter, “and you forced me to do it. Jolly good thing you did force me.”
His first “jolly” at that school. At once I began to count them.

“Everyone has to gargle just now,” he continues, “and we all do it at
the same time, and it must sound awfully rum to people passing along the
street. We generally gargle a song, and there was a competition in
‘Home, sweet Home’ among the scugs at m’ tutor’s, and the judge said I
gargled it longest.”

Soon afterwards he had the exultation of being recognised as an entity
by one of the masters.

“I was walking with Dolman mi.,” his letter says, “and we met a new beak
called Tiverley and he pretended to fence with me and said ‘Whose
incomparable little noodle are you?’” This, apparently, was all that
happened, but Neil adds with obvious elation, “It was awfully decent of
him.” (Hail to thee, Tiverley, may “a house” anon be thy portion for
heartening a new boy in the dwindling belief that he exists.)

Dolman mi. evidently had no run on this occasion, but he is older and
more famous than Neil (which makes the thing the more flattering). It is
a school whither many royal scions are sent, and when camera men go down
to photograph the new one, Dolman mi. usually takes his place. He has
already been presented to newspaper readers as the heir to three
thrones. Of course it is the older boys who select, scrape and colour
him (if necessary) for this purpose, but they must see something in him
that the smaller boys don’t see.

Neil’s next step was almost a bound forward; he got a tanning from the
head of the house. This also he took in the proper spirit, boasting
indeed of the vigour with which Beverley had laid on. (Thee, also,
Beverley, I salute, as the Immensity who raised Neil from the ranks of
the lowly, the untanned.)

Quite the amiable, sensible little schoolboy, readers may be saying, but
that Neil was amiable or sensible I indignantly deny. He was merely
waiting; that shapely but enquiring nose of his was only considering how
best to strike once more for leadership. So when the time came he was
ready; and he has been striking ever since, indeed, there is nothing
that I think he so much resembles as a clock that has got out of hand.

All the other small boys in his house had the same opportunity, but they
missed it. It was provided by some learned man (name already tossed to
oblivion) who delivered unto them a lecture entitled _Help One Another_.
The others behaved in the usual way, cheered the lecturer heartily when
he took a drink of water, said “Silly old owl!” as they went out and at
once forgot his Message. Not so Neil. With the clearness of vision that
always comes to him when anything to his own advantage is toward, he saw
that the time and the place and the loved one (himself) had arrived
together. Portents in the sky revealed to him that his _métier_ at
school was to Help Others. There would be something sublime about it had
he not also seen with the same vividness that he must make a pecuniary
charge of threepence. He decided astutely to begin with W. W. Daly.

As we write these words an extraordinary change comes over our
narrative. In the dead silence that follows this announcement to our
readers you may hear, if you listen intently, a scurrying of feet, which
is nothing less than Neil being chased out of the story. The situation
is one probably unparalleled in fiction.


                           3. _Tintinnabulum_

Elated by your curiosity we now leave Neil for a moment (say, searching
with his foot for a clean shirt among a pile of clothing on the floor),
mount to the next landing and enter the second room on the left, the
tenant of which immediately dives beneath his table under the impression
that we are a fag-master shouting “Boy.” We drag him out and present him
to you as W. W. Daly. He is five feet one, biceps 7¾, and would probably
kick the beam at about 6½ stone. He is not yet celebrated for anything
except for being able to stick pins into his arm up to the head;
otherwise a creature of small account who, but for Neil’s patronage,
would never have risen to the distinction of being written about, except
perhaps by his mother.

W. W.’s first contact with school was made dark by a strange infirmity,
an incapacity to remember the Latin equivalent for the word “bell.” Many
Latin words were as familiar to him as his socks (perhaps even more so,
for he often wears the socks of others), and those words he would give
you on demand with the brightness of a boy eager to oblige; but daily
did his tutor insist (like one who will have nothing for breakfast but
eggs and bacon) on having “bell” alone. Daily was W. W. floored.

It is now that Neil appears with his sunny offer of Help. He took up the
case so warmly that he entirely neglected his own studies, which is one
of his failings. True he charged threepence (which we shall henceforth
write as 3_d._, as it is so sure to come often into these chronicles),
but this detracts little from his grandeur, for the mere apparatus
required cost him what he calls a bob.

His first procedure was to affix to the bell-pull a card bearing in bold
letters the device “Tintinnabulum.” This seems simple but was
complicated by there being no bell in W. W.’s room. Neil bought a bell
(W. W. being “stony”), and round the walls he constructed a gigantic
contrivance of wire and empty ginger-beer bottles, culminating at one
end in the bell and at the other end in W. W.’s foot as he lay abed. The
calculation, a well-founded one, was that if the sleeper tossed
restlessly the bell would ring and he would awake. He was then, as
instructed by Neil, first, to lie still but as alert as if visited by a
ghost, and to think hard for the word. If, however, it still eluded him
he was to turn upon it the electric torch, kept beneath his pillow for
this purpose and borrowed at 1_d._ per week from Dolman mi., spot the
tricky “Tintinnabulum” in its lair and say the word over to himself a
number of times before returning to his slumbers, something attempted,
something done to earn a night’s repose.

All this did W. W. conscientiously do, and if there was delay in
bringing Tintinnabulum to heel the fault was not that of Neil, but
of inferior youths who used to substitute cards inscribed
“Honorificabilitudinitatibus,” “Porringer,” “Xylobalsamum,”
“Beelzebobulus,” and other likely words.

Eventually he achieved; a hard-won ribbon for his benefactor whom we are
about to call Neil for the last time.

There was a feeling among those who had betted on the result that it
should be celebrated in no uncertain manner, and a dinner with speeches
not being feasible (though undoubtedly he would have liked it), he was
re-christened Tintinnabulum, and the name stuck.

So Tintinnabulum let it be henceforth in these wandering pages. Neil the
disinherited may be pictured pattering back to me on his naked soles and
knocking me up in the night.

“Neil,” I cry (in dressing gown and a candle), “what has happened? Have
you run away from school?”

“Rather not,” says the plaintive ghost, shivering closer to the fire, “I
was kicked out.”

“By your tutor?” I ask blanching.

“No, by Tintinnabulum. He is becoming such a swell among the juniors
that he despises me and the old times. And now he has kicked me out.”

“Drink this hot milk, Neil, and tell me more. What are those articles
you are hugging beneath your pyjamas?”

“They are the Bruiser Belt and the score against Juddy’s. He threw them
out after me.”

“Don’t take it so much to heart, Neil. I’ll find an honoured place for
them here, and you and I will have many a cosy talk by the fire about
Tintinnabulum.”

“I don’t want to talk about him,” he says, his hands so cold that he
spills the milk, “I would rather talk about the days before there was
him.”

Well, perhaps that was what I meant.

Cruel Tintinnabulum.


                       4. _The Best Parlour Game_

Soon after the events described in our last chapter I knew from
Tintinnabulum’s letters that he was again Helping. They were
nevertheless communications so guarded as to be wrapped in mystery.

His letters from school tend at all times to be more full of instruction
for my guidance than of information about where he stands in his form. I
notice that he worries less than did an older generation about how I am
to dress when I visit him, but he is as pressing as ever that the postal
order should be despatched at once, and firmly refuses to write at all
unless I enclose stamped envelopes. On important occasions he even
writes my letters for me, requesting me to copy them carefully and not
to put in any words of my own, as when for some reason they have to be
shown to his tutor. He then writes, “Begin ‘Dear T.’ (not ‘Dearest T.’),
and end ‘Yours affec.’ (not ‘Yours affectionately’).”

The mysterious letters that preceded the holidays were concerned with W.
W. Daly, whom I was bidden (almost ordered) to invite to our home for
that lengthy period, “as his mother is to be away at that time on
frightfully important business in which I have a hand.”

I was instructed to write “Dear Mrs. Daly (not “dearest”), I understand
that you are to be away on important business during the holidays, and
so I have the pleasure to ask you to allow your son to spend the
holidays with me and my boy who is a general favourite and very
diligent. Come, come, I will take no refusal, and I am, Yours affec.”

I did as I was told, but as I now heard of the lady for the first time I
thought it wisest not to sign my letter to her “Yours affec.” Thus did I
fall a victim to Tintinnabulum’s wiles.

What could this frightfully important business of Mrs. Daly’s be in
which he “had a hand”?

[Illustration: “ON IMPORTANT OCCASIONS HE EVEN WRITES MY LETTERS FOR
ME.”]

You may say (when you hear of his dark design) that I should at once
have insisted on an explanation, but explanations are barred in the
sport that he and I play, which is the greatest of all parlour games,
the Game of Trying to Know Each Other without asking questions. It is
strictly a game for two, who, I suppose, should in perfect conditions be
husband and wife; it is played silently and it never lasts less than a
life-time. In panegyrics on love (a word never mentioned between us two
players), the game is usually held to have ended in a draw when they
understand each other so well that before the one speaks or acts the
other knows what he or she is going to say or do. This, however, is a
position never truly reached in the game, and if it were reached, such a
state of coma for the players could only be relieved by a cane in the
hand of the stronger, or by the other bolting, to show him that there
was one thing about her which he had still to learn.

No, no, these doited lovers when they think the haven is in sight have
set sail only. Tintinnabulum and I have made a hundred moves, but we are
well aware that we don’t know each other yet; at least, I don’t know
Tintinnabulum, I won’t swear that he does not think that he at last
knows me. So when he brought W. W. home with him for the holidays it was
for me to find out without inquiry how he had been helping Mrs. Daly
(and for what sum). He knew that I was cogitating, I could see his
impertinent face regarding me demurely, as if we were at a chess board
and his last move had puzzled me, which indeed was the situation.

All I knew of her was that she had lately remarried and that W. W. had
been invited to spend his holidays with us while she was away on her
honeymoon.

Good heavens, could Tintinnabulum have had some Helping part in the
lady’s marriage? This boy is beginning to scare me.

I studied him and W. W. at their meals and stole upon them at their
play. There could not have been more cherubic faces.

But then I remembered the two cherubic faces I had watched from a
bridge.


                    5. _Tintinnabulum Eats an Apple_

I went to Tintinnabulum’s bedchamber and told him I could not rest until
I knew what he had been doing to that lady. In the days of Neil it had
been a room of glamour, especially the bed therein, where were performed
nightly between 6.15 and 6.30 precisely, the brighter plays of
Shakespeare, two actors, but not a sign of them anywhere unless you
became suspicious of the hump in the coverlet. Never have the plays gone
with greater merriment since Mr. Shakespeare made up “A Midsummer
Night’s Dream” in his Judith’s hump.

No glamour of course in the room of a public schoolboy, unless it was
provided by his discarded raiment, which lay like islands on the floor.
However, I found Tintinnabulum in affable humour, sitting tailor-like in
bed, dressed in half of his pyjamas, reading a book and eating an apple.
He had doubtless found the apple or the book just as he was about to
enter the other half of his night attire.

“What could I have been doing to her?” he asked invitingly. (He likes to
be hunted.)

The robing of him having been completed, I said with humorous intent,
“You may have been luring her into matrimony against her better
judgment.”

“She is nuts on him,” Tintinnabulum said, taking my remark seriously.

“But you can’t have had anything to do with it?”

He nodded, with his teeth in the apple.

“Of course this is nonsense,” I said, though with a sinking, “you don’t
know her.”

“I didn’t need to know her for a thing like that.”

I tried sarcasm. “I should have thought it was essential.” He shook his
head.

“I heard W. W. say to-day,” I continued in the same vein, “that she is
spending the honeymoon on the Riviera; you are not implying, are you,
that it was you who sent her there?”

“At any rate, if it hadn’t been for me,” he replied, taking a good bite,
“she wouldn’t be on the Riviera and there wouldn’t be a honeymoon.”

I became alarmed. “Take that apple out of your mouth and tell me what
you mean.”

The mysterious boy of the so open countenance, as he told me the queer
tale in bed that night, was superbly unaware of its queerness, and was
more interested in standing on his head to see how far his feet would
reach up the wall. He far exceeded the record that had been left by
Neil.

“I wasn’t the one who made her fond of the chappie,” he said by way of
beginning. “She did that bit herself.”

“Very generous of you to give her that amount of choice,” I conceded.

“But she stuck there,” said he. “It was W. W. who told me how she had
stuck. W. W. has a sister called Patricia. Their mother’s name is
Mildred. That is all I know about her,” he added with great lightness of
touch, “except that I worked the marriage.”

This was the first time I had heard of W. W.’s having a sister.

“He doesn’t speak about her much,” Tintinnabulum explained, “because
they are twins. I say, don’t let on to him that I told you he was a
twin.”

So far as I can gather, W. W. keeps the existence of his girl twin dark
from boys in general in case it should make them think less of him.

“He didn’t ask me to help him out till things were in an awful mess at
home, and then he showed me some of Patricia’s letters.”

“If I were cross-examining you,” I pointed out, “I should say that your
statement is not quite clear. Tell the Jury what you mean, and don’t
blow the apple pits at the portrait of your uncle the bishop.”

“I bet you I get him in the calves twice in three shots,” he said.

“An ignoble ambition,” I told him; “answer my question.”

“Well, you see, Patricia had found out all about her mother’s being fond
of the man. His name begins with K, but I forget the rest of it.”

I ventured to say that the least he could do for a man whose life he had
so strangely altered was to remember his name.

“W. W. will know it,” he said with the carelessness of genius.

“Even now,” I pressed him, “I don’t see where you come in. Did Patricia
object to Mr. K.?”

“Oh, no, she thinks no end of him. So does W. W.” He added handsomely,
“I wouldn’t have let her get married if they had shied at it.”

“In that case——”

“It wasn’t Patricia that was the bother,” he explained, running the
apple up and down his arm like a mouse, “it was Mrs. Daly. You know how
funny ladies are about some things.”

“I do not,” I said severely.

“Well, it was about marrying a second time. Mrs. Daly couldn’t make up
her mind whether it would be fair to W. W. and Patricia. She knew they
liked him all right, but not whether they liked him as much as that.”

“Tell me how Patricia found all this out, and don’t bump about so much.”

“She was watching,” he replied airily. “She is that kind. I daresay the
thing wasn’t difficult to find out if all the stuff she said in her
letters to W. W. was true. They were awful letters, saying her mother
was in anguishes about what was the best thing to do for her progeny.
One letter would say, ‘Mr. K. made a lovely impression on mother to-day
and I don’t think she can resist much longer.’ Then the next would say,
‘I fear all is up, for they have been crying together in the
drawing-room, and when he left he banged the door.’”

“Their mother hadn’t a notion,” Tintinnabulum assured me, making an
eye-glass of the apple, “that they knew there was anything in the wind.”

“Nor would they have had any such notion,” I rapped out, “if they had
been children of an earlier date.”

“I suppose we are cleverer now,” he admitted. He became introspective.
“I expect the war did it. It’s rummy what a difference the war has made.
Before the war no one could hold two eggs in his mouth and hop across a
pole. Now everyone can do it.”

I requested him to stick to the point.

“Why didn’t Patricia the emancipated go to her mother and inform her
that all was well?”

“That is the very thing W. W. and she bickered about in their letters.
He was always writing to her to do that, but she said it would be
unladylike.”

“Very un-shingled of her to trouble about that,” I got in. “But had she
any proposal to make to W. W.?”

“Rather. She was always badgering W. W. to write to their mother saying
they knew all and wanted her to go at it blind. She thought it would
come better from him, being male. That was what made him come to me in
the end. He told me all about it and asked me if I could help.”

“And what was your reply?” I asked with some interest. “Don’t tell me,”
I added hurriedly (we were back at the game, you see), “I want to guess.
You said immediately, ‘All right’?”

He approved.

“Did it ever strike you,” I enquired curiously, “that you might not be
able to help?”

“I can’t remember,” the unfathomable one answered. “I say, would you
like to see me do a dive over your head?”

Offer declined.

“You see,” he continued, “W. W. is rather—rather——”

“Rather a retiring boy when there is trouble ahead,” I suggested. “Well,
what did you devise?”

“I said I couldn’t do anything until I knew the colour of Patricia’s
hair and eyes.”

This took me aback, though it is quite in Tintinnabulum’s manner.

“How could that help?” I had to enquire instead of risking a move.

“I couldn’t get a beginning,” he insisted doggedly, “till I found out
that.” (To this day I don’t know what he meant.)

“No difficulty in finding out from W. W.,” I said.

Here I was wrong. W. W. had no idea of the colour of his dear little
sister’s eyes but presumed that, as he and she were twins, their eyes
must be of the same hue. There followed a scene, undoubtedly worthy of
some supreme artist, in which, by the light of a match, Tintinnabulum
endeavoured to discover colour of W. W.’s eyes, W. W. being again unable
to supply desired information. The match always going out just as
Tintinnabulum was on the eve of discovery, it was decided by him that W.
W. should write to his twin for particulars (letter dictated by
Tintinnabulum). Patricia’s reply was, “Who is it that wants to know?
Eyes too expressive to be blue, too lovely to be grey,” and it irritated
the two seekers after truth.

“We didn’t ask her what colour they were not,” Tintinnabulum said to me
witheringly, “but what colour they were.”

In the end, rather than bother any more with her, they risked putting
her eyes down as browny black. This determined, Tintinnabulum apprized
his client that Patricia was to write the letter that would make their
mother happy. This nearly led to a rupture.

_W. W._ (_sitting_, as they say in the plays, though he might as well be
standing): She can’t write a letter to mother when they are living in
the same house.

_Tintinnabulum_ (_rising_, because W. W. sat): It would be a letter to
you.

_W. W._ (_contemptibly_): That brings me into the thing again.

_Tintinnabulum_: Shut up and listen. The letter isn’t to be posted. Your
mother will find it lying open on Patricia’s desk and read it on the
sly.

_W. W._ (_nobly_): My mother never does things on the sly.

_Tintinnabulum_ (_comprehensively_): Oh.

_W. W._ (_hedging_): What would the letter say?

_Tintinnabulum_: It would show her that you and Patricia knew what she
was after and both wanted her to marry the chappie, and then she could
put it back where she found it and never let on that she had seen it and
make all her arrangements with a happy heart.

_W. W._: That is what we want, but mother wouldn’t read a letter on the
sly.

_Tintinnabulum_ (_after thinking it out when he should have been doing
his prep._): Look here, if she is so fussy we can tell Patricia to leave
the letter open on the floor as if it had blown there, and then when
your mother picks it up to put it back on the desk she can’t help taking
a look at it.

_W. W._: Would that not be reading it on the sly?

_Tintinnabulum_ (_with cheerful cynicism_): Not for a woman.

_W. W._ (_depressed_): It will be an awfully difficult letter to write.

_Tintinnabulum_ (_exultant_): Fearfully.

_W. W._: I don’t think Patricia could do it.

_Tintinnabulum_: Not she. I’ll do it. Then you copy my letter and she
copies yours.

_W. W._: 3_d._?

_Tintinnabulum_: Tons more than that.

This scheme was carried out, Tintinnabulum, after a thoughtful study of
Patricia’s epistolary style, producing something in this manner, no
doubt with the holy look on his face that is always there when he knows
he is concocting a masterpiece. (I regret that he has forgotten what he
said in the introductory passage, which dealt in an artful feminine
manner with her garments and was probably a beauty.)


“Darling Doubly Doubly,

... oh dear, I am so unhappy because I fear the match between darlingest
mummy and Mr. K. is not to be hit off. Oh dear, she blows hot and cold
and it makes me bleed to see the poor man’s anguishes, and you and me
wanting it so much. If only I could think of a lady-like way to tell
mummy that we know she wants it and that we want her to go ahead, but I
cannot, and it would need a wonder of a man to do it. Oh dear, how
lovely it would be, oh dear, how I wish I knew some frightfully clever
person, oh dear——”


“I stopped there,” Tintinnabulum told me. “I meant to put in a lot more
before I finished, but I wouldn’t let myself go on.”

“Why?” I asked eagerly, aware that he had reached a great moment in his
life.

“Because,” he said heavily, “I saw all at once that I had come to the
end.” (We are so undemonstrative that I did not embrace him).

The letter was left as arranged, on Mrs. Daly’s floor, and I may say at
once that everything went as planned by the Master. Can we not see
Mildred (all authors have a right to call their heroine by her Christian
name), opening the door of that room? Her beautiful face is down-cast,
all the luckier for Tintinnabulum and Co., for she at once sees the
life-giving sheet. She picks it up, meaning to replace it on the desk
whence it has so obviously fluttered, when a word catches her eye, and
not intending to read she reads. An exquisite flush tints her face as
she recognises Patricia’s inimitable style. The happy woman is now best
left to herself (Come away, Tintinnabulum, you imp).

Dear (not dearest) heroine, you little know who is responsible for your
raptures, the indifferent lad now trying to twist one leg round his neck
as he finishes his apple. Grudge us not the few minutes in which for
literary purposes we have snatched you from the shores of the blue
Mediterranean. Thither we now return you to cloudless days and to your
K., roses in your cheeks (Tintinnabulum’s roses). And you, O lucky K.,
when you encounter boys of thirteen, might do worse than have a
mysterious prompting to give them a franc or so. I wish you both very
happy, and I am, yours affec.

“Shall I send them your love?” I almost hear myself saying to
Tintinnabulum.

“If you like,” he replies, preoccupied with what is left of an apple
when the apple itself has gone. For it must be admitted of him that he
has not boasted of his achievement. His only comment was modesty itself,
“Two bob,” he said.

It is almost appalling to reflect that no woman who knows Tintinnabulum
(and has two bob) need remain single. And what character apples have,
even when being consumed; if I had given him an orange or a pear this
chapter would be quite different. With such deep thoughts I put out his
light, and took away the other apple which he had hidden beneath his
pillow.


                              6. _Nemesis_

As the holidays waned (and after W. W. was safely stowed away in bed)
Tintinnabulum gratified me by being willing to talk about Neil. If you
had heard us at it you would have sworn that those two had no very close
connection, that Neil was merely some interesting whipper-snapper who
had played about the house until the manlier Tintinnabulum arrived. He
was always spoken of between us as Neil, which obviously suited
Tintinnabulum’s dignity, but I wonder how I took to it so naturally
myself. I hope I am not a queer one.

By that arrangement Tintinnabulum can make artful enquiries, not
unwistful, into his own past, and I can seem (thus goes the game) not to
know that he is doing so. He can even commend Neil.

“Pretty decent of him,” he says, discussing the Bruiser Belt and the
score against Juddy’s.

“I didn’t think he had it in him,” is even stronger about the sea-trout
Neil had landed and been so proud of that he would not lie prone till it
was put in a basin by his bedside. He had then slept with one arm over
the basin.

Strongest of all is to say that Neil was mad, at present a term not only
of approval but even of endearment at the only school that counts
(Tintinnabulum speaking). Sometimes we talk of the dark period when
Neil, weeping over his first Latin grammar, used to put a merry tune on
the gramophone to accompany his woe. He continued to weep as he studied,
but always rose at the right time to change the tune. This is a
heart-breaker of a memory to me, and Tintinnabulum knows it and puts his
hand deliciously on my shoulder (that kindest gesture of man to man).

“The gander must have been mad, quite mad,” he says hurriedly.

How Neil would like to hear Tintinnabulum saying these nice things about
him.

Perhaps we all have a Neil. Have you ever wakened suddenly in the night,
certain that you heard a bell ring as it once rang or a knocking on your
door as only one could knock or a voice of long ago, quite close?
Sometimes you rise and wander the house; more often, after waiting alert
for a repetition of the sound, you decide that you have been dreaming or
that it was the creaking of a window or a board. But I daresay it was
none of these things. I daresay it was your Neil.

Perhaps you have become something quite different from what he meant to
be. Perhaps he wants to get into the house, not to gaze proudly at you
but to strike you.

Some drop their Neil deliberately and can recall clearly the day of the
great decision, but most are unaware that he has gone. For instance, it
may have been Neil who married the lady and you who gradually took his
place, so like him in appearance that she is as deceived as you. Or it
may be that she has found you out and knows who it is that is knocking
on the door trying to get back to her. You might be scared if you knew
that though she is at this moment attending to your wants with a smile
for you on her face, her passionate wish is to be done with you. On the
other hand, you may be the better fellow of the two. Let us decide that
this is how it is.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The last week of the holidays was darkened for Tintinnabulum and W. W.
by the shadow of a letter demanded of them by their tutor. It had to be
on one of three subjects:

                    (_a_) Your Favourite Walk.
                    (_b_) Your Favourite Game.
                    (_c_) What shall I do next Half?

A nasty tag attached to m’ tutor’s order said “the letter must be of
great length.” Little had they troubled about it till the end loomed,
but then they rumbled wrathfully; well was it for their tutor he heard
not what they said of him.

Tintinnabulum of course was merely lazy, or on principle resented
writing anything for less than 3_d._ Grievous, however, was the burden
on W. W., whose gifts lie not in a literary direction. He is always
undone by his clear-headed way of putting everything he knows on any
subject into the first sentence. He had a shot at (_a_), (_b_) and
(_c_).

_Attempt on (a)._ “My favourite walk is when I do not have far to go to
it.” (Here he stuck.)

_Attempt on (b)._ “The game of cricket is my favourite game, and it
consists of six stumps, two bats and a ball.” After wandering round the
table many times he added, “Nor must we forget the bails.” (Stuck
again.)

_Attempt on (c)._ “Next half is summer half, so early school will be
half an hour earlier.” (Final stick.)

He then abandoned hope and would, I suppose, have had to run away to sea
(if boys still do that) had not Help been nigh.

For a consideration (and you can now guess exactly how much it was)
Tintinnabulum offered to write W. W.’s letter for him. I did not see it
till later (as you shall learn), indeed the episode was purposely kept
dark from me. The subject chosen was “My Favourite Walk,” because
Tintinnabulum had a book entitled Walks and Talks with the Little Ones,
which never before had he thought might come in handy. Of course such a
performer by no means confined himself to purloining from this work,
though he did have something to say about how W. W. wandered along his
walk carrying a little book into which he put “interesting plants.”
Anything less like W. W. thus engaged I cannot conceive, unless it be
Tintinnabulum himself.

The miscreant also carefully misspelt several words, as being natural to
W. W. Unfortunately (his fatal weakness) he could not keep his own name
out of the letter, and he made W. W. say that the favourite walk was
“near the house of my kind friend Tintinnabulum, and you know him, sir,
for he is in your house, and I mess with him, which is very lucky for
me, all the scugs wanting to mess with him and nobody wanting me.”

Could brainy critics, peeled for the pounce, read that human document
they would doubtless pause to enquire into its hidden meaning. On the
surface it was written (_a_) to get 3_d._ out of W. W., (_b_) to give
relief to Tintinnabulum’s ego. To the ordinary reader (with whom to-day
we have no concern) this might suffice, but the digger would ask, what
is the philosophy of life advanced by the author, is the whole thing an
allegory and if so, what is Tintinnabulum’s Message; in short, is he,
like the commoner writers, merely saying what he says, or, like the big
chaps, something quite different?

Had his tutor considered the letter thus, we might have had a most
interesting analysis of it (and no one would have been more interested
than Tintinnabulum). But though a favourite of mine (and also of
Tintinnabulum) his tutor is just slightly Victorian, and he went for the
letter like one of the illiterate.

It was not seen by me until the two hopefuls returned to school, when I
received it from their tutor with another one which is uncommonly like
it. Investigation has elicited the following data, for which kindly
allow me to use (_a_), (_b_) and (_c_) again, as I have taken a fancy to
them.

(_a_) Letter is read and approved by W. W.

(_b_) W. W. on reflection objects to passage about the honour of messing
with Tintinnabulum.

(_c_) Ultimatum issued by Tintinnabulum that the passage must be
retained.

(_d_) MS. haughtily returned to the author.

(_e_) The author alters a few words and sends in letter as his own.

(_f_) W. W. has made a secret copy of the letter and sends it in as his,
with the objectionable passage deleted.

(_g_) Their tutor smells a rat.

(_h_) He takes me into his confidence.

(_i_) Days pass but I remain inactive.

(_j_) He puts the affair into the hands of Beverley, the head of the
house.

(_k_) Triumph of Miss Rachel.

Miss Rachel who is an old friend of ours is slight and frail, say 5 ft.
3, her biceps cannot be formidable and I question whether she could kick
the beam however favourably it was placed for her. She is such an
admirer of Tintinnabulum that he occasionally writhes, in his fuller
knowledge of the subject.

Having led a quiet and uneventful life (so far as I know), Miss Rachel
suddenly shoots into the light through her acquaintance with the
Beverleys of Winch Park, which is, as it were, nothing; but the great
Beverley, Beverley the thunderous, who is head of m’ tutor’s house, is a
scion of that family; and now you see what a swell Miss Rachel has
become. When Neil (as he then was) was entered for that great school she
wrote to Beverley—fancy knowing someone who can write to
Beverley—telling him (to Neil’s indignation) what a darling her young
friend was and hoping Beverley would look after him and make him his
dear little fag. Months elapsed before a reply came, but when it did
come it really referred to Tintinnabulum and contained these pregnant
words: “As to the person in whom you are interested, I look after him a
good deal, and the more I see of him the more I lick him.”

Miss Rachel showed me the letter with exultation. So kind of him, she
said, though she was a little distressed that a strapping fellow like
Beverley should spell so badly.

More recently I had a letter from Tintinnabulum, which I showed to her
as probably denoting the final transaction in the affair of the letter.

“W. W. and I,” it announced very cheerily, “saw Beverley yesterday in
his room and he gave each of us six of the best.”

“How charming of Beverley!” Miss Rachel said.

“The best what?” she enquired, but I cannot have heard her, for I made
no answer.

I learn that sometimes she thinks it was probably cakes and at other
times fives balls, which she knows to be in great demand at that school.
I shall not be surprised if Miss Rachel sends a dozen of the best to
Beverley.


                      7. _How to Write a Collins_

I note that the dozen of the best shared by these two odd creatures
seems to have made them pals again. The proof is that though they began
the new half by messing with other youths they are now once more messing
together.

“That priceless young cub, W. W.,” occurs in one letter of
Tintinnabulum’s.

“W. W. is the lad for me,” he says in the next.

Again, I have a note of thanks for hospitality from W. W. in which he
remarks, “Tintinnabulum is as ripping as ever.” This, however, is to be
discounted, as, though the letter is signed W. W. Daly, I recognise in
it another hand, I recognise this other hand so clearly that I can add a
comment in brackets (3_d._).

Yes, I can do so (because of a game I have long been playing), but any
other person would be deceived, just as m’ tutor was at first deceived
by the epistles on the favourite walk. He told me that these were so
fragrant of W. W. that he had thought Tintinnabulum must be the
copy-cat. Indeed, thus it was held until W. W. nobly made confession.

What I must face is this, that Tintinnabulum, being (alas) an artist,
has been inside W. W. Not only so, he has since his return to school
been inside at least half a dozen other boys, searching for Collinses
for them.

A Collins, as no one, perhaps except Miss Austen, needs to be told, is
the fashionable name for a letter of thanks for hospitality to a host or
hostess. Thus W. W.’s letter to me was a Collins. Somehow its fame has
spread through his house, and now Tintinnabulum is as one possessed,
writing threepenny Collinses for the deficient. They are small boys as
yet, but as the quality of his Help is trumpeted to other houses I
conceive Fields, Blues and Choices knocking at his door and begging for
a Collins. It will be a great day for Tintinnabulum when Beverley
applies.

The Collins letter is a fine art in which those who try the hardest
often fall most heavily, and perhaps even m’ tutor or the Provost
Himself, at his wit’s end how to put it neatly this time, will yet crave
a 3_d._ worth. It may even be that readers grown grey in the country’s
service, who quake at thought of the looming Collins, would like to have
Tintinnabulum’s address. It is refused; but I mention, to fret them,
that his every Collins is guaranteed different from all his other
Collinses, and to be so like the purchaser that it is a photograph.

If you were his client you could accept Saturday to Monday invitations
with a light heart. But don’t, when he is at your Collins, go near him
and the babe lest he clutch it to his breast and growl. He has the great
gift of growling, which will yet make him popular with another sex.

His concentration on the insides of others is of course very disturbing
to me, but I should feel still more alarmed if I heard that he had
abandoned the monetary charge and, for sheer love of the thing, was
turning out Collinses gratis.

To-day there comes a ray of hope from a harassed tutor, who writes that
Tintinnabulum has deserted the Collins for googly bowling, the secrets
of which he is pursuing with the same terrific intensity. I can picture
him getting inside the ball.


                       8. _He and I and Another_

You readers may smile when I tell you why I have indited these memories
and fancies. It was not done for you but for me, being a foolish attempt
to determine, by writing the things down (playing over by myself some of
the past moves in the game), whether Tintinnabulum really does like me
still. That he should do so is very important to me as he recedes
farther from my ken down that road which hurries him from me. I cannot,
however, after all, give myself a very definite answer. He no longer
needs me of course, as Neil did, and he will go on needing me less. When
I think of Neil I know that those were the last days in which I was
alive.

Tintinnabulum’s opinion of himself, except when he is splashing, is
lowlier than was Neil’s; some times in dark moods it is lowlier than
makes for happiness. He has hardened a little since he was Neil,
coarsened but strengthened. I comfort myself with the curious reflection
that the best men I have known have had a touch of coarseness in them.

Perhaps I have made too much of the occasional yieldings of this boy
whom I now know so superficially. The new life is building seven walls
around him. Are such of his moves in the game as I can follow merely an
expert’s kindness to an indifferent player?

On the other hand, I learn from a friendly source that he has spoken of
me with approval, once at least, as “mad, quite mad,” and I know that my
battered countenance, about which I am very “touchy” excites his pity as
well as his private mirth. On the last night of the holidays he was
specially gruff, but he slipped beneath my door a paper containing the
words “I hereby solemnly promise never to give you cause for moral
anxiety,” and signed his name across a postage stamp to give the
document a special significance. Nevertheless, W. W. and he certainly do
at times exchange disturbing glances of which I am the object, and
these, I notice, occur when I think I am talking well. Again, if I set
off to tell a humorous story in company nothing can exceed the agony on
Tintinnabulum’s face. Yet I am uncertain that this is not a compliment,
for if he felt indifferently toward me why should he worry about my
fate?

During those holidays a master at his old preparatory sent me a letter
he had received from Tintinnabulum (whom he called Neil), saying that as
it was about me he considered I ought to read it. But I had not the
courage to do so. Quite likely it was favourable, but suppose it hadn’t
been. Besides, it was not meant for me to see, and I cling to his
dew-drop about my being mad. On the whole, I think he is still partial
to me. Corroboration, I consider, was provided at our parting, when he
so skilfully turned what began as a tear into a wink and gazed at me
from the disappearing train with what I swear was a loving scowl.

What will become of Tintinnabulum? There was a horror looking for him in
his childhood. Waking dreams we called them, and they lured Neil out of
bed in the night. It was always the same nameless enemy he was seeking,
and he stole about in various parts of the house in search of it,
probing fiercely for it in cupboards, or standing at the top of the
stairs pouring out invective and shouting challenges to it to come up. I
have known the small white figure defend the stair-head thus for an
hour, blazing rather than afraid, concentrated on some dreadful matter
in which, tragically, none could aid him. I stood or sat by him, like a
man in an adjoining world, waiting till he returned to me, for I had
been advised, warned, that I must not wake him abruptly. Gradually I
soothed him back to bed, and though my presence there in the morning
told him, in the light language we then adopted, that he had been “at it
again” he could remember nothing of who the enemy was. It had something
to do with the number 7; that was all we ever knew. Once I slipped from
the room, thinking it best that he should wake to normal surroundings,
but that was a mistake. He was violently agitated by my absence. In some
vague way he seemed on the stairs to have known that I was with him and
to have got comfort from it; he said he had gone back to bed only
because he knew I should be there when he woke up. I found that he
liked, “after he had been an ass,” to wake up seeing me “sitting there
doing something frightfully ordinary, like reading the newspaper,” and
you may be sure that thereafter that was what I was doing.

After he had been a year or two at his preparatory, Neil did a nice
thing for me; one of a thousand. I had shaken my head over his standing
so low in Maths, though he was already a promising classic, and had said
that it was “great fun to be good at what one was bad at.” A term or two
later when he came home he thrust the Maths prize into my hand. “But it
wasn’t fun,” he growled. (It was Neil’s growl before it was
Tintinnabulum’s.) He came back to blurt out, “I did it because in those
bad times you were always sitting there with the newspaper when I woke.”

By becoming Tintinnabulum he is not done with his unknown foe, though I
think they have met but once. On this occasion his dame had remained
with him all night, as he had been slightly unwell, and she was amused,
but nothing more, to see him, without observing her, rise and search the
room in a fury of words for something that was not there. The only word
she caught was “seven.” He asked them not to tell me of this incident,
as he knew it would trouble me. I was told, and, indeed, almost expected
the news, for I had sprung out of bed that night thinking I heard Neil
once again defending the stair. By the time I reached Tintinnabulum it
had ceased to worry him. “But when I woke I missed the newspaper,” he
said with his adorable smile, and again putting his hand on my shoulder.
How I wished “the newspaper” could have been there. There are times when
a boy can be as lonely as God.

[Illustration: “I DID IT BECAUSE YOU WERE ALWAYS SITTING THERE WITH THE
NEWSPAPER WHEN I WOKE”]

What is the danger? What is it that he knows in the times during which
he is shut away and that he cannot remember to tell to himself or to me
when he wakes? I am often disturbed when thinking of him (which is the
real business of my life), regretting that, in spite of advice and
warnings, I did not long ago risk waking him abruptly, when, before it
could hide, he might have clapped seeing eyes upon it, and thus been
able to warn me. Then, knowing the danger, I would for ever after be on
the watch myself, so that when the moment came, I could envelop him as
with wings. These are, of course, only foolish fears of the dark, and
with morning they all fly away. Tintinnabulum makes very merry over
them. I have a new thought that, when he is inside me, he may leave them
there deliberately to play upon my weakness for him and so increase his
sock allowance. Is the baffling creature capable of this enormity? With
bowed head I must admit he is. I make a note, to be more severe with him
this half.




[Illustration]

                               The Dream

                                                         HERBERT ASQUITH


              My dream? Can I remember my dream?
                  I was floating down the nursery stair,
              And my little terrier ran in front
                  With his feet treading on the air;
              And when we came to the dining-room,
                  The King and the Queen were there:
              And father and mother, two and two;
              And a baby elephant from the Zoo,
                  Each on a golden chair;
              And three soldiers, and Mary Rose
              Riding an ostrich that pecked her toes,
                  And Uncle Jim
                  Looking very trim,
              Eating a kipper.
                  And, when they had sung to the King,
                  They all sat down in a ring,
              And played at hunt the slipper.

              Then I saw a curling stream
                  And yellow flow’rs in a meadow,
              And six little green frogs
                  Dancing a jig in the shadow:
              And the tune came from a bough,
                  “Tweet, tweet, quiver,”
              Sung by a little brown bird
                  That swayed above the river.

              Then we all started to dance,
                  And Aunt Rebecca too;
              Uncle Jim began to prance,
                  And the baby elephant blew
              A curl of smoke from his cigar,
                  As he sat and watched the evening star.
              And the little brown bird sang on,
                  Swaying above the river:
              But a wind came whispering down,
                  And the leaves began to shiver.

              Then with a crackly sound
                  Uncle Jim went flat:
                  He turned into a cricket-bat;
              But Aunt Rebecca grew very round
                  And floated up like a black balloon,
                  Higher and higher, into the Moon.
              The stars fell out of the sky;
                  The baby elephant whined:
              “Time to get up” said nurse:
                  And “Flap” went the blind.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                              Mr. Snoogles

                                                    By Elizabeth Lowndes


Veronica lay very still in bed, then she stretched out as far as she
could. Her feet travelled down to that cold region near where the sheets
and blankets disappear under the mattress. She was certainly still
awake, for one doesn’t stretch in dreams, and if one did one would
certainly wake up.

Then she cautiously raised herself upon one elbow and looked round,
slowly, at the fire. Ever since Teddy had said that Mr. Snoogles lived
up the chimney she had regarded the fire with much greater interest, not
to say dread. Not that Mr. Snoogles was real. He was just fun. And yet,
though Veronica knew he was only fun, she often wondered how he managed
to fit in the inside of the chimney—if, that is, he was at all like
father, or even Dr. Blackie (who wasn’t at all big for a man). But then
Teddy was the only person who claimed to have ever seen this person who
had taken refuge in their chimneys, and he couldn’t be made to describe
him.

In the morning and in the afternoon Mr. Snoogles was much more amusing
than any shop-bought game. Veronica would laugh over him, and invent
long conversations in which he said such silly things! But when the
evening crept on, and the fire crackled in the grate, and flickered on
the walls, it made it all so different. Why do things which aren’t true
make you think they are true, at night?

Veronica remembered uneasily a curious dream. She was no longer a big
girl with short hair and long thin legs; she was a green velvet
pin-cushion, and pins of various sizes and colours were just about to be
stuck into her before she was sent off to a village bazaar. Though that
was only a dream, for a long time she never saw a pin-cushion without
thinking of herself as one....

And now, to-night, she at last lay back in bed out of sight of the fire,
and tried to plan adventures for the next day. Why did real adventures
always pass her by?

Suddenly she heard a curious low rumbling sound. For a moment she hoped
and yet dreaded that it came from the direction of the chimney, but when
the sound got louder, as it did very soon, she burst out laughing, for
it was only Teddy snoring. The door between their rooms was open, so no
wonder she heard him. How funny, and how disappointing!

In time Veronica’s eyes closed without her noticing it, and lying there,
so comfortable and so warm in bed, just on that borderland of the
ordinary world of lessons and rice pudding (when one expected something
else with jam on it) and that other delicious world of dreams and vague
sensations.

But all at once Veronica heard a great clatter. She sat up in bed and
opened her eyes wide to see in the firelight a most curious little
person. He had leapt out of the chimney and dropped all the fire-irons
in a heap at his feet. She could see them lying there on the white
woolly mat, all at sixes and sevens.

He was very small, about as high as the poker. He had large round eyes,
nearly as round as two pennies. And on his head, perched on the very
top, was the lid of the nursery kettle! It was a copper kettle, and was
always kept very bright.

The stranger was dressed in black and his clothes fitted him quite
tight, like a well-drawn-up stocking or a glove.

Veronica gazed at him, her eyes growing almost as round as his own.

Then he stamped his foot, and raising his arms over his head, he made a
low bow.

“Madam, your wish to see me, though it is only prompted by idle
curiosity, has brought me down from my kingdom among the chimney pots. I
have a request to make to you. Will you take my place for a few hours? I
am called away on urgent private affairs, but I cannot leave my work up
there unless you will give me your help.”

His voice was high and sharp. It was rather like listening to a sparrow.

[Illustration: “HE MADE A LOW BOW”]

He went straight on, without waiting for an answer. “It is a mistake to
suppose that I live in the chimney. It would be most disagreeable to do
so, as I should have thought you, who have imagination, would realize.
But I am talking too much. I wait respectfully, Madam, for your answer.
Will you help me?”

Veronica wriggled uncomfortably under the warm bedclothes.

“I will help you if I can.” She was a cautious, as well as a truthful,
child, so she added hastily, “I don’t want to say I will, if I can’t.
And are you—_are_ you Mr. Snoogles?”

The strange little man standing on the mat threw back his head so
suddenly that the lid of the kettle fell off and bounced away behind the
coal scuttle.

“Oh, how funny!” he laughed. “I shall add that to my collection. No, I’m
_not_ Mr. Snoogles; but I am the person whom your brother calls Mr.
Snoogles.”

“So Teddy _has_ seen you after all. Sometimes I thought Mr. Snoogles was
only a game.”

“Indeed, I’m not a game. What a horrid thing to be! Imagine being a
football?”

“Or a pin-cushion,” said Veronica hastily. “I know because I believed I
was one once, but only for a short time,” she added, because she was
truthful, but also in case Mr. Snoogles found a stray pin on the floor
and, remembering what she had said, might stick it into her. He looked
such a tidy man.

“I can assure you, Madam, that I will not request you to do anything at
all difficult. I shall only require your services for a short period—say
about ten years.”

“_Ten years?_ But in ten years I shall be quite old—that is, quite grown
up. I shall be twenty-one.”

“Well, what of that? My work is much more amusing than what you do all
day—lessons, walks, quarrels.”

Veronica felt a little taken aback.

“But I don’t quarrel—that is to say, not much, not nearly as much as do
our cousins in the country or as the long-haired family we see in the
park. Would you like to hear my names? I am not madam yet. You see, I am
not married. And won’t you sit down?”

“No, I never sit down. It’s lazy. Proceed with your names. Though I know
what I call you to myself.”

“I was christened Elizabeth Veronica Sybella—now, what do _you_ call
me?”

“Never mind. Don’t ask questions. It’s bad manners.”

Veronica felt annoyed, but she put her pride in her pocket and asked:
“If I do what you want me to do—will you tell me then?”

“I shall if you deserve it.”

What a horrid thing to say! How like a holiday governess!—the sort that
Veronica and her brother had had last summer.

“We must be gone. You have been wasting _our_ time. Not that time is
money to me.”

“Isn’t it? It is to father, though how he makes it into money I don’t
know. I have so much time I could make such a lot of money if only I
knew how to do it.”

“Money is silly stuff. Look how easily it burns. Only yesterday I saw
the kitchenmaid at No. 5 throw a five-pound note on to the fire. She
didn’t know what it was, poor silly girl, though she is very clever at
washing cups and saucers. Come on now!”

Veronica jumped out of bed, and ran over to the fireplace.

“Do we go up there?” she said, looking at the chimney and then at the
dying fire. “Won’t it burn?”

“Not when you are with me. Fire is my servant. I am fire’s lord and
master. But if you feel at all nervous I will command it to die.”

With these dramatic words Mr. Snoogles clapped his hands together and
cried out: “Servant, hide thyself! Let thy light burn dim while we pass
over you.”

Instantly the coals grew grey and dusty.

Mr. Snoogles put out his hand, and taking Veronica’s fingers firmly in
his, he pulled her up, and soon she found herself being drawn up higher
and higher.

“When we get to the top I will explain what you have to do.”

Veronica said nothing. Adventure had come at last—the real thing, better
than any story-book she had ever read, because it was happening to
her—actually to her.

They suddenly came out into the night air. To the right, to the left, in
fact, wherever she looked, were chimney pots. Some had strange things on
them like hats.

Then it was that Veronica noticed she had become about the same size as
Mr. Snoogles. She did not feel cold, either, which was stranger still.
But she sat down as she had been told, and gazed about her. High above,
the stars were twinkling and the young moon was shining.

Mr. Snoogles coughed.

“Have you finished thinking your thoughts, and will you now think of
mine?” he said crossly.

“I am so sorry. Please tell me yours.”

“My business—and soon it will be _your_ business, don’t forget—is to be
the Watchman of Fire and Smoke. Smoke is used for punishment because it
is unpleasant. But Fire brings warmth and happiness. You will have power
over them both, but you must keep Fire in his proper place. When you see
things not going well in a house then send down Smoke. If they bear it
well, and cease to think of themselves, call it back and ask Fire to
burn brightly to warm them, and to make them feel happy and cheerful. If
a live coal flies out on the mat, you must be there to make it go out. A
house on fire is a terrible thing, and means you have not been doing
your work properly.” He waited a moment, then exclaimed: “I must be
going soon, so do your best!”

[Illustration: “HAVE YOU FINISHED THINKING YOUR THOUGHTS”]

“But how shall I——?” Veronica looked round, but Mr. Snoogles had
vanished, and she found herself alone on the roof.

“I can’t do it, it’s too difficult,” she said to herself, “much more
difficult than learning a long speech out of Shakespeare. One can always
do that if one really tries, but this——?”

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Veronica, Veronica, I have been screaming at you for ages. There is a
big fire outside! That empty house is burning down, I can see it from my
window——”

Teddy was jumping about in his pyjamas. “Come along! Hurry up!” he
shouted.

Veronica got out of bed as if she was dreaming. Then she cried in great
distress, “It’s my fault—that fire. Mr. Snoogles said I must not allow
it to happen.”

“Don’t be so silly. Mr. Snoogles isn’t real. Come along!”

The two children ran to the window, and in the excitement of watching
the fire engines arrive, and the water pouring out of the great hose
pipes Veronica forgot her part in this tragedy.

Later in the morning, as they were coming in from a walk, Veronica said,
“Teddy, what was Mr. Snoogles really like when you saw him? Do tell me
and I will tell you a great secret.”

“Mr. Snoogles? I will show him to you.”

Teddy took off his coat and hat, and running halfway up the stairs, he
threw his coat round a pillar which marked the half landing. Then he put
his cap on the round knot at the top.

“Veronica! Allow me to introduce you to Mr. Snoogles!”

“Teddy! D’you mean you never saw him really? I have.”

“Of course I didn’t. And you haven’t either!”

Veronica said nothing to that. She knew better.




[Illustration]

                                  Eggs

                                                         HERBERT ASQUITH


                 Bob has blown a hundred eggs,
                     Blue and olive, white and grey;
                 Warbler, nightingale, and thrush,
                   Bob has blown their songs away!

                 Low in spotless wool they rest,
                     Purest blue and clouded white,
                 Streaked with cinnamon and red,
                     Flecked with purples of the night;

                 Mute and gleaming, row on row,
                     Lie the tombstones of the spring!
                 What a chorus would there be
                     If those eggs began to sing!




                            The Two Sailors

[Illustration]

                                                                JOHN LEA


                             _This was one_

           There once was a sailor who never could bear
           To rub any oil on the top of his hair,
           And no one who loved him at sea or at home
           Would offer the use of a brush and a comb.
           He said (and what reason for doubting the tale?)
           The very best brush is the breath of a gale,
           While as to the comb—seek a better, in vain,
           Than jolly good torrents of tropical rain.
           So all round the world (and no cruise did he miss)
           That singular sailor looked something like _this_.


                        _This was the other one_

[Illustration]

         There once was a sailor who lavished with care
         Whole buckets of oil on the top of his hair,
         And no one who loved him omitted to speak
         In rapture of tresses so splendidly sleek.
         He said (and who questions what mariners say?)
         He brushed them and combed them each hour of the day.
         For, up on the mast in the wildest of seas,
         He never neglected such duties as these.
         And so, as no chance he would lazily miss,
         That singular sailor looked something like _this_.




               Doctor Dolittle meets a Londoner in Paris

                                                            HUGH LOFTING


One day John Dolittle was walking alone in the Tuileries Gardens. He had
been asked to come to France by some French naturalists who wished to
consult him on certain new features to be added to the zoo in the Jardin
des Plantes. The Doctor knew Paris well and loved it. To his way of
thinking it was the perfect city—or would be, if it were not so
difficult to get a bath there.

It had been raining all day, but now the sun was shining, and the
gardens, fresh and wet, looked very beautiful. As the Doctor passed one
of the many shrubberies he came upon a sparrow wallowing in a puddle in
the middle of the gravel path.

“Why, I declare!” he muttered to himself, hurrying forward. “It’s
Cheapside!”

The small bird, evidently quite accustomed to human traffic, was far too
busy with his bathing to notice anyone’s approach.

“How do you do, Cheapside?” said the Doctor in sparrow language. “Who on
earth would ever have thought of finding you here?”

The sparrow stopped his fluttering and wallowing and looked up through
the water that ran down in big drops off his tousled head-feathers.

“Jiminy Crickets!” he exclaimed. “It’s the Doc himself!”

[Illustration: “‘HOW DO YOU DO, CHEAPSIDE?’ SAID THE DOCTOR IN SPARROW
LANGUAGE”]

“How do you come to be in Paris?” asked John Dolittle.

“Oh, it’s all Becky’s doing,” grumbled Cheapside, hopping out of the
puddle and fluttering his wings to dry them. “I’m satisfied to stay in
London, goodness knows. But every Spring it’s the same way: ‘Let’s take
a hop over to the Continong,’ says she. ‘The horse-chestnuts will just
be budding.’ ‘We got horse-chestnut trees in Regent’s Park,’ I says to
’er. ‘Ah,’ says she, ‘but not like the ones in the Twiddle-didee
Gardens. Oh, I love Paris in the Spring,’ she says.... It’s always the
same way: every year she drags me over ’ere. Sentiment, I reckon it is.
You see, Doc, me and Becky met one another first ’ere—right ’ere in the
Twiddle-didee Gardens. I recognised ’er as a London Sparrow—you can tell
’em the world over—and we got talkin’. You know the way those things
’appen. She wanted to build our first nest up there in the Lufer Palace.
But I says, ‘No,’ hemphatic. ‘Let’s go back to St. Paul’s,’ I says. ‘I
know a place in St. Edmund’s left ear what ’as all the stonework in
Paris beat ’ollow as a nestin’ place. Besides,’ I says, ‘we don’t want
our children growing up talkin’ no foreign language! We’re Londoners,’ I
says: ‘let’s go back to London.’”

“Yes,” said the Doctor. “Even I guessed you were a London sparrow,
before I recognised you, because——”

“Because I was washin’,” Cheapside finished. “That’s true: these ’ere
foreign birds don’t run to water much.”

“That’s a fine puddle you have there,” said the Doctor. “I’ve half a
mind to ask you to lend it to me. You know, I’ve been trying to get a
bath myself ever since I’ve been in Paris—without success so far. After
all, even a puddle is better than nothing. When I asked them at the
_pension_ where I’m staying could I have a bath, they seemed to think I
was asking for the moon.”

“Oh, I can tell you where you can get a bath, Doctor, a good one,” said
the sparrow. “Just the other side of that shrubbery over there there’s
an elegant marble pond, with a fountain and statues in the middle. You
can hang your bath-towel on the statue and use the fountain for a
shampoo. Just helegant!—But of course you’d have to do it after dark.
Anybody washin’ in Paris is liable to get arrested—not because you ’ad
no clothes on, mind you. Oh no, the French is very sensible about that.
Look at all these statues: they don’t wear no clothes—and in summertime
it’s much cooler for ’em. But washin’? That’s another matter. Over ’ere
they’re very suspicious of anybody washin’. Just the same you could
manage a tub in the marble pond late at night, easy—because there’s
hardly anybody in the gardens then.”

“My gracious! I’ve a good mind to try it, Cheapside,” said the Doctor.
“I haven’t had a bath in over a week.”

“Well,” said the Cockney sparrow, “you meet me here at midnight and me
and Becky will guide you to the pond and keep a look-out while you get a
wash.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

There was a half moon that night. And when, a few minutes before twelve
o’clock, John Dolittle came into the Tuileries Gardens with a bath-towel
over his arm, the first person he saw was a French policeman. Not
wishing to be taken for a suspicious character, he thrust the bath-towel
beneath his coat and hurried past the shrubbery as though bent on
important business.

But he had not gone very far before he was overtaken by Cheapside and
his wife, Becky.

“Don’t get worried, Doc, don’t get worried,” said the sparrow. “That
bobby only goes by about once every ’alf-hour. ’E won’t be back for a
while. Come over ’ere and we’ll show you your dressing-room.”

John Dolittle was thereupon conducted to a snug retreat in the heart of
a big shrubbery.

“Nobody can see you ’ere,” said Cheapside. “And as soon as you’re ready
all you’ve got to do is to ’op round that privet-’edge, sprint across
the little lawn and there’s your bath waitin’ for you. Me and Becky will
keep a look-out. And if any danger comes along we’ll whistle.”

Five minutes later the famous naturalist was wallowing luxuriously in
the marble pond. The night was softly brilliant with moonlight, and the
statues in the centre of the pool stood out palely against the dark mass
of the trees behind.

John Dolittle had paused a moment with a cake of soap uplifted in his
hand, utterly enchanted by the beauty of the scene, when he heard
Cheapside hoarsely whispering to him from a branch overhead.

“Look out! Hide quick! Someone coming!”

Now the Doctor had left his bath-towel on the base of the statue. At
Cheapside’s warning he splashed wildly out to get it before attempting a
retreat to the shrubbery. Breathless, he finally reached the fountain.
But just as he was about to grasp the towel Becky called from the other
side of the pond:

“Cheapside! There is another party coming in at the other gate! The
Doctor can never make it in time.”

John Dolittle, waist-deep in the water at the foot of the statue, looked
about him in despair.

“Gracious! What shall I do then?” he cried drawing the bath-towel over
his shoulders.

“You’ll have to be a statue,” hissed Cheapside the quick thinker. “Hop
up on to the pedestal. They’ll never know the difference in this light.
When they go by you can come down. Hurry! They’re quite close. I can see
their heads over the top of the hedge.”

Swiftly winding his bath-towel about him, John Dolittle sprang up on to
the pedestal and crouched in a statuesque pose. The marble group was of
Neptune the sea-god and several attendant figures. John Dolittle, M.D.,
became one of the attendant figures. His hand raised to shade his eyes
from an imaginary sun, he gazed seaward with a stony stare.

“Fine!” whispered Cheapside, flying on to the base of the statue. “No
one could tell you from the real thing. Just keep still and you’ll be
all right. They won’t stay, I don’t expect. Here they come. Don’t get
nervous, now. Bless me, I believe they’re English too!—Tourists. Well,
did you ever?”

A man and a woman, strolling through the gardens by one of the many
crossing paths, had now paused at the edge of the pond and, to John
Dolittle’s horror, were gazing up at the statue in the centre of it.
They were both elderly; they both carried umbrellas; and they both wore
spectacles.

“I’ll bet they’re short-sighted, Doc,” whispered Cheapside comfortingly.
“Don’t worry.”

“Dear me, Sarah,” sighed the man. “What a beautiful night! The moon and
the trees and the fountain. And such an imposing statue!—The sea-god
Neptune with his mermaids and mermen.”

“Lancelot,” said the woman shortly, “let us hurry home. You’ll get your
bronchitis worse in this damp air. I don’t like the statue at all. I
never saw such fat creatures. Just look at that one on the corner
there—the one with his hand up scanning the horizon. Why, he’s stouter
than the butcher at home!”

“Humph!” muttered Cheapside beneath his breath. “It don’t seem to me as
though _you_ ’ave any figure to write ’ome about, Mrs. Scarecrow.”

At this moment a large flying beetle landed on the Doctor’s neck and
nearly spoiled everything.

“Good gracious, Sarah!” cried the man. “I thought I saw one of the
figures move, the fat one.”

The tourist adjusted his spectacles and, coming a little closer to the
edge of the pond, stared very hard. But Cheapside, to add a touch of
convincing realism, flew up on to the merman’s shoulder, kicked the
beetle into the pond with a secret flick of his foot and burst into a
flood of carefree song.

“No, Sarah,” said the man. “I was mistaken. See, there is a bird sitting
on his shoulder. How romantic! Must be a nightingale.”

“_Will_ you come home, Lancelot?” snapped the woman. “You won’t feel so
romantic when your cough comes back. It must be after midnight.”

“But you know, Sarah,” said the man, as he was almost forcibly dragged
away, “_I_ don’t think he’s too fat. They had to be stout, those marine
people: they floated better that way. Dear me, Paris is a beautiful
city!”

As the footsteps died away down the moonlit path, John Dolittle sighed a
great sigh of relief and came to life.

“Cheapside,” said he, stretching his stiff arms, “you could never guess
who those people were. My sister Sarah and her husband, the Reverend
Lancelot Dingle. It’s funny, Cheapside, but whenever I am in an awkward
or ridiculous situation Sarah seems bound to turn up. Of course she and
her husband would just _have_ to come touring Paris at the exact hour
when I was taking a bath in the Tuileries Gardens. Ah well, thank
goodness the pond kept them off from getting any closer to me!”

“Well, listen, Doc,” said the London sparrow: “I think you had better be
gettin’ along yourself now. It’s about time for that bobby to be coming
round again.”

“Yes, you’re right,” said the Doctor. And he slid back into the water,
waded to the edge and stepped out on to dry ground.

But John Dolittle’s troubles were not over yet. While he was still no
more than half way to his “dressing-room” there came another warning
shout from Cheapside:

“Look out!—Here he comes!”

This time flight seemed the only course. The policeman had seen the
culprit disappear into the shrubbery. Breaking into a run, he gave
chase.

“Don’t stop, Doc!” cried Cheapside. “Grab your clothes and get out the
other side—Becky! Hey, Becky! Keep that policeman busy a minute.”

The Doctor did as he was told. Seizing his clothes in a pile as he
rushed through the shrubbery, he came out at the other end like an
express train emerging from a tunnel. Here Cheapside met him and led him
across a lawn to another group of bushes. Behind this he hurriedly got
into his clothes. Meanwhile Becky kept the policeman busy by furiously
pecking him in the neck and making it necessary for him to stop and beat
her off.

However, she could not of course keep this up for long. And if John
Dolittle had not been an exceptionally quick dresser he could never have
got away. In one minute and a quarter, collar and tie in one hand, soap
and towel in the other, he left his second dressing-room on the run and
sped for the gate and home.

The loyal Cheapside was still with him; but the sparrow was now so
convulsed with laughter that he could scarcely keep up, even flying.

“I don’t see what you find so funny about it,” panted the Doctor
peevishly as he slowed down at the gate and began putting on his collar.
“I had a very narrow escape from getting arrested.”

“Yes, and you’d have gone to jail, too,” gasped Cheapside. “It’s no
light offence, washing in this country. But that wasn’t what I was
laughing at.”

“Well, what was it, then?” asked the Doctor, feeling for a stud in his
pocket.

“The Reverend Dingle took me for a nightingale!” tittered the Cockney
sparrow. “I must go back and tell Becky that. So long, Doc! You’ll be
all right now. That bobby’s lost you altogether.... After all, you got
your bath. See you in Puddleby next month.”




                               Vice-versa
                       ANY FATHER TO ANY DAUGHTER

                                                           HENRY NEWBOLT


                 If buttercups were white and pink,
                     And roses green and blue,
                 Then you instead of me could think,
                     And I instead of you.

                 Then I could daily give your doll
                     Her early evening tub,
                 While you in easy-chairs could loll
                     At some or other Club.

                 Then I could spell p-i-g pidge,
                     And learn to sew like Nurse;
                 While you could take a hand at bridge,
                     And murmur “Zooks!” or worse.

                 Oh, it would be as fresh a sight
                     As ever yet was seen,
                 If buttercups were pink and white
                     And roses blue and green.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                                KITTEEN

                                   BY

                            MARGARET KENNEDY


              I sat beside the ingle-nook,
                  The fire was glowing;
              The pot was bubbling on the hook,
                  The wind was blowing.
              In the shadows of the room
                  Ghosts were hiding;
              From the furthest, deepest gloom
                  They came gliding.
              At the back of me I knew
                  Crowds were creeping.
              Through the house the storm-wind blew,
                  Flames went leaping,
              Awful shadows on the wall
                  Set me screaming.
              Close at hand came Someone’s call:
                  “Sure she’s dreaming!
                  What have you seen?
                      Kitteen!
              Tell us, what have you seen?”

              In the brown bog by the lake
                  There are stacks of drying peat;
              When by chance that way I take,
                  Past I run with flying feet;
              For once when, wandering carelessly,
                  I came into that lonely place,
              I watched a peat stack close to me
                  And saw it had a wrinkled face!
              All old women sitting round,
                  Each one in a long brown cloak;
              They gazed and gazed upon the ground
                  With eyes like stones, and never spoke.
              Then I turned my back and fled
                  Up our hill, with stumbling feet;
              In a doorway Someone said:
                  “She’s as white as any sheet!
                  What did you see?
                    Kitteen machree!
              Tell us, what did you see?”




                                Gilbert

                                                           CLEMENCE DANE


I am the aunt of Annabel. Annabel is coming next Friday to the birthday
party she ought to have had a month ago; but she had measles instead. I
am anxious for Annabel to enjoy herself. Whom shall I ask to meet her?

Annabel is five—a gracious-mannered five, with a smooth bobbed head of
red hair, eyes like lilacs, and a generously curved mouth. She is a
darling. She is also a devil. She never allows me or anyone else a quiet
moment with her mother when she is in the room: indeed, she owns her
parents and regards all visitors as her perquisites. She owns also, and
can use with disastrous effect on my borders, a scooter and a tricycle.
She can adjust the wireless set and listen in at her pleasure to
Bournemouth, Cardiff or London. She swears at the dog in broad Devon,
and has her ideas about her frocks. But she cannot read or tie her own
shoes or tell the time.

Annabel is coming to tea on Friday. How am I to keep her amused? Shall I
invite Philip Collins, that hard-working child, proprietor of
stickle-backs, my particular friend? Will there be anything left of
Philip if I do—or of Annabel? Philip is seven. With only a year or so
between them they ought to get on. And yet, how did I feel towards seven
when I was five? Across the white magic-lantern circle of my memory a
shadow flits, a leggy, olive-green shadow, with fur at its neck and
wrists, and I recognise Gilbert, and pause.

Annabel is so much more sophisticated and so much more of a baby than we
were ever allowed to be, that the Gilbert adventure could hardly happen
to her. She would say she didn’t like him and be done with it. And
yet—suppose she didn’t! Suppose she suffered him in silence like her
aunt before her! I do want Annabel to enjoy herself.

[Illustration: “SHE OWNS ALSO, AND CAN USE WITH DISASTROUS EFFECT ON MY
BORDERS, A SCOOTER AND A TRICYCLE.”]

You must not think that there was any harm in Gilbert. He was, I see
now, a nice, polite little boy. My Aunt Angela said so. He was as nice a
boy, I daresay, as Philip, who is—perhaps—to make Annabel’s acquaintance
next Friday. But he was long and, as it was a fancy-dress ball, his
mother had dressed him in greenery-yallery tights, and a doublet with
moleskin at the neck and wrists. Now, when you are no older than Annabel
and own a live mole which you keep in the ring-dove’s cage, you do not
feel friendly to people who wear moleskin. (No, I don’t know what
happened to the ring-dove, though I remember that she lived for some
time in the kitchen in a straw-coloured wicker-work cage, and was
incessantly laying eggs that wouldn’t hatch and croo-rooing over them in
a lamentable voice which made the nursery feel that the whole bitter
business was the nursery’s fault.)

It is not too much to say that from the moment I set eyes upon Gilbert I
felt for him that unreasoning sick dislike of which only a child is
capable, and which it never attempts to explain. I never said a word to
my Aunt Angela about Gilbert, though I noted him with a prophetic
shudder as I followed her across the shining, slippery floor. Indeed,
nobody could help noticing Gilbert. It was not only that he was so much
longer than anybody else, so prominent among the Joan of Arcs and
Pierrots and Geishas, but that he was such a pervasive dancer: he seemed
to be behaving beautifully with everybody at once. There was a horrible
fascination in his smiling efficiency: he wasn’t shy like everyone else:
he didn’t mind what he did: and he did it well. He was a handsome boy
too, for my Aunt Angela said so. Indeed, I can best fix him for you by
recalling the fact that when I saw Lewis Waller come upon the stage as
Robin Hood I instantly, and for the first time in fifteen years,
remembered Gilbert.

Before I could pull on my white silk mittens, my aunt (I knew she would)
had caught Gilbert and introduced him to me, and he wrote his name on my
programme and his own, and his moleskin wrist—his mole must have been an
older and oilier mole than mine—rubbed against my bare hand. In the
frantic subsequent attempts to scrub off the feel, I spilled water down
my new frock, my fancy-dress of yellow satin petals over a green satin
skirt, with three green satin leaves dangling from the neck; for I, in
that hour, was a primrose.

But washing my hands and drying my frock only took up a dance and a
half: Gilbert and his Berlin Polka were still to be faced.

I had an idea. I would anticipate Gilbert: I would have a partner of my
own. I marked one down, a rosy, bewildered little girl in sparkles: a
Snow-white—a Fairy queen—what did I care? I gave her her orders; for she
was only four. She was to look out for me when number seven began. She
was to refuse to dance with anyone else. She was dancing the Berlin
polka with me—did she understand?—with me: and if a green boy with
moleskin on his wrists asked her where I was, well—there I wasn’t! Did
she quite understand?

I was still passionately explaining the situation when the music of
number six struck up, and her partner, a Father Christmas smaller than
herself, jogged her away. I can still see so clearly the bunchy little
figure—we were not so particular about the cut of our clothes as is
Annabel’s generation—and the alarmed dark eyes and hot cheeks as she
looked back at me over her winged shoulder. As for me, I had to put in
the perilous time somehow. I hid.

I found a beautiful place to hide in, a room with cane chairs and palms,
and one or two screened recesses with two chairs and a table in each. I
sat me down in the only empty recess and listened to the music, and
wondered whether Gilbert had begun to look for me yet. Soon a young lady
with bare shoulders and a young gentleman with an eye-glass arrived,
looked in, departed, and shortly returned again. It was quite evident
that they wanted my refuge. I wasn’t going to let them have it. I was
terrified of them both, but I was still more terrified of Gilbert.

Said the young gentleman:

“What are you doing here?” and he called me “little girl!”

Said I, firmly, but I was on the edge of tears:

“I am waiting for my partner,” and felt that I lied, for I was not
exactly waiting for Gilbert.

[Illustration: “HE STARED AT ME REPROACHFULLY”]

“Oh, indeed!” said the young gentleman, and stared again, and whispered
to the young lady with the white shoulders, and the young lady whispered
back. You cannot think how miserable I felt. They went away at last; but
they, and my lie—a lie was a lie in those days—had ruined my haven. I
slipped out as the music stopped, and instantly the young gentleman and
the young lady got up from two chairs under a palm and sat down behind
my screen, while—oh horror!—Gilbert’s green and questing length crossed
and re-crossed the lighted swirling space on the other side of the
draped doorway. I knew—who better?—whom he sought. I backed into the
dark corner formed by the wall and the other side of the screen, too
much occupied with Gilbert’s next move to attend to the murmurs on the
other side of it. But the sitters-out were sensitive; or I, effacing
myself as much as possible, must have pushed against the screen. Slowly,
over the top, rose the head of the young gentleman. He stared down at me
reproachfully and I, in a paralysis of embarrassment, stared up at him.
You cannot think how tall the screen seemed, and how terrible the face
of the young gentleman to the eyes of five. Nothing was said. How long
he was prepared to stare at me I do not know, for his eye-glass was more
than I could bear: at that moment even Gilbert was easier to face. I
sidled back into the ballroom, worming my way as self-effacingly as
possible in and out between mothers and empty chairs, till a familiar
glitter caught my eye. It was my partner, my illegal partner, so soft,
so rosy, so cosy, so blessedly harmless, so very much smaller than I.
She was not pleased to see me (I realise now that I must have been as
awful to her as Gilbert to me) but what did that matter? I grasped her
hurriedly by a hand and a wing:

“One, two, three,” I prompted: and we put our feet into the second
position. But fate was looking after the little girl in sparkles, not
after me.

“My dance, I think.” Gilbert, cool, easy, adequate, even remembered to
bow. “I’ve been looking for you everywhere!” he said and he put out
mole-skinny hands.

“I’m dancing with _her_,” I muttered. It was my last throw. But at that
a new voice interposed:

“Oh, Mary, you mustn’t take the little girl away from her partner!” And
the fairy queen, inexpressible relief in her eyes, pulled her hand out
of mine and retired upon her mother.

I danced with Gilbert.

The last straw was hearing my Aunt Angela telling my mother, in the cab
coming home, that it was pretty to see how the child had enjoyed
herself.

Now I wonder how Annabel would have dealt with Gilbert? Her childhood is
not my childhood. I read _Pickwick_ at five, while Annabel is satisfied
with _Teddy Tail_: that fancy-dress ball was my first party, while
Annabel goes to dances twice a week. Annabel’s emotions could never have
been in the least like mine. And yet, five years old in the
eighteen-nineties is nearer five years old in the nineteen-twenties than
five years old will ever be to a contemporary aunt. If I ask my nice
Philip Collins to tea—such a handsome boy!—such good manners!—how am I
to be certain that I am not inflicting a Gilbert upon Annabel? On the
other hand, Annabel might have liked Gilbert. He was a popular person
that evening: and Annabel has never kept moles.

Annabel does not think me young. She asked me yesterday if I had ever
spoken to Queen Elizabeth; but she likes to hear what I did in that
Palæolithic age when I was little. I will tell her about Gilbert when I
tuck her up to-night, and see what she says.




                         Jack and His Pony, Tom

                                                               H. BELLOC


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

              Jack had a little pony, Tom.
              He frequently would take it from
              The stable where it used to stand
              And give it sugar with his hand.
              He also gave it oats and hay
              And carrots twenty times a day
              And grass in basketfuls and greens
              And swedes and mangels: also beans;
              And patent foods from various sources
              And bread—which isn’t good for horses—
              And chocolate and apple-rings,
              And lots and lots of other things
              The most of which do not agree
              With Polo Ponies such as he,
              And all in such a quantity
              As ruined his digestion wholly
              And turned him from a Pono Poly
              —I mean a Polo Pony—into
              A case that clearly must be seen to,
              Because he swelled and swelled and swelled.
              Which, when the kindly boy beheld,
              He gave it medicine by the pail
              In malted milk, and nutmeg ale,
              And yet it only swelled the more
              Until its stomach touched the floor;
              And then it heaved and groaned as well
              And staggered, till at last it fell
              And found it could not rise again.
              Jack wept and prayed—but all in vain.
              The pony died, and, as it died,
              Kicked him severely in the side.


                                 MORAL

                     Kindness to animals should be
                     Attuned to their brutality.




                         Tom and His Pony, Jack

                                                               H. BELLOC


[Illustration]

               Tom had a little pony, Jack:
               He vaulted lightly on its back
               And galloped off for miles and miles,
               A-leaping hedges, gates and stiles,
               And shouting “Yoicks!” and “Tally-Ho!”
               And “Heads I win!” and “Tails below!”
               And many another sporting phrase.
               He rode like this for several days,
               Until the pony, feeling tired,
               Collapsed, looked heavenward and expired.
               His father made a fearful row.
               He said, “By Gum! You’ve done it now!
               Here lies, a Carcase on the ground,
               No less than five and twenty pound!
               Indeed, the value of the beast
               Would probably have much increased.
               His teeth were false; and all were told
               That he was only four years old.
               Oh! Curse it all! I tell you plain
               I’ll never let you ride again.”

[Illustration]


                                 MORAL

                 His father died when he was twenty,
                 And left three horses—which is plenty.




[Illustration]

                               “Pigtails
                                 Ltd.”

                                                       WALTER DE LA MARE


How such an odd and curious notion had ever come into Miss Rawlings’s
mind, not even Miss Rawlings herself could have said. When had it come?
She could not answer even that question either. It had simply stolen in
little by little like a beam of sunshine into a large room.

Not of course into an empty room, for Miss Rawlings had many things to
think about. She was by far the most important person in the Parish, and
everyone—from Archdeacon Tomlington and his two curates, Mr. Moffat and
Mr. Timbs, down to little old Mrs. Ort the hump-backed charwoman who
lived in the top attic of a cottage down by Clopbourne—or, as they
called it, Clobburne—Bridge, everyone knew how _practical_ she was.

But once that sunny beam had begun to steal into Miss Rawlings’s mind
and into her life, it had lightened up with its precious gold everything
that was there. It was nevertheless a fantastic notion, simply because
it could not possibly be true. How could Miss Rawlings ever have lost a
little girl if there had never been any little girl to lose? Yet that
exactly was Miss Rawlings’s idea. It had flitted into her imagination
like a nimble, bright-feathered bird. And once it was really there, she
never hesitated to talk about it; not at all.

“My little girl, you know,” she would say with a little emphatic nod and
a pleasant smile on her broad face. Or rather, “My little gal”—for she
always pronounced the word as if it rhymed with Sal—the short for Sarah.
This, too, was an odd thing; for Miss Rawlings had been brought up by
her parents with the very best education, and seldom mispronounced even
such words as Chloe or Psyche or epitome or misled. And so far as I
know—which is not very far—and apart from shall and pal and Hal, there
is not a single word of one syllable in our enormous English language
that is pronounced like Sal; for Pall Mall, of course, is pronounced
Pell Mell. Still, Miss Rawlings did talk about her little girl, and she
called her, her little gal.

It never occurred to anybody in the Parish—not even to Mr. Timbs—to
compare the Little Gal to a gay little bird or to a beam of sunshine.
Mrs. Tomlington said indeed that it was merely a bee in Miss Rawlings’s
bonnet. But whether or not, partly because she delighted in bright
colours, and partly because, in fashion or out, she had entirely her own
taste in dress, there could not be a larger or brighter or flowerier
bonnet for any bee to be _in_. Apart from puce silk and maroon velvet
and heliotrope feathers and ribbons and pom-poms and suchlike, Miss
Rawlings’s bonnets invariably consisted of handsome spreading
flowers—blue-red roses, purple pansies, mauve cineraria—a complete
little garden for any bee’s amusement. And this bee sang rather than
buzzed in it the whole day long.

You might almost say it had made a new woman of her. Miss Rawlings had
always been active and positive and good-humoured and kind. But now her
spirits were so much more animated. She went bobbing and floating
through the Parish like a balloon. Her _interest_ in everything seemed
to have first been multiplied by nine, and then by nine again. And
eighty-one times anything is a pretty large quantity. Beggars, gipsies,
hawkers, crossing-sweepers, blind men positively smacked their lips when
they saw Miss Rawlings come sailing down the street. Her heart was like
the Atlantic, and they like row-boats on the deep—especially the blind
men. As for her donations to the Parochial Funds, they were first
doubled, then trebled, then quadrupled.

There was, first, for example, the Fund for giving all the little
parish girls and boys not only a bun and an orange and a tree at
Christmas and a picnic with Veal and Ham Pie and Ice Pudding in
June, but a Jack-in-the-Green on May-day and a huge Guy on
November the 5th, with Squibs and Roman Candles and Chinese
Crackers and so on. There was not only the Fund for the Delight of
Infants of Every Conceivable Description; there was also the
Wooden-Legged Orphans’ Fund. There was the Home for Manx and Tabby
Cats; and the Garden by the River with the willows for Widowed
Gentlewomen. There was the Threepenny-Bit-with-a-Hole-in-It
Society; and the Organ Grinders’ Sick Monkey and Blanket Fund, and
there was the oak-beamed Supper Room in “The Three Wild Geese” for
the use of Ancient Mariners—haggis and toad-in-the-hole, and plum
duff and jam roley-poley. And there were many others. If Miss
Rawlings had been born in another parish, it would have been a sad
thing indeed for the cats and widows and orphans and organ monkeys
in her own.

With such a power and quantity of money, of course, writing cheques was
very much like just writing in birthday-books. Still you can give too
much to any Fund; though very few people make the attempt. But Miss
Rawlings was a practical woman. Besides, Miss Rawlings knew perfectly
well that charity must at any rate _begin_ at home, so all this time she
was keeping what the Ancient Mariners at the “Three Wild Geese” called a
“weather eye” wide open for her lost Little Gal. But how, it may be
asked, could she keep any kind of an eye open for a lost Little Gal,
when she didn’t know what the lost Little Gal was like? And the answer
to that is that Miss Rawlings knew perfectly well.

She may not have known where the absurd notion came from, or when, or
why; but she knew that. She knew what the Little Gal looked like as well
as a mother thrush knows what an egg looks like; or Sir Christopher Wren
knew what a cathedral looks like. But as with the Thrush and Sir
Christopher, a good many little things had happened to Miss Rawlings
first. And this quite apart from the old wooden doll she used to lug
about when she was seven, called Quatta.

One morning, for example, Miss Rawlings had been out in her carriage and
was thinking of nothing in particular, just daydreaming, when not very
far from the little stone bridge at Clobburne she happened to glance up
at a window in the upper parts of a small old house. And at that window
there seemed to show a face with dark bright eyes watching her. Just a
glimpse. I say _seemed_, for when in the carriage Miss Rawlings rapidly
twisted her head to get a better view, she discovered either that there
had been nobody there at all, or that the somebody had swiftly drawn
back, or that the bright dark eyes were just too close-together flaws in
the diamond-shaped bits of glass. In the last case what Miss Rawlings
had seen was mainly “out of her mind.” But if so, it went back again and
stayed there. It was excessively odd, indeed, how clear a remembrance
that glimpse left behind it.

Then again, Miss Rawlings, like her great-aunt Felicia, had always
enjoyed a weakness for taking naps in the train, the flowers and plumes
and bows in her bonnet nodding the while above her head. The sound of
the wheels on the iron lines was like a lullaby; the fields trailing
softly away beyond the window drowsed her eyes. Whether asleep or not,
she would generally close her eyes and at least appear to be napping.
And not once, or twice, but three separate times, owing to a screech of
the whistle or a jolt of the train, she had suddenly opened them again
to find herself staring out (rather like a large animal in a field) at a
little girl sitting on the opposite seat, who, in turn, had already
fixed _her_ eyes on Miss Rawlings’s countenance. In every case there had
been a look of intense, patient interest on the little girl’s face.

Perhaps Miss Rawlings’s was a countenance that all little girls are apt
to look at with extreme interest—especially when the owner of it is
asleep in the train. It was a broad countenance with a small but
powerful nose with a round tip. There was a good deal of fresh colour in
the flat cheeks beneath the treacle-coloured eyes; and the hair stood
out like a wig beneath the huge bonnet. Miss Rawlings, too, had a habit
of folding her kid-gloved hands upon her lap as if she was an image.
None the less, you could hardly call it only “a coincidence” that these
little girls were so much alike, and so much like the face at the
window. And so very much like the real lost Little Gal that had always,
it seemed, been at the back of Miss Rawlings’s mind.

Not that there had ever been any kind of a ghost in Miss Rawlings’s
family. Her family was far too practical for that; and her mansion was
most richly furnished. All I mean is that each one of these little girls
happened to have a rather narrow face, a brown pigtail, rather small
dark brown bright eyes and narrow hands, and except for the one at the
window, they wore round beaver hats and buttoned coats. No; there was no
ghost _there_. What Miss Rawlings was after was an absolutely real
Little Gal. And her name was Barbara Allan.

This sounds utterly absurd. But so it had come about. For a long
time—having talked about her Little Gal again and again to the
Archdeacon and Mrs. Tomlington and Mr. Moffat and other ladies and
gentlemen in the Parish, Miss Rawlings had had no name at all for her
small friend. But one still summer evening, there being a faint red in
the sky, while she was wandering gently about her immense drawing-room,
she had happened to open a book lying on an “occasional” table. It was a
book of poetry—crimson and gilt-edged, with a brass clasp—and on the
very page under her nose she had read this line:

                   “Fell in love with Barbara Allan.”

The words ran through her mind like wildfire. Barbara Allan—it was _the_
name! Or how very like it! An echo? Certainly some words and names _are_
echoes of one another—sisters or brothers once removed, so to speak.
Tomlington and Pocklingham, for example; or quince and shrimp; or
angelica and cyclamen. All I mean is that the very instant Miss Rawlings
saw that printed “Barbara Allan,” it ran through her heart like an old
tune in a nursery. It _was_ her Little Gal, or ever so near it—as near,
that is, as any name can be to a thing, viz., crocus, or comfit, or
shuttlecock, or mistletoe, or pantry.

Now, if Miss Rawlings had been of royal blood and had lived in a
fairy-tale; if, that is, she had been a Queen in Grimm—it would have
been a quite ordinary thing that she should be seeking a little lost
Princess, or badly in need of one. But except that her paternal
grandfather was a Sir Samuel Rawlings, she was but very remotely
connected with royalty. Still, if you think about it, seeing that once
upon a time there were only marvellous Adam and beautiful Eve in the
Garden, that is in the whole wide world, and seeing that all of Us as
well as all of the earth’s Kings and Queens must have descended from
them, _therefore_ all of Us must have descended from Kings and Queens.
So too with Miss Rawlings. But—unlike Mrs. Tomlington—she had not come
down by the grand staircase.

Since then Miss Rawlings did not live in a fairy-tale nor in Grimm, but
was a very real person in a very real Parish, her friends and
acquaintances were all inclined in private to agree with Mrs. Tomlington
that her Little Gal was nothing but a bee in her bonnet. And that the
longer it stayed there the louder it buzzed. Indeed, Miss Rawlings
almost began to think of nothing else. She became absent-minded, quite
forgetting her soup and fish and chicken and French roll when she sat at
dinner. She left on the gas. She signed cheques for the Funds without
looking back at the counterfoils to see what she had last subscribed.
She gave brand-new mantles and dolmens away to the Rummagers; ordered
coals from her fishmonger’s; rode third class with a first class ticket;
addressed a postcard to Mrs. Tomfoolington—almost every kind of
absent-minded thing you can imagine.

And now she was always searching: even in the house sometimes; even in
the kitchen quarters. And her plump country maids would gladly help too.
“No, m’m, she ain’t here.” “No, m’m, we ain’t a-seed her yet.” “Lor’,
yes’m, the rooms be ready.”

Whenever Miss Rawlings rose from her chair, she would at once peer
sharply out of the window to see if any small creature were passing in
the street beyond the drive. When she went a-walking, she was frequently
all but run over by cabs and vans and phaetons and gigs, because she was
looking the other way after a vanishing pigtail. Not a picture-shop, not
a photographer’s could she pass without examining every single face
exhibited in the window. And she never met a friend, or the friend of a
friend, or conversed with a stranger without, sure enough, beginning to
talk about Young Things. Puppies or kittens or lambs, perhaps, first,
and then gradually on to little boys. And then, with a sudden whisk of
her bonnet, to Little Girls.

Long, long ago now she had learnt by heart the whole of “Barbara Allan”:

             “... She had not gane a mile but twa,
                      When she heard the dead-bell ringing,
                  And every jow that the dead-bell gied,
                      It cryed, _Woe to Barbara Allan!_

                  ‘O mother, mother, make my bed!
                      O make it saft and narrow!
                  Since my love died for me to-day,
                      I’ll die for him to-morrow.’”

Oh dear, how sad it was; and you never knew! Could it be, could it be,
she cried one day to herself, that the dead, lovely Barbara Allan of the
poem had got by some means muddled up in Time, and was in actual fact
_her_ Little Gal? Could it be that the maiden-name of the wife of Miss
Allan’s father had been Rawlings?

Miss Rawlings was far too sensible merely to wonder about things. She at
once enquired of Mr. Moffat (who had been once engaged to her dearest
friend, Miss Simon, now no more) whether he knew anything about Barbara
Allan’s family. “The family, Felicia?” Mr. Moffat had replied, his
bristling eyebrows high in his head. And when, after a visit to the
British Museum, Mr. Moffat returned with only two or three pages of
foolscap closely written over with full particulars of the ballad and
with “biographical details” of Bishop Percy and of Allan Ramsay and of
Oliver Goldsmith and of the gentleman who had found the oldest
manuscript copy of it in Glamis Castle, or some such ancient edifice,
and of how enchantingly Samuel Pepys’s friend, Mrs. Knipp, used to sing
him the air—but nothing else: Miss Rawlings very reluctantly gave up all
certainty of this. “It still might be my Little Gal’s family,” she said,
“and on the other hand it might not.” And she continued to say over to
herself with infinite sorrow in her deep rich voice, that tragic stanza:

                She had not gane a mile but twa,
                  When she heard the dead-bell ringing,
                And every jow that the dead-bell gied,
                  It cryed, _Woe to Barbara Allan!_

And “Oh no! not Woe,” she would say in her heart.

Soon after this, Miss Rawlings fell ill. A day or two before she took to
her bed, she had been walking along Laburnum Avenue, and had happened to
see the pupils of the Miss Miffinses’ Young Ladies’ Seminary taking the
air. Now, the last two and smallest of these pupils—of the Crocodile, as
rude little boys call it—were walking arm in arm with the nice English
mistress, chattering away like birds in a bush. Both of them were rather
narrow little creatures, both wore beaver hats beneath which dangled
brown pigtails. It was yet one more astonishing moment, and Miss
Rawlings had almost broken into a run—as much of a run, that is, as
being of so stout and ample a presence she was capable of—in order to
get a glimpse of their faces.

But, alas! and alack! the wrought-iron gates of the school were just
round the corner of Laburnum Avenue, and the whole Crocodile had
completely disappeared into the great stone porch beyond by the time she
had come in sight of the two Monkey-Puzzles on the lawn, and the brass
curtain bands to the windows.

Miss Rawlings stood and gazed at these—for the moment completely
forgetting polite manners. The hurry and excitement had made her hot and
breathless: and the wind was in the east. It dispirited her, and instead
of ringing the bell and asking for the Miss Miffinses, she had returned
home and had at once written an invitation to the whole school to come
to tea the following Sunday afternoon. In a moment of absent-mindedness,
however, she left the note on her little rose-wood secretaire beside the
silver inkstand that had belonged to Sir Samuel. And two days
afterwards—on the Friday, that is, the month being February—she had been
seized with Bronchitis.

It was a rather more severe attack than was usual for Miss Rawlings,
even in foggy November, and it made Miss Rawlings’s family physician a
little anxious. There was no immediate danger, he explained to Nurse
Murphy; still care is care. And Miss Rawlings, being so rich and so
important to the Parish, he at once decided to invite an eminent
Consultant to visit his patient—a Sir James Jolliboy Geoghehan who lived
in Harley Street and knew more about Bronchitis (Harley Street being
also in a foggy parish) than any other medical man in Europe or in the
United States of America (which are not usually foggy places).

Fortunately, Sir James took quite as bright and sanguine a view of his
patient as did Miss Rawlings’s family physician. There Miss Rawlings
lay, propped up against her beautiful down pillows with the frills all
round, and a fine large pale blue-ribboned bed cap stood up on her large
head. She was breathing pretty fast, and her temperature, according to
both the gentlemen’s thermometers, was 102.6.

A large copper kettle was ejecting clouds of steam from the vast
cheerful fire in the vast brass and steel grate, with the Cupids in the
chimneypiece. There were medicine bottles on the little table and not
only Nurse Murphy stood grave but brave on the other side of the bed,
but, even still more Irish Nurse O’Brien also. Now, the more solemn
_she_ looked the more her face appeared to be creased up in a gentle
grin.

Miss Rawlings panted as she looked at them all. Her eye was a little
absent, but she too was smiling. For if there was one thing Miss
Rawlings was certain to do, it was to be cheerful when most other people
would be inclined to be depressed. As she knew she was ill she felt
bound to be smiling. She even continued to smile when Sir James
murmured, “_And_ the tongue?” And she assured Sir James that though it
was exceedingly kind of him to call it wasn’t in the least necessary. “I
frequently have bronchitis,” she explained, “but I never die.” Which
sounded a little like “rambling.”

When Sir James and the family physician had gone downstairs and were
closeted together in the gilded Library, Sir James at once asked this
question: “What, my dear sir, was our excellent patient remarking about
a Miss Barbara Allan? Has she a relative of the name?”

At this Miss Rawlings’s family physician looked a little confused. “No,
no; oh dear no,” he exclaimed. “It’s merely a little fancy, a caprice.
Miss Rawlings has a notion there is a little girl belonging to her
somewhere—probably of that name, you know. Quite harmless. An
aberration. In fact, I indulge it; I indulge it. Miss Rawlings is a most
able, sagacious, energetic, philanthropic, practical, generous,
and—and—humorous lady. The fancy, you see, has somehow attached itself
to the _name_ Barbara Allan—a heroine, I believe, in one of Sir Walter
Scott’s admirable fictions. Only that. Nothing more.”

Sir James, a tall man, peered down at Miss Rawlings’s family physician
over his gold pince-nez. “I once had a patient, my dear Dr. Sheppard,”
he replied solemnly in a voice a good deal deeper but not so rich as
Miss Rawlings’s, “who had the amiable notion that she was the Queen of
Sheba and that I was King Solomon. A _most_ practical woman. She left me
three hundred guineas in her will, for a mourning ring.” He thereupon
explained (in words that his patient could not possibly have understood,
but that Dr. Sheppard understood perfectly), that Miss Rawlings was in
no immediate danger and that she was indeed quite a comfortable little
distance from Death’s Door. Still, bronchitis _is_ bronchitis; so let
the dear lady be humoured as much as possible. “Let her have the very
best nurses, excellent creatures; and all the comforts.” He smiled as he
said these words, as if Dr. Sheppard was a long-lost brother. And he
entirely approved not only of the nice sago puddings, the grapes, the
delicious beef-juice (with toast _or_ a rusk), the barley water and the
physic, but of as many Barbara Allans as Miss Rawlings could possibly
desire. And all that he said sounded so much like the chorus of “Yeo,
ho, ho,” or “Away to Rio,” or “The Anchor’s Weighed,” that one almost
expected Dr. Sheppard to join in.

Both gentlemen then took their leave, and Dr. Sheppard having escorted
Sir James to his brougham (for this was before the days of machine
carriages), the two nurses retired from the window and Miss Rawlings
sank into a profound nap.

In a few days Miss Rawlings was much, much, much better. Her temperature
was 97.4. Her breathing no more than twenty-four or five to the
minute—at most. The flush had left her cheeks, and she had finished
three whole bottles of medicine. She devoured a slice from the breast of
a chicken and said she enjoyed her sago pudding. The nurses _were_
pleased.

Now, naturally, of course, Miss Rawlings’s illness increased her anxiety
to find Barbara Allan as quickly as ever she could. After all, you see,
we all of us have only a certain number of years to live, and a year
lasts only twelve calendar months, and the shortest month is only
twenty-eight days (excluding Leap Year). So if you want to do anything
badly it is better to begin at once, and go straight on.

The very first day she was out in Mr. Dubbins’s invalid chair she met
her dear friend Mr. Moffat in Combermere Grove, and he stood conversing
with her for a while under the boughs of almost as wide a spreading
chestnut-tree as the village blacksmith’s in the poem. Mr. Moffat always
looked as if he ought to have the comfort of a sleek, bushy beard. If he
had, it is quite certain it would have wagged a good deal as he listened
to Miss Rawlings. “What I am about to do, my dear Mr. Moffat, is
advertise,” she cried, and in such a powerful voice that the lowest
fronds of the leafing chestnut-tree over her head slightly trembled as
they hung a little listlessly on their stalks in the spring sunshine.

“Advertise, my dear Felicia?” cried Mr. Moffat. “And what for?”

“Why, my dear old friend,” replied Miss Rawlings, “for Barbara Allan to
be sure.”

Mr. Moffat blinked very rapidly, and the invisible beard wagged more
than ever. And he looked hard at Miss Rawlings’s immense bonnet as if he
actually expected to see that busy bee; as if he even feared it might be
a Queen Bee and would produce a complete hive.

But after bidding him good-bye with yet another wag of the bonnet and a
“Yes, thank you, Dubbins,” Miss Rawlings was as good as her word. She
always was. Three days afterwards there appeared in the _Times_, and in
the _Morning Post_, and in the _Daily Telegraph_, and five days later,
in the _Spectator_, the following:

    WANTED as soon as possible, by a lady who has lost her as long
    as she can remember, a little girl of the name (probably) of
    Barbara Allan, or of a name that _sounds_ like Barbara Allan.
    The little girl is about ten years old. She has a rather
    three-cornered shaped face, with narrow cheek-bones, and bright
    brown eyes. She is slim, with long fingers, and wears a pigtail
    and probably a round beaver hat. She shall have an _exceedingly_
    happy home and Every Comfort, and her friends (or relatives)
    will be amply rewarded for all the care and kindness they have
    bestowed upon her, for the first nine years or more of her life.

You should have seen Miss Rawlings reading that advertisement over and
over. Her _Times_ that morning had a perfume as of the spices of
Ambrosia. But even Miss Rawlings could not have hoped that her
advertisement would be so rapidly and spontaneously and abundantly
answered. The whole day of every day of the following week her beautiful
wrought-iron gates were opening and shutting and admitting all kinds and
sorts and shapes and sizes of little girls with brown eyes, long
fingers, pigtails and beaver hats, _about_ ten years of age. And usually
an Aunt or a Step-mother or the Matron of an Orphanage or a Female
Friend accompanied each candidate.

There were three genuine Barbara Allans. But one had reddish hair and
freckles; the second, curly flaxen hair that refused to keep to the
pigtail-ribbon into which it had been tied; and the third, though her
hair was brown, had grey speckled eyes, and looked to be at least
eleven. Apart from these three, there were numbers and numbers of little
girls whose Christian name was Barbara, but whose surname was Allison or
Angus or Anson or Mallings or Bulling or Dalling or Spalding or
Bellingham or Allingham, and so on and so forth. Then there were
Marjories and Marcias and Margarets, Norahs and Doras, and Rhodas and
Marthas, all of the name of Allen, or Allan or Alleyne or Alyn, and so
on. And there was one little saffron-haired creature who came with a
very large Matron, and whose name was Dulcibella Dobbs.

Miss Rawlings, with her broad bright face and bright little eyes, smiled
at them all from her chair, questioned their Aunts and their
Stepmothers, and their Female Friends, and coveted every single one of
them, including Dulcibella Dobbs. But you _must_ draw the line
somewhere, as Euclid said to his little Greek pupils when he sat by the
sparkling waves of the Ægean Sea and drew triangles in the sand. And
Miss Rawlings felt in her heart that it was kinder and wiser and more
prudent and proper to keep strictly to those little girls with the
three-cornered faces, high cheek-bones, “really” bright brown eyes and
with truly appropriate pigtails. With these she fell in love again and
again and again.

There was no doubt in the world that she had an exceedingly motherly
heart, but very few mothers could so nicely afford to _give it rein_.
Indeed, Miss Rawlings would have drawn the line nowhere, I am afraid, if
it had not been for the fact that she had only ten thousand pounds or so
a year.

There were tears in her eyes when she bade the others good-bye. And to
everyone she gave not one bun, not one orange, but a _bag_ of oranges
and a _bag_ of buns. And not merely a bag of ordinary denia oranges and
ordinary currant buns, but a bag of Jaffas and a bag of Bath. And she
thanked their Guardianesses for having come such a long way, and would
they be offended if she paid the fare? Only one was offended, but then
her fare had cost only 3_d._—2_d._ for herself, and 1_d._ (half price)
for the little Peggoty Spalding she brought with her. And Miss Rawlings
paid _her_ sixpence.

She kept thirty little ten-year-olds altogether, and you never saw so
many young fortunate smiling pigtailed creatures so much alike. And Miss
Rawlings, having been so successful, withdrew her advertisements from
the _Times_ and the _Morning Post_ and the _Daily Telegraph_ and the
_Spectator_, and she bought a most beautiful Tudor house called Trafford
House, with one or two wings to it that had been added in the days of
Good Queen Anne, and William and Mary, which stood in entirely its own
grounds not ten miles from the Parish boundary. The forest trees in its
park were so fine—cedars, sweet chestnuts, and ash and beech and
oak—that you could only get a glimpse of its chimneys from the entrance
to the drive.

Things _are_ often curious in this world, and coincidences are almost as
common as centipedes. So Miss Rawlings was more happy than surprised
when, on looking over this mansion, she counted (and to make sure
counted again) exactly thirty little bedrooms, with some larger ones
over for a matron, a nurse, some parlour-maids, some housemaids, some
tweeny-maids and a boy to clean the button-boots and shoes. When her
legal adviser explained to her that this establishment, what with the
little chests-of-drawers, basins and ewers, brass candlesticks, oval
looking-glasses, mahogany beds, three-legged stools, dimity curtains,
woolly rugs, not to speak of chiffoniers, what-nots, hot-water bottles,
soup ladles, and so on and so forth; not to mention a uniform with brass
buttons for the man with whiskers at the park gate, would cost her at
least six thousand a year, that bee in Miss Rawlings’s bonnet buzzed as
if indeed it _was_ a whole hive gone a-swarming.

“Well, now, my dear Mr. Wilkinson,” she said, “I made a little estimate
myself, being a _business_ woman, and it came to £6,004 10_s._ 0_d._ How
reasonable! I shall be over four pounds in pocket.”

So, in a few weeks everything was ready; new paint, new gravel on the
paths, geraniums in the flower-beds, quilts as neat as daisies on a lawn
on the mahogany beds, and the thirty Barbara Allans sitting fifteen a
side at the immensely long oak table (where once in Henry VIII’s time
monks had eaten their fish on Fridays), the matron with the corkscrew
curls at the top and the chief nurse in her starched cap at the bottom.
And Miss Rawlings, seated in the South bow-window in an old oak chair
with her ebony and ivory stick and her purple bonnet, smiling at her
Barbara Allans as if she had mistaken Trafford House for the Garden of
Eden.

And I must say every single pigtail of the complete thirty bobbed as
merrily as roses in June over that first Grand Tea—blackberry jelly,
strawberry jam, home-made bread, plum cake, the best beef-dripping for
those who had not a sweet or a milk tooth, Sally Lunns, heather honey,
maids-of-honour, and an enormous confection of marchpane, with cupids
and comfits and silver bells and thirty little candles standing up in
the midst of the table like St. Paul’s Cathedral on the top of Ludgate
Hill in the great city of London. It was a lucky thing for the Thirty’s
insides that Grand Teas are not every-day teas.

[Illustration: “THAT FIRST GRAND TEA”]

And so, when all the thirty Pigtails had sung a Latin grace put out of
English by Mr. Moffat and set to a tune composed by a beloved uncle of
Miss Rawlings, who also was now no more, the Grand Tea came to an end.
Whereupon the Thirty (looking themselves like yet another Crocodile with
very fat joints) came and said good night to Miss Rawlings, though some
of them could scarcely speak. And as Miss Rawlings knew that not _all_
little girls like being kissed by comparative strangers, she just shook
hands with each, and smiled at them as if her motherly heart would
almost break. And Dr. Sheppard was Medical Adviser to the thirty little
Pigtailers, and Mr. Moffat came every other Sunday to hear their
catechisms.

And this was the order of the day with the Pigtails in their home. At
half-past seven in Summer, and at nine in Winter, the boy in buttons
rang an immense bell, its clapper tied round with a swab of cotton-wool,
to prevent it from clanging too sonorously. This great quiet bell was
not only to waken from their last sweet dreams the slumbering Pigtails
in their little beds, but to tell them they had yet another half-hour
between the blankets before they had to get up. Then, hair-brushes,
tooth-brushes, nailbrushes, as usual. Then, “When morning gilds the
sky,” and breakfast in the wide white room with the primrose curtains
looking out into the garden. And if any Pigtail happened to have been
not quite so good as usual on the previous day, she was allowed—if she
asked for it—to have a large plateful of porridge, with or without salt,
for a punishment. No less than ninety-nine such platefuls were served
out in the first year—the Pigtails were so high-spirited. Still, it can
be imagined what a thirty-fold sigh of relief went up when breakfast on
December 31st was over and there hadn’t been a hundredth.

From nine _a.m._ to twelve _p.m._ the Pigtails were one and all
exceedingly busy. Having made their beds they ran out into the garden
and woods: some to bathe in the stream, some to listen to the birds,
some to talk and some to sing; some to paint and some to play, and some
to read and some to dance, and some just to sit; and some, high up in a
beech-tree, to learn poems, to make up poems and even to read each
other’s. It all depended on the weather. The sun shone, the rooks cawed,
the green silken leaves whispered; and Miss Rawlings would stand looking
up at them in their venturous perch as fondly as a cat at its kittens.
There was not at last a flower or a tree or an insect or a star in those
parts—or a bird or a little beast or a fish or a toadstool or a moss or
a pebble that the little Pigtails did not know by heart. And the more
they knew them the more closely they looked at them, and the more
closely they looked at them the more they loved them and the more they
knew them—round and round and round and round.

[Illustration: “HIGH UP IN A BEECH-TREE TO LEARN POEMS”]

From twelve to one there were “Lessons”; then dinner, and tongues like
jackdaws raiding a pantry for silver spoons. In the afternoon those who
went for a walk towards the stranger parts, went for a walk. Some stayed
at home in a little parlour and sang in chorus together like a charm of
wild birds. Some did their mending and darning, their hemming and
feather-stitching, and some did sums. Some played on the fiddle, and
some looked after their bullfinches and bunnies and bees and guinea-pigs
and ducks. Then there were the hens and the doves and the calves and the
pigs to feed, and the tiny motherless lambs, too (when lambs there were)
with bottles of milk. And sometimes of an afternoon Miss Rawlings would
come in and sit at a window just watching her Pigtails, or would read
them a story. And Dr. Sheppard asseverated not once, but three times
over, that if she went on bringing them sweetmeats and candies and
lollipops and suckets to such an _extent_, not a single sound white
ivory tooth of their nine hundred or so would be left in the Pigtails’
heads. So Miss Rawlings kept to Sundays.

At five was tea-time: jam on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays; jelly on
Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays; and both on Sundays. From six to
seven there were “Lessons,” and when the little Pigtails were really
tired, which was always before nine, they just slipped off to bed. Some
of them had munched their supper biscuits and were snug in bed indeed
even before the rest had sung the evening hymn. And the evening hymn was
always “Eternal Father”—for being all of them so extremely happy they
could not but be “in peril on the deep.” For happiness in this world may
fly away like birds in corn, or butterflies before rain. And on Sundays
they sang “Lead, kindly light” too, because Miss Rawlings’s mother had
once been blessed by the great and blessed Cardinal Newman. And one
Pigtail played the accompaniment on her fiddle, and one on the
sweet-tongued viola, and one on the harpsichord; for since Miss Rawlings
had read “Barbara Allan” she had given up pianofortes. And then, sleepy
and merry and chattering, they all trooped up to bed.

So this was their Day. And all night, unseen, the stars shone in their
splendour above the roof of Trafford House, or the white-faced moon
looked down upon the sleeping garden and the doves and the pigs and the
lambs and the flowers. And at times there was a wind in the sky among
the clouds; and at times frost in the dark hours settled like meal
wheresoever its cold brightness might find a lodging. And when the
little Pigtails awoke, there would be marvellous cold fronds and
flowerets on their windowpanes, and even sometimes a thin crankling slat
of ice in their water-jugs. On which keen winter mornings you could hear
their teeth chattering like monkeys cracking nuts. And so time went on.

On the very next June 1, there was a prodigious Garden Party at
Trafford House, with punts on the lake and refreshments and lemonade
in a tent in the park, and all the Guardianesses and Aunts and
Stepmothers and Matrons and Female Friends were invited to come and
see Miss Rawlings’s little Pigtails. And some brought their sisters,
and some their nieces and nephews. There were Merry-go-Rounds, Aunt
Sallies, Frisk-and-Come-Easies, a Punch and Judy Show, a Fat Man, a
Fortune-Teller, and three marvellous acrobats from Hong Kong. And
there were quantities of things to eat and lots to see, and
Kiss-in-the-Ring, and all broke up after fireworks and “God Save the
Queen” at half-past nine.

The house, as I keep on saying, was called Trafford House, but the
_Home_ was called “The Home of all the little Barbara Allans and such
like, with Brown Eyes, Narrow Cheekbones, Beaver Hats, and Pigtails,
Ltd.” And it was “limited” because there could be only thirty of them,
and time is not Eternity.

And now there were only three things that prevented Miss Rawlings from
being too intensely happy to go on being alive; and these three were as
follows: (_a_) She wanted to live always at the House—but how could the
Parish get on without her? (_b_) What was she going to do when the
Pigtailers became 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, etc., and grown-up? And (_c_)
How could she ever possibly part with any of them or get any more?

For, you see, Miss Rawlings’s first-of-all Barbara Allan was aged 10,
and had somehow managed to stay there. But because, I suppose, things
often go right in this world when we are not particularly noticing them,
and don’t know how, all these difficulties simply melted away at last
like butter in the sun.

In the first place, Miss Rawlings did at last (in 1888, to be exact, one
year after Queen Victoria’s first Jubilee), did, I say, at last go to
live at the Home of all the little Barbara Allans and such like with
Brown Eyes, Beaver Hats, and Pigtails, Ltd. She was called The Matron’s
Friend, so as not to undermine the discipline. When her Parish wanted
her, which was pretty often, the Parish (thirty or forty strong) came to
see her in her little parlour overlooking the pond with the punts and
the water-lilies.

Next, though how, who can say, the little Pigtails somehow did not grow
up, even though they must have grown older. Something queer happened to
their Time. It cannot have been what just the clocks said. If there
wasn’t more of it, there was infinitely more _in_ it. It was like air
and dew and sunbeams and the South Wind to them all. You simply could
not tell what next. And, apart from all that wonderful learning, apart
even from the jam and jelly and the Roast Beef of Old England, they went
on being just the right height and the right heart for ten. Their brown
eyes never lost their light and sparkle. No wrinkles ever came in their
three-cornered faces with the high cheek-bones; and not a single grey or
silver hair into their neat little pigtails that could at any rate be
seen.

Next, therefore, Miss Rawlings never had to part with any of them or to
search or advertise for any more.

Yet another peculiar thing was that Miss Rawlings grew more and more
like a Pigtail herself. She grew younger. She laughed like a
school-girl. Her face became a little narrower, even the cheek-bones
seemed not to be so wide. As for her bonnets, as time “went on,” they
grew up instead of broadwise. And when she sat in Church with the
Thirty, in the third pew down from Mrs. Tomlington’s, you might almost
have supposed she herself was a widish pigtail, just a little bit
dressed up.

It is true that in the very secretest corner of her heart of hearts she
was still looking for the one and only absolute little Barbara Allan of
her life-long day-dream; but that is how things go. And the thought of
it brought only a scarcely perceptible grave glance of hope and enquiry
into her round brown eyes. But underneath—oh dear me, yes—she was almost
too happy and ordinary and good-natured and homely a Miss Rawlings to be
telling this story about at all.

We all die at last—just journey on—and so did Miss Rawlings. And so did
the whole of the Thirty, and the matron, and the chief nurse, and Mr.
Moffat, and Dr. Sheppard, and the Man with whiskers at the park gates,
_and_ the Boy who cleaned the button-boots; parlour-maids, tweeny-maids,
Mrs. Tomlington and all.

And if you would like to see the Old House and the little graves, you
take the first turning on the right as you leave the Parish Church on
your left, and walk on until you come to a gate-post beyond the
mile-stone. A path crossing the fields—sometimes of wheat, sometimes of
turnips, sometimes of barley or oats or swedes—brings you to a farm in
the hollow with a duck-pond, guinea-fowl roosting in the pines at
evening, and a lovely old thatched barn where the fantailed doves croon
in the sunshine. You then cross the yard and come to a lane beside a
wood of thorn and hazel. This bears a little East, and presently after
ascending the hill beyond the haystack you will see—if it is still
there—The Home of all the little Barbara Allans and such like with Brown
Eyes, Beaver Hats and Pigtails, Ltd.

And not very far away is a little smooth-mown patch of turf with a
beautiful thatched wall round it, which Mr. Moffat consecrated himself.
And there, side by side, sleep the Little Thirty, with their pigtails
beside their narrow bones. And there lie the tweeny-maids, the
parlour-maids, the Man with whiskers at the park gate, and the Boy who
cleaned the button-boots. And there Miss Rawlings, too. And when the
last trump sounds, up they will get as happy as wood-larks, and as sweet
and fresh as morning mushrooms. But if you want to hear any more about
_that_, please turn to the Poems of Mr. William Blake.




[Illustration]

                                  THE
                              PERFECT HOST

                (_From Lady Trenchard’s Visitor’s Book_)

                                                      SIR WALTER RALEIGH


                What is it makes the Perfect Host?
                Not wine and coffee, eggs and toast,
                For these you can get just as well
                In any dreary good hotel;
                Not resolute attempts to please,
                For money will procure you these.
                The Perfect Host thinks vastly less
                Of comfort than of happiness.
                He’s happy; and the overflow
                Belongs to those who come and go.
                Within his house you’ll hear no quarrels
                And very little talk of morals,
                He does not lead a perfect life,
                He sometimes has a perfect wife.
                But this of all his points is best—
                He does not want a perfect guest;
                And even when you go too far
                He’s friendly with you as you are.




                               The Spark

                                                              A. PEMBURY


        The daylight was fading, and shadowy gloom
        Was creeping and crawling all over the room,
        When out of the fire, like a star in the dark,
        There leapt to the fender a bright little spark.

        “Ha, ha, little children!” it chuckled with glee,
        “I’ve something to tell you, so listen to me!
        This morning, Tom Dull, whom I never admire,
        Was sitting in front of this very same fire;
        And, as it burned dimly, was heard to remark:
        ‘Oh, Mary! There’s nothing in here but a spark!’

        “The spark was myself, and I thought, Well-a-day!
        It’s hard to be judged in that impudent way.
        But stuck to my labours, and shortly, you know,
        Had warmed up the coals to a beautiful glow.

        “I called from their slumbers, the fairies of flame,
        And out on the carpet they merrily came,
        And up all the curtains, a marvel to view,
        They climbed as no others are able to do.

        “They peeped in the corners where shadows lay hid,
        And chuckled: ‘We’ve found you! Come out!’ and they did.
        Thus, darting about in the liveliest play,
        They caught all the shadows and drove them away.

        “I’m certain they laughed, though you think it absurd;
        For never a sound of that laughter was heard.
        Yet where is the wonder, for who will dispute
        That hearts often laugh when the lips are quite mute?

        “That’s all. But in parting, oh, take it from me
        That sparks of endeavour, though tiny to see,
        May quickly grow stronger and end, as you guess,
        In lighting the beautiful fire of success.
        My task is accomplished. Good-bye!” said the spark—
        And, giving one flash, he went out in the dark.

[Illustration]




                               Theophania

                                                     ADELAIDE PHILLPOTTS


Peter-Wise was a clever young peasant who lived in a little village that
looked like a dimple in the hillside. He owned fifty mooing cows, one
hundred baaing sheep, forty grunting pigs, two hundred clacking
fowls—and a bellowing bull. And he prophesied that in ten years’ time he
would have doubled these numbers. But with all this wealth, Peter-Wise
lacked the most important creature of all—a wife. Without a wife, what
is the use of fifty cows, one hundred sheep, forty pigs, two hundred
fowls—and a bull?

Now Peter-Wise declared that he would not marry a maiden who was less
than seventeen or more than twenty-two years old, and in the village
there were only six girls between these ages who were not already
betrothed or wed. Of these six, therefore—all of whom, being brought up
on cream and honey and wheaten bread and saffron cake and wild
strawberries, were bonny and plump and fair to see—Peter-Wise decided to
choose the cleverest, who, nevertheless, must be just the least bit less
clever than he was. So, to discover which was the cleverest, for, busy
man that he was with his cows and his sheep and his pigs and his
fowls—and his bull, he had not the time to woo each separately, he
resolved to set them three tasks: one to try their fingers; one to try
their brains; one to try their imaginations; and to marry her who
succeeded best in the three.

[Illustration: “I WILL MARRY WHICHEVER OF YOU CAN PERFORM THREE TASKS”]

So Peter-Wise summoned Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie and Lucy, and
Theophania, called Tiffany for short—these were the names of the
girls—and said to them:

“Children, I will marry whichever of you can perform to the best
advantage these three tasks: first, to darn a hole in the heel of a
sock; secondly, to open, without touching the keyhole, the big barn door
which is always locked; thirdly, to catch the moon and put it into a
wash-tub.”

Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie and Lucy said:

“Oh, the sock is easy enough, but the door and the moon——”

Theophania, called Tiffany for short, said: “The door and the moon
should be easy enough, but the sock——”

The three trials were to take place in the morning, afternoon and
evening respectively. So in the morning the six maidens assembled in
Peter-Wise’s parlour—Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie and Lucy in
their best flowered-prints—Tiffany in a green smock; Tiffany had brown
eyes, but the eyes of the others were five different shades of blue:
speedwell, cornflower, lupin, forget-me-not, and chicory.

Peter-Wise gave them each a sock, out of which he had cut the heel, and
left them for an hour to darn the hole. When he came back the six socks
were lying on the table in a heap, finished. He examined them carefully.
Then he said:

“Five of these socks are so perfectly darned that not one exceeds
another in excellence. The sixth, however, is very badly done—a mere
cobble. Come forward in turn, and let her who darned _this_ sock claim
it.”

Mary tripped forward, looked at the sock, turned up her nose a little
and shook her pretty head. “Not mine,” said she. Then came Sally and
Polly and Minnie and Lucy, also turning up their noses a little and
shaking their pretty heads and saying: “Not mine,” “Not mine,” “Not
mine,” “Not mine.” Lastly, with a twinkle in her eye, came Theophania,
called Tiffany for short.

“Mine,” she said. “I never, never shall be able to darn.”

“The first task is over,” announced Peter-Wise. “This afternoon meet me
outside the big barn door which is always locked, at three o’clock.”

And away trotted Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie and Lucy and
Tiffany.

At three o’clock they met outside the big barn door, wearing pink and
yellow and blue and white and green sunbonnets, and fluttering together
like butterflies, except Tiffany, who did not wear a bonnet at all, and
she stood by herself, thinking.

Peter-Wise said:

“This door, as you know, is always kept locked. Here is the key. Now,
let me see which of you can open it without touching the keyhole, for I
assure you it can quite easily be done.”

“How can we open a locked door without a key?” said Mary and Sally and
Polly and Minnie and Lucy in dismay, and each thought—“It is useless
trying the handle—besides, I should look so foolish, and the others
would jeer.”

But Tiffany—who always thought her own thoughts, not other
people’s—thought something quite different.

“We give it up,” sorrowfully said Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie
and Lucy.

“And you?” asked Peter-Wise of Tiffany.

Tiffany thought: “Because the door has always been locked before, that
doesn’t prove it is locked to-day. Anyhow, here goes!” And she marched
up to the big barn door, turned the handle, and—opened it wide!

“Oh!” cried Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie and Lucy. “But it is
always locked!”

“It wasn’t to-day,” said Theophania, called Tiffany for short; and she
could not help laughing, kindly, at the five expressions of surprise on
the five fair faces.

“The second task is over,” said Peter-Wise. “Now go and borrow your
mothers’ wash-tubs, wait till the moon rises, catch it, and put it in
the tub. Then come and fetch me.”

“But,” said Tiffany, “there is only one moon.”

“Exactly,” he replied, “therefore only one of you can succeed.”

Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie and Lucy whispered together.

“He is making sport of us,” they agreed. “Not even Tiffany can catch the
moon. We must give it up.” And each of them said in her heart: “After
all, so-and-so would make a much better husband.”

So they gave it up.

[Illustration: “THERE, SURE ENOUGH, WAS THE ROUND, SILVER MOON”]

But in the evening Tiffany came to Peter-Wise and said:

“I have caught the moon and put it into mother’s wash-tub. Come and
see.”

“Caught the moon!” exclaimed Peter. “But there it is up in the sky!”

“Not at all,” replied she. “That is not the moon.”

The night was still and warm. Peter-Wise followed Tiffany to a
water-meadow, in the middle of which was her mother’s wash-tub.

“There!” she cried, pointing. “Go and see if the moon isn’t in that
tub.”

So he went up to it, looked over the edge, and there, sure enough, was
the round, silver moon shining up at him.

“Well, but there are not two moons,” he said, looking at the other moon
in the sky.

“How foolish you are!” said Tiffany. “That moon in the sky is just the
reflection of the real moon in this tub.”

Peter-Wise was determined to make sure, so he took a penny out of his
pocket and dropped it into the tub. It fell through the moon with a
splash.

“Oh ho!” he exclaimed. “Whoever heard of a penny falling through the
moon? This moon is made of water.”

“Nobody ever tried to throw a penny through before,” said Tiffany.

Then Peter-Wise kicked the tub, and the moon began to wobble. A piece of
it splashed over the edge on to his boots.

“Whoever heard of the moon being spilt?” he asked.

“Nobody ever tried to spill it before,” said Tiffany.

Peter-Wise stroked his chin.

“I have it!” he cried, and grasping the tub, heaved it sideways and
upset the mock moon on to the grass, where with little watery sighs it
slowly disappeared.

“So much for your moon,” said he. “And behold its reflection is still in
the sky!” But Tiffany only laughed and laughed and laughed.

“Yes,” said Peter to himself, “she is certainly the cleverest girl in
the village, but just the least bit less clever than I am. I will marry
her.” And aloud he said:

“Theophania, you shall, in spite of the sock and the moon that was not a
moon, be my wife.”

“Peter-Wise,” she answered, “you shall not win me so easily. There is a
task that _you_ shall perform for _me_ before I will marry you.”

“Well, that is only fair after all,” said he, rather taken aback.

“It is quite out of the question for me to marry you before I can darn a
sock,” she continued, “but in six years I shall have perfected myself in
that difficult art. Will you wait for me six years?”

This she said to try his love.

“I will wait,” said he, who really loved her, and knew something about
women.

Now, at the end of three months Peter-Wise was still waiting for
Theophania, and she realised that he would keep his word for the rest of
the six years. But meanwhile she had learnt to darn as beautifully as
Mary and Sally and Polly and Minnie and Lucy, who by this time were
betrothed respectively to John and James and William and Tom and Adam.
So she came to him one day with an example of her darning, and said:

“Peter, it has not taken me so long to learn to darn as I thought it
would. How would it be if we were married _before_ the six years are
up?”

“We will get married whenever you please, dear heart,” he said, not
surprised.

“Well then,” she replied, “—to-morrow.”

And they were married at eleven o’clock the next morning.




                      The Weasel in the Storeroom

                   (_La Fontaine, Fables, III._, 17)

                                                            EDWARD MARSH


      Into a storeroom once Miss Weasel came,
      Through a small hole squeezing her lank lean frame:
      From illness she had grown so slender.
      Once in, she made complete surrender
      To her capacious appetite,
      Nibbling and guzzling day and night.
      The life she led, Lord only knew,
      Or the amount of bacon she got through—
      Small wonder she grew chubby, plump, and sleek!
      After this diet for a week,
      She heard some noise which made her wish to egress.
      Where was the hole? She scuttled to and fro.
      Surely ’twas this one? No—then this? Still less.
      “Well, bless my soul!” she said, “’twas here, I know,
      I wriggled through, hardly a week ago.”
      A rat perceived how she was troubled.
      “Since you’ve been here,” said he, “your paunch has doubled.
      Thin you came in, and thin you must go out.”

      This has been said to others, I’ve no doubt;
      But Reader, be it far from you or me
      To press the delicate analogy.[2]

Footnote 2:

  The allusion is to the tribunal set up by Colbert to enquire into the
  peculations of the Financiers.




[Illustration]

                            Love the Jealous


                                                            W. H. DAVIES

              I praised the daisies on my lawn,
              And then my lady mowed them down.
                My garden stones, improved by moss,
                She moved—and that was Beauty’s loss.
              When I adored the sunlight, she
              Kept a bright fire indoors for me.
                  She saw I loved the birds, and that
                  Made her one day bring home a cat.
              She plucks my flowers to deck each room,
              And make me follow where they bloom.
                  Because my friends were kind and many,
                  She said—“What need has Love of any?”
              What is my gain, and what my loss?
              Fire without sun, stones bare of moss,
                  Daisies beheaded, one by one;
                  The birds cat-hunted, friends all gone—
              These are my losses: yet, I swear,
              A love less jealous in its care
                  Would not be worth the changing skin
                  That she and I are living in.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

                                  The
                             Magic Medicine

                            BY
                              DENIS MACKAIL


Once upon a time there was a very naughty little girl called Freda. She
was what is known as an only child, and so you might have thought that
her father and mother and her grandparents and her uncles and aunts and
her nurse would have had all the more time for teaching her to be good.
But though this was perfectly true, and they all worked very hard at
saying “Don’t do that, Freda,” or “Put that down at once!” she continued
to be extremely naughty.

She never tried to be polite to anybody, she used to tear her clothes on
purpose, she used to break her toys, and walk in puddles, and snatch
things from other children, and say things that weren’t true, and eat
gravel and blow bubbles in her milk. If there are any other naughty
things that I have forgotten to mention, then she did them too. And when
she was scolded, instead of saying she was sorry, she used to lie down
on the ground and bellow at the top of her voice.

For this reason the people who knew her best grew to be rather careful
about scolding her—especially in the Park, where her behaviour had often
attracted quite a crowd; but, of course, the only result of this was
that she became far naughtier than ever.

Is that perfectly clear? Well, now we come to the story.

One afternoon she was taken to a children’s party, where there was not
only a bran-pie but also a conjuror. Freda was fairly good while she was
being dressed, and still fairly good while she was driving there in the
taxi with her nurse, but as soon as she got to the party itself she just
let herself go. She made a face at a little boy who was smaller than she
was until he cried and had to be taken to sit upstairs. She snatched a
balloon from another child and burst it, so that the child also cried
and had to be taken to sit upstairs. And when the bran-pie came in, she
felt about in it for nearly two minutes until she had found the largest
parcel—which, of course, is cheating—and afterwards, because she didn’t
like what was inside, she forced another little girl to change presents
with her, and the other little girl cried and had to be taken to sit
upstairs.

And when the conjuror was in the middle of his most difficult trick and
had just got to the part where he was going to cut open an orange and
take out of it a watch which he had borrowed from the father of the
little girl who was giving the party, I am sorry to say that Freda
shouted out: “It isn’t the same orange!”

This was exceedingly naughty of her, and distressed the conjuror more
than I can say, as well as spoiling all the pleasure of the good
children who thought it _was_ the same orange. And several of them were
so much upset that they cried, and had to be taken to sit upstairs.

Freda’s nurse had seen her doing all these naughty things, but she had
said to herself: “It’s no use my saying anything to Miss Freda now,
because if I do she will only lie down on the floor and bellow at the
top of her voice. It will be better to speak to her about it when we get
home.” So she contented herself by making a stern face when she thought
that Freda and no one else could see her. Only, as a matter of fact, she
did this just at the wrong moment and missed Freda altogether, and only
succeeded in frightening a little boy in a kilt. And he cried, and had
to be taken to sit upstairs.

So Freda went on being naughtier and naughtier, and the room upstairs
became fuller and fuller of other children, but the lady whose little
girl was giving the party didn’t like to say anything because she
thought, “Freda is an only child, and, anyhow, I needn’t ask her another
time.” And Freda’s nurse didn’t like to say anything because (as I have
already told you) she was afraid that Freda might disgrace her by lying
down on the floor and bellowing at the top of her voice.

Is that all perfectly clear? Well, now we get on to what happened next.

All the children went into the dining-room, where there were so many
buns and chocolates and crackers and pink cakes and sandwiches and other
things of this nature that their eyes nearly popped out of their heads.
And in the middle of the biggest table there was an enormous cake, and
on the top of the enormous cake there was a rather smaller cake, and on
the top of the rather smaller cake there was a golden star.

And as soon as Freda saw this golden star, she pointed at it (which, of
course, she shouldn’t have done) and said in a very loud, clear voice:
“I WANT THAT STAR.”

If only her nurse had heard these words, she would most certainly have
said something which would have made Freda lie down on the floor and
bellow at the top of her voice. For there is no need to explain how
naughty it is to point at things in other people’s houses and say that
you want them. No grown-up person would ever dream of doing a thing like
that.

But, as a matter of fact, the nurse had just met another nurse who was a
great friend of hers, and although they had had a long talk in the Park
only that very morning, they still found they had so much to tell each
other that neither of them heard what Freda was saying.

Is that all perfectly clear? Well, now Freda really _is_ going to be
naughty.

For I am grieved to say that, having pushed a number of other children
out of the way (several of whom cried and had to be taken to sit
upstairs) she went on pushing until she had got right up to the middle
table. And then, when no one was looking, she stood up very quickly on a
chair and snatched at the golden star.

I really don’t know what, exactly, she meant to do with it, because she
had no pocket in her party frock; and very likely if she had been left
to herself she would have got tired of the golden star and dropped it
under the table.

But just at this moment a little boy in a white silk blouse looked up
and saw what she had done.

“Oh!” he said, in a very loud, clear voice. “Freda has taken the golden
star.”

And all the other children began to shout and tell each other that Freda
had taken the golden star. And Freda’s nurse heard the noise, and came
quickly to see what had happened.

“What’s the matter, Miss Freda?” she said. “What did you do?”

“Nothing,” said Freda.

“She did,” said a little girl who had just lost all her front teeth.
“She took the golden star off the top of the cake.”

“Put it back at once,” said Freda’s nurse.

“Shan’t!” said Freda.

And then the nurse saw it in her hand and tried to take it from her. And
Freda never stopped to think what the star might be made of, but put it
very quickly into her mouth, and crunched it into three bits, and
swallowed them all with one swallow.

“I’ve swallowed it,” she said.

Her nurse turned first pink, then white, and then green in the face.

“Put it out at once,” she said.

“I can’t,” said Freda. “It’s gone.”

“Oh dear,” said the nurse. “Does anyone know what that star was made
of?”

But nobody knew what the star was made of. Even the mother of the little
girl whose party it was didn’t know.

“What did it taste like?” they asked Freda.

But she had swallowed it so quickly that she didn’t know.

“You’re a very naughty little girl,” said the nurse. And of course you
can all guess what happened then. Freda got off her chair and lay down
on the floor, and began to bellow at the top of her voice.

But it was far too serious a case to be treated merely by sending her to
sit upstairs. For all that anyone knew the star might have been made of
the most deadly kind of poison. So Freda’s nurse ran off and found her
shawl, and she picked her up off the floor (where she was still
bellowing at the top of her voice) and wrapped the shawl round her and
carried her away and put her into a taxi, and they drove back to Freda’s
home, and she missed the dancing altogether—which served her perfectly
right.

And when they got home, the nurse went to the cupboard in the corner of
the room and took out a very large bottle and a very small glass, and
filled the very small glass from the very large bottle, and then she
said to Freda:

“Now you must drink this.”

At these words Freda lay down on the floor and bellowed at the top of
her voice.

“If you don’t drink it,” said the nurse, “you will have a terrible
pain.”

“Whoo-hoo-hoo,” said Freda (for this was the way that she bellowed), and
she crawled right under the table—in her best frock—and stayed there.

“Now, Miss Freda,” said the nurse presently, when everything else had
failed, “I shall put this glass on the table here, and I shall go
upstairs and turn on your bath, and if you haven’t drunk it by the time
I come back again, I shall be very angry indeed.”

Then she left the room, and after a second Freda came out from under the
table and picked up the glass and sloshed all the slimy stuff in it into
the fireplace, and it spluttered and fizzed and disappeared from sight.

And when she had done this, she was terribly frightened.

She was so frightened that when the nurse came back and said, “Ah,
that’s a good little girl. I see you’ve drunk it all up nicely,” she
never said anything at all. She didn’t even bellow at the top of her
voice.

All the time she was having her bath she was trying to say what she had
done, but she never could quite bring herself to do it. And after she
was in bed she called out suddenly to her nurse, meaning to say what she
had done with the slimy stuff in the little glass; but when the nurse
came in, she just couldn’t get it out. She pretended that she had wanted
a drink of water, and the nurse gave it her and went away again, and
Freda was left alone—still feeling terribly frightened.

“Supposing,” she thought, “that star really _was_ made of poison.
Supposing that stuff I threw in the fire might have saved me. Oh dear,
if the poison kills me now, it will be all my own fault.”

It was a long time before she could go to sleep, and in the morning she
hadn’t been awake for more than five minutes when it all came back to
her. But she had left it so long now, that it was quite impossible to
tell anyone.

Is that all perfectly clear? Well, now I’ll tell you something that
Freda doesn’t know to this day.

The mother of the little girl who had given the party had been so
anxious about Freda that the very first thing in the morning she had
telephoned to the shop where the cake had come from, and had asked the
lady there what the star was made of. And the lady had said: “Sugar.”
And the mother of the little girl who had given the party had telephoned
to Freda’s house and had asked to speak to Freda’s nurse and had told
her that the star was made of sugar. And when Freda’s nurse heard this
she was very much relieved, but at the same time she wasn’t going to
tell Freda that she had made her drink that slimy stuff (as she thought)
for nothing at all. “If I do that,” she said to herself, “I shall never
get Miss Freda to drink any medicine again.”

So she said nothing; and Freda—who of course hadn’t drunk even a drop of
the slimy stuff—went about wondering when the poison was going to begin
working, and whether it would hurt horribly when it did.

She was so frightened now that if only she could have got at the large
bottle, she would have drunk it all up without saying anything—and that
really _would_ have made her ill. But she couldn’t get at the large
bottle, because the cupboard was out of her reach.

And so what do you think she did?

She went to the china pig in which she kept all her money, and she shook
it and rattled it and waved it and waggled it until at last a very
bright sixpence (which her grandfather had once given her) rolled out on
to the floor. And she picked up this sixpence, and waited carefully
until her nurse went up to the bathroom to wash out the party frock
which had got all dirty from being under the table last night, and then
she ran downstairs very quickly and let herself out by the front door
and ran off to the chemist’s shop, which was just round the corner.

The chemist was a very old man with spectacles, and in the ordinary way
Freda was rather frightened of him, but she was still more frightened of
being poisoned, so she pushed open his door—which, always made a little
bell ring—and went straight up to his counter and knocked on it with her
sixpence.

Presently the old chemist came out and looked at her through his
spectacles.

“And what can I do for you, miss?” he said.

“I want to buy some medicine,” said Freda, “that would save someone from
being poisoned by a golden star on the top of a cake at a party. And it
mustn’t cost more than sixpence, because that’s all I’ve got.”

“Dear, dear,” said the chemist. “And are you the little girl who ate the
golden star?”

Freda would have liked to say “No,” but she didn’t dare.

“Yes,” she said, in a very small voice.

“Dear, dear,” said the chemist again. “That wasn’t very good of you, was
it?”

“No,” said Freda, in a still smaller voice.

“And when did you eat it?” asked the old chemist.

“Yesterday,” said Freda.

“And do you still feel quite well?” asked the old chemist.

“Yes,” said Freda. “But I only pretended to drink the slimy stuff they
gave me last night, and I’m afraid the poison may still be waiting
inside me.”

“It seems to me,” said the chemist, “that what you really need is some
medicine to make you good. Eh?”

He looked at her very hard through his spectacles as he said this, and
Freda agreed at once.

“Very well,” said the chemist. “You’ve come to me just in time. When I
close this shop to-night I’m never coming back, and next week they’re
going to start pulling it down. But I’ve got just one dose of medicine
for naughty children left, and you shall have it now.”

Then he took Freda round behind the counter, and she watched him while
he poured a little from one bottle, and a few drops from another, and a
teaspoonful from a third, and just a dash from a fourth. And he mixed
them all together until the stuff fizzed and turned pink, and then he
poured most of it away and gave the rest to Freda.

“If you drink this,” he said, “it will make you good for twenty-four
hours.”

She drank it down, and it tasted delicious.

“Thank you very much,” she said. “And here’s the sixpence.”

“Thank _you_, miss,” said the old chemist. “And here’s your change.”

And he gave Freda half-a-crown from his pocket, and she ran back home as
fast as she could and found the front door still open. So she ran right
up to the nursery, and she dropped the half-crown into the china pig,
and just at that moment the nurse came down from the bathroom.

“Why, Miss Freda,” she said; “how quiet you’ve been.”

“I cannot see,” said Freda, “why any child should ever be anything but
quiet. Can you, my dear nurse?”

She was good now, you see, because the pink medicine was beginning to
work. And this is the way that good children talk. But the nurse
couldn’t make it out.

“Well,” she said, with a laugh, “I’m sure it’s strange to hear you say
that, Miss Freda.”

“I fear,” said Freda, “that I have often been extremely thoughtless in
the past, and that I have often allowed my temper to get the better of
me, with the result that I have lain down on the floor and bellowed at
the top of my voice. I can only express my regret that this should have
been so, and my hope that you will overlook the trouble which I must
have given you.”

The nurse opened her mouth very wide and stared.

“Good gracious, Miss Freda!” she said. “What _has_ come over you?”

“Nothing, that I am aware of,” said Freda. “And now, if you will be good
enough to dress me, I think it is time for us to go up to the Park.”

The nurse was more puzzled than ever, for Freda used almost always to
make a fuss about going out. But she was still more puzzled by the time
they came in again. For Freda hadn’t walked in a single puddle, she had
insisted on keeping her gloves on, she hadn’t run, she hadn’t shouted,
and she had refused to play with her usual friends because she said
their games were so noisy and rough.

At lunch time she asked for a second helping of plain rice-pudding, and
ate every scrap of it.

“This can’t last,” said the nurse to herself. But it did. And after tea,
when Freda went down to the drawing-room, she quite terrified her mother
by asking to be taught a hymn—although her father had just offered to
play at tigers with her.

At half-past six she kissed her father and mother and went up to bed
without being fetched. While she was having her bath, instead of
splashing—and screaming when it was time to come out—she told her nurse
how she had decided to give all her toys to the poor children who hadn’t
got any. As soon as she was put to bed, she lay quietly down and went
fast to sleep.

The nurse and Freda’s mother had a long talk together that evening.

“I don’t see how she can be ill, mum,” said the nurse, “because she’s
eaten everything, and made no fuss about it at all. I just can’t make it
out.”

“I don’t like it,” said Freda’s mother. “There’s nothing we can do now,
and she’s certainly sleeping very peacefully—though I’ve never seen that
look on her face before. But if she’s no different in the morning, I
shall send for the doctor.”

In the morning Freda was just the same, and her mother sent for the
doctor.

“It is very kind of you, dear mother,” said Freda, when she was told,
“but I am feeling perfectly well. Would it not be better if the doctor
were to visit some of the poor children in the hospital?”

And this alarmed Freda’s mother so much that she went quickly to the
telephone, and asked Dr. Tomlinson to put off all his other patients and
come at once. When he arrived, he found Freda sitting bolt upright in
her little chair and reading a lesson-book.

“Well, my little dear,” he said, “and how do you feel this morning?”

“It is very good of you to ask,” said Freda. “I am happy to say that I
am in the best of health. However, if you have a few minutes to spare,
perhaps you would be kind enough to hold my book, and see whether I have
yet learnt this beautiful poem about the poor little chimney-sweep.”

The doctor did nothing of the sort.

“I’m very glad you sent for me,” he told Freda’s mother, and he picked
Freda up and felt her pulse and looked at her tongue and put his head
first against her chest and then against her back.

“Well,” he said at length; “this beats me. The child seems to be
perfectly well, and yet....” And he scowled and puffed out his cheeks
and walked up and down, while all the time Freda’s mother and the nurse
waited in the utmost anxiety.

And then all of a sudden the clock struck, and as it was twenty-four
hours since Freda had swallowed the magic dose, the effect vanished in a
single instant.

The grown-up people who were watching her saw her jump out of the chair,
and fling the lesson-book on the ground.

“Now, now,” said Dr. Tomlinson, “oughtn’t you to be more careful with
that pretty book?”

Freda gave one look at him, and then she lay down on the floor and
bellowed at the top of her voice.

“Thank heaven!” said her mother.

“Our dear little Miss Freda has come back to us,” said the nurse.

“Hum-ha,” said Dr. Tomlinson. “Yes, I think we have cured her.”

He had to say this, you see, because he was a doctor. But Freda’s mother
was so glad that her little girl was herself once more, that she thanked
him over and over again. And all the time Freda lay on the floor and
bellowed at the top of her voice, and from that moment she was just as
naughty as ever she had been before.

I hope that’s all perfectly clear. Some people say that this story will
encourage little girls to be naughty, by making them think that their
parents and nurses prefer them like that. I should be very sorry if this
were so, but of course it’s no use pretending that anything happened
otherwise than I have said.

Freda never had another dose of the magic medicine, because the old
chemist never came back to his shop, and—as he had said—the next week
the men came and began to pull it down. But of course she didn’t go on
being naughty for ever, because after a bit she grew up, and now she
actually has a little girl of her own. And if there’s one thing that’s
absolutely certain, it is that all grown-up people are always good.




                       The Rhyme of Captain Gale

                                                              A. PEMBURY


                Oh, Captain Gale who sails the sea,
                When waves are high and winds are free,
                Will kiss his hand, to make it plain
                How much he scorns the hurricane;
                A most imprudent thing to do
                While sailing on the ocean blue.

                He walks his deck, I’ve heard it said,
                When wiser sailors lie in bed,
                And far upon the lonely foam,
                He takes his food as if at home
                (Including plates of greasy stew);
                A thing that I could never do.

                His ship may toss, his ship may pitch,
                He doesn’t mind a morsel which;
                And never seems to care a bit
                How deep the sea is under it—
                Though this, to me, beyond a doubt,
                Is something he should care about.
                But sailors always were, to me,
                A singular community.




[Illustration]

                              Sermon Time

                                                           HENRY NEWBOLT


                  The roof is high above my head,
                      With arches cool and white;
                  The man is short, and hot, and red;
                      It is a curious sight.




[Illustration]

                    OLAF THE FAIR AND OLAF THE DARK

                                                         CYNTHIA ASQUITH


Once upon a time there lived two boys who were each called Olaf. One had
golden curls clustered all over his head—curls so glittering that every
woman’s hand must touch their brightness: and to look into his eyes was
to see the gleam of blue sky through two rounded windows. In short, he
was the most beautiful child that his mother had ever seen.

The other Olaf was crowned with dark curls—blue-black as the plumage of
a crow. And to look into his eyes was to see twin stars shine up through
the brown depths of a mountain stream. In short, he was the most
beautiful child that his mother had ever seen.

Now, these two Olafs had both been born on exactly the same day, but
Olaf the Fair was the son of a mighty King, and lived in a dreadfully
big palace, and Olaf the Dark was the son of a poor shepherd, and lived
in a dreadfully small cottage.

When Olaf the Fair learned to walk, he staggered across a vast floor,
and if he tumbled, it was only to sink into the soft depths of thick
carpets. In his nursery there was nothing dangerous—not even the corners
were allowed to be sharp—so he never knew the fun of watching bruises
turn from plain brown to yellow and purple and green.

But Olaf the Dark learned to walk in quite a different way; he staggered
across an uneven floor of cold stone, in a small room, crowded with
things from whose sharp corners Pain constantly darted out at him. The
hard floor seemed to rise up and smite him, first in one place and then
in another. His mother was always kissing these places to make them
well. He liked these kisses and was proud of his scarred body,
especially of the red knees across which his seven skins were never seen
all at once. His knees generally looked as though raspberry jam had been
spread over them.

Just as you do, both Olafs hated to go to bed, but, just as you do, to
bed they both had to go. Olaf the Fair plunged his bright head into a
large pillow—so soft that it almost met across his nose, whilst the
small pillow on which Olaf the Dark laid his dark head was so bumpy and
so hard that in the morning his bruised ear would often ache, he knew
not why.

[Illustration]

Both boys loved to eat and drink. Olaf the Fair was fed on every sort of
delicious food. You should have seen his nursery table piled high with
glowing fruits, coloured cakes and trembling jellies. Chicken came every
day, and there was always jam for tea. Olaf the Dark seldom swallowed
anything more dainty than lumpy porridge, black bread and just a very
little bacon. Yet he often knew a treat, that was far greater than any
of the dainties in the palace, and this was the taste of his plain food
when he was very hungry—so hungry that his empty place was just
beginning to hurt.

His father lay all crumpled up with rheumatism, so that, almost as soon
as Olaf the Dark could walk, he had to shoulder the shepherd’s heavy
staff, whistle to the sheep-dog, and stride forth to guard his father’s
flocks.

Watching the baaing sheep as they nibbled the short grass, their bells
tinkling as they moved, the lonely little shepherd-boy shivered in the
cold, wet winds of winter and gasped in the scorching heats of summer.
He would have liked to stay at home, learning to read by the leaping
fire whilst his mother stirred the porridge, but day after day, he had
to put on his little sheepskin suit, and go out to be hurt by
hailstones, terrified by thunder or soaked in the snow.

The year Olaf the Fair was born his father died, so he became king, the
smallest king that ever was seen. His crown was heavy and made his head
ache. His sad, smiling mother said he must learn how to be a wise king.
This meant doing hundreds and hundreds of lessons. Whilst ten tutors
tried to stuff figures and facts into his head, he would stare out
through the windows wistfully watching all the different sorts of
weather. Oh, how he longed to be out in the hail, the thunder, or the
snow!

One day as Olaf the Dark sat by his sheep on the high hillside and
played on his flute to keep himself company, a huge brown mastiff came
into sight. Olaf’s faithful sheep-dog pricked his ears and low thunder
rumbled in his shaggy throat. The fierce mastiff sped along the ground,
and in the blinking of an eye the two dogs had flown at one another’s
throats. Terrified, Olaf the Dark strove with his staff to beat them
apart, but all in vain. Fortunately four horsemen, who were the little
king’s escort, now galloped up and, leaping from their saddles,
contrived to separate the foam-flecked, blood-spattered dogs.

“Well for thee, lad, we were at hand,” said the tallest of the men.
“’Twould have gone ill with thy mongrel had he harmed the king’s pet.”

“It was your dog’s fault! He attacked mine!” indignantly answered Olaf
the Dark.

“Hush!” said the man roughly. “Here is the king. Bow down to him, you
saucy lad!”

For Olaf the Fair had just ridden up. The man held the reins of the
snow-white palfrey and the little king dismounted to assure himself of
his mastiff’s safety.

Now, Olaf the Dark had never even seen a picture-book, and at the
dazzling sight of Olaf the Fair he gasped in amazement. The little king
was clad in velvet of shimmering blue, edged with shining silver and on
his head was a crown of gold.

He approached the shepherd-boy, and the two Olafs, who were of exactly
the same size, stared long at one another.

“I’m glad your dog is not harmed. How long have you had him?” said the
king. “Wolf was only given to me yesterday.”

“Sentry is my father’s,” answered the shepherd. “He had him before I was
born.”

“How old are you?” asked the king.

“I was seven years yesterday,” answered the shepherd.

“Were you? That’s funny!” exclaimed the king. “Why I had my seventh
birthday yesterday, too. But, who is with you? Surely you aren’t allowed
to stay out by yourself, are you?”

“I _have_ to stay out,” replied the shepherd. “I should like to go
home.”

“You’d like to go home? Funny! Why, I’d give anything to be allowed to
sit on that silvery frost! Have you been playing with those nice woolly
sheep for long? What pretty bells they’ve got! And wherever did you get
that splendid crook’d staff? I’d like to have one just like that,”
chattered the little king.

“Sire,” broke in the tall man with a low bow. “We must return home. His
Excellency your Tutor-in-Chief said that only one hour could be spared
from your Majesty’s studies to-day.”

Olaf the Fair stamped his foot.

“Oh, bother!” he cried. “I can’t bear to go in to yawny lessons! I want
to stay out in the shininess. I say, Boy, when have you got to go home
and do lessons?”

“Don’t do any lessons,” grunted Olaf the Dark.

“You don’t do any lessons?” exclaimed Olaf the Fair. “Oh, you _are_ a
lucky one! How long will you stay out?”

“Till it gets dark. The sheep must graze till then.”

“Till it gets dark? Oo-oo-oo-ee! Lovely! I’ve never been out in the
night. I would like to see how the stars get there. Have you ever seen
one just pricking through the blackness? But, where’s your coat? ’Twill
surely be cold before ’tis dark.”

“Don’t have a coat.”

“Don’t you wear anything but just that one dead sheep? It must be
beautifully comfortable. My clothes are so hot and heavy,” said the
king, tugging at his rich robes.

“Sire?” pleaded the attendant.

“All right, I’m coming,” said Olaf the Fair, and reluctantly mounting
his palfrey, he turned its arched neck towards the distant palace.
“Good-bye, Boy. Wish I could stay and play with you and your sheep.”

Wistfully Olaf the Dark gazed after the gay figure of the king
disappearing into the rising mists, and as he rode away, Olaf the Fair
turned his head, weary with the weight of his crown, and stared long at
the solitary figure of the sturdy little shepherd. Disconsolately, he
listened to the tinkling bells till they died away in the distance.

Deep in thought, his forgotten flute on the grass, the shepherd-boy sat
on. Hours passed. The sun sank in flaming glories of orange and gold.
Dusk thickened into darkness and heavy drops of rain fell coldly on his
bare head. Still pondering, Olaf the Dark at last rose and wearily drove
his drowsy sheep towards home.

He sat down to his supper. Silently he spooned his burnt porridge and
gnawed at his crust of black bread.

“What’s come to thee, son?” asked his mother. “I miss the gabble of thy
tongue.”

“I’ve seen the king, mother,” said Olaf, and he told her the story of
the dog fight.

“Seen his small majesty, have you? To think of it! Born the very same
day as you, he was. Be you two boys much of a size?”

“Yes, he’s no taller nor I and I guess I’m the stronger. But oh, mother,
the lovely horse he was riding, and the clothes he had on him, and the
glittering crown on his head! ’Twas as though he had caught rays from
the sun itself! Oh, mother, I’d like to be a king the same as him, and
ride around in coloured clothes, nor need to mind no silly sheep.”

“Is it wanting to be a king you are, Olaf?” laughed his mother. “Sure,
there’s no contentment under the sun. But I’m thinking a good shepherd’s
better nor a bad king, and they’re saying to be a good king’s no easy
calling—subjects being more unaccountable troublesome than sheep
themselves. Anyways, you two lads have the same God to serve, and sure
you can serve Him from a cottage just as easy as from a palace. To be a
good shepherd’s a proud thing, I’m thinking, and as for the rheumatics,
they enters the joints be you high or be you low.”

But Olaf the Dark was not to be consoled. For the first time he noticed
the shabbiness of his sheepskin suit, and the smallness of the cottage.
Discontentedly he looked around.

“What would the king’s palace be like?” he asked.

“Oh!” said his mother. “They do say it be all marble and gold with
thousands of lights a-twinkling from the ceiling, and I’ve heard as the
wee king sleeps in a bed that’s bigger nor this room and the roof of
it’s of gold and there be curtains to it.”

Olaf the Dark blinked.

“Oo-oo-oo-ee!” he sighed, as though sucking the sweetest of sweets.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Now, that same evening, when bedtime came, Olaf the Fair pressed his
face against the cold bars of the window and stared wistfully at the
spangled blue-blackness outside. He thought with envy of the
shepherd-boy out there all alone on the hidden hill. For the little king
yearned to go out while darkness was spread over the earth. How
mysterious the world looked! What, he wondered, happened to all the
ordinary daylight things during the night? If he were outside would he
be able to see his shadow and what would the flowers and the trees be
doing?

After he had climbed into his high, soft, golden bed, the queen came in
to say good night.

“Oh, mother!” he said, snuggling into her white arms, “I’ve done such a
dreadful, dreadful lot of lessons to-day.”

“Poor little Olaf,” said the Queen, kissing her son.

“Oh, mother,” the little king continued, “I saw such a nice boy to-day
out on the hill. And isn’t he lucky? He doesn’t do any lessons at all,
and he’s allowed to stay out by himself with nothing but a lot of sheep.
Mayn’t I have some nice woolly sheep to play with, mother?”

“Sheep aren’t toys, Olaf. They’re duties, like lessons. The boy must
have been a shepherd.”

“Duties, are they, mother? Then I’d much rather do sheep than do
lessons. But was he a real shepherd, that boy? Why, he’s only my age!
Oh, mother, can’t I be a shepherd?”

“You are a sort of shepherd, Olaf. But you’ve got human beings to look
after instead of animals. I want you to be so good a king that I shall
be proud that you were my baby. That’s why you have to work so hard.”

“I do try, mother. But I wish I was a proper out-of-doors shepherd. And
please, mother, must I always wear my crown? It is so heavy, and it
bites my forehead.”

“Yes, darling. I am afraid you must. Your crown is to remind you that
you are a king and not your own master. Now go to sleep and dream that
you are a shepherd and have to shiver out of doors in all the cold and
wet. You’d soon be glad to wake up in your own bed.”

But Olaf the Fair was not to be persuaded.

“I’d love to be out in the rain!” he exclaimed. “I hate indoors, and I’d
like to be dressed in a dead sheep.”

Days, weeks, months passed away, and Olaf the Fair and Olaf the Dark
still continued to think of one another. More and more did the little
king weary of the long lessons which kept him indoors and of all the
solemn attendants who surrounded him. More and more did he pine to be
free and wander at will over the hillside. Above all he yearned to go
out into the night and feel the darkness. When he looked up at the sad,
solemn moon, he would thrill with a strange, unaccountable excitement.
The moon! She flooded the earth with a queer, transforming light that
drew him out of all sleepiness and made his soul shiver till his body
became too excited to lie still. Passionately he envied the shepherd-boy
out there in the darkness, playing his flute beneath the pine trees. One
night the longing grew too strong, and, as he tossed on his golden bed,
it flashed into his memory that the bars of the window in the great hall
were wide enough apart to allow his body to squeeze through them. (This
was long before even kings had glass in their windows.)

He sat upright. The leaves of the trees just outside rustled
mysteriously and tiny twigs tapped against the bars, beckoning him out
of bed. Yes, his mind was made up. He was going to escape and run out
into the strange silvery light that the moon was making. With hammering
heart he slid from his high bed and tiptoed towards the door. There was
a low growl, and the mastiff raised his huge head. Oh, heavens, if he
were to bark, or follow, he would surely arouse the man who slept just
outside across the door! But, fortunately, Olaf remembered the bone he
was to give his dog next morning, and in a moment busy sounds of
scrunching and gulping filled the room.

One danger passed. But now Olaf must step across the body of the man
who, with a dagger in his mouth, guarded his royal master’s door.
Supposing the man were awake. Then the adventure would become impossible
and Olaf would have to return to the dreariness of trying to go to
sleep. Trembling, he turned the handle and pulled the door towards him.
Regular breathing reassured him. The man was fast asleep. Softly as snow
falls on snow, the boy stepped across the huge form and hastened on
swift feet down the long, empty corridor. Shafts of moonlight gleamed
through the round windows and shone on the armour stacked against the
wall. How strange the palace seemed in this light!

A little scared, Olaf slipped down the wide, shallow steps of the huge
staircase. Now he was in the great hall. The night wind blew in and the
tapestries trembled on the walls. Olaf shivered with something that was
more than cold. High up in the sky a pale moon raced through white
trailing clouds. She looked as if she were being pursued.

[Illustration: “THE TWO BOYS STARED AT ONE ANOTHER”]

“I must get out! I must get out!” said Olaf aloud. “I must get out and
run after her.”

He reached the window and seized the bars. Oh, heavens, what was this?
Consternation crushed into his heart, for crisscross along the iron bars
there now ran new horizontal ones. Alas! alas! he had adventured too
late. Impossible now to squeeze through to liberty. His palace was a
prison. In vain he tugged at the cruel bars. They could not even be
shaken. He stamped his foot. Strong sobs shook his small body; tears
scalded his eyes.

But what was this he saw through the dancing blur of his tears? Exactly
opposite, a face stared through at him! The moon had raced behind a
cloud and her light was dim. Was he looking into a mirror instead of out
of doors? No, this pale face was surrounded with dark hair, and now his
fingers felt the touch of other warm fingers. Yes, other hands were
clasping the forbidding bars, and sobs that were not his own fell on his
ear. The moon again sailed forth into the open sky and clearly Olaf the
Fair recognised the face of the shepherd-boy, the constant thought of
whom had so much quickened his discontent. Yes, it was Olaf the Dark,
who, shivering from the cold, stood outside and wistfully gazed at the
warmth and wealth within.

The one craning in, the other craning out, the two boys stared at one
another.

“Why are you crying, Boy?” asked Olaf the Fair.

“Because I can’t get in,” sobbed the little shepherd. “Why are you
crying?”

“Because I can’t get out,” sobbed the little king.

  “Do you want to get _in_?”  }
                                   } shrilled two surprised voices.
  “Do you want to get _out_?” }

“Funny!” they both said, and their next sobs rode up on the top of two
little laughs and their tears fell into the cracks made by their smiles.

Yes, they both laughed and the laughter stretched their hearts, so that
Understanding could enter in and open the door to Contentment. Some
people can only laugh at jokes. If you can laugh at your life even while
it makes you cry, you have learnt more than a thousand schoolroom
lessons can teach you, and your face will be safe from ever growing ugly
through sullenness.

“Why ever do you want to get in here?” asked the king.

“Because it looks so lovely—all gorgeous and glowing. I want to know
what it feels like inside. I’m so cold—I’m quite blue and I mustn’t go
home till morning breaks. I thought I’d squeeze through the bars and
‘catch warm’ and then go back to my sheep. There they are. Do you hear
their bells? But why ever do you want to get out?”

“Because I hate the palace. Ugh! It’s a great big prison. Besides, I
want to feel the moonlight, dance in it, alone and free, and I want to
be cold. I’ve never been cold.”

“Wish I were you!” said both boys at once, smiling as they sighed.

“Where’s your lovely golden crown?” asked Olaf the Dark. “Don’t you
always wear it?”

“Oh, no. I don’t sleep in it. I hang it on its peg. I hate it!”

“Oh, I did want to try it on.”

“You wouldn’t like it. It makes my head ache. It’s so heavy. I’d much
rather have a staff like that crooked one of yours.”

“It’s awfully heavy,” sighed the shepherd.

“Heavy?” exclaimed Olaf the Fair. “I don’t see how a heavy thing in your
hand could matter. Push it through. I want to hold it.”

“Fetch me your crown, then, and we’ll exchange.”

Olaf the Fair knew that it was dangerous to return to his room to fetch
the crown. Supposing the mastiff should bark and awaken the man. But he
longed to handle the shepherd’s staff.

“All right, I’ll fetch it,” he said and tiptoed up the stairs.
Stealthily he stepped across the sleeping man, and the dog, recognising
his master’s scent, made no sound. Olaf seized the crown and hastened
back to the moon-flooded window.

“Here it is,” he said, pushing the crown through the bars that were just
wide enough to let it through. “Try it on, and give me your staff.”

Exultantly, the shepherd placed the gleaming crown on his dark head
while the king grabbed at the tall crook.

“It isn’t a bit heavy! I can’t feel it!” they both exclaimed.

Then for a few minutes they chattered, comparing one another’s days: the
little king complaining of confinement and of being always in a crowd,
the little shepherd complaining of having to stay out of doors and be
all alone.

“Mother says I am the servant of my subjects,” said the king. “And oh,
I’ve got such an awful lot of them! I’d far rather be the master of
sheep, as you are.”

“I’m not their master,” replied the shepherd. “I’m no better than their
slave. Father says so. Besides, they’re really yours. They’ve all got
little crowns stamped on their backs.”

“Have they? That’s funny! Why, my sceptre’s the shape of a shepherd’s
crook.”

As they talked, Olaf the Dark felt the crown beginning to eat into his
forehead. Heavier and heavier it grew until his brows ached and his head
drooped. Meanwhile, in Olaf the Fair’s hand the staff which had seemed
so light grew heavier and heavier. Surely it must be made of lead, he
thought, and at last with a sigh he changed it into his other arm. At
the same moment, with a groan, the shepherd tore the crown from his
head.

“Phew! it _is_ a weight! How can you wear it all day?” he said, pushing
it back through the bars.

“Phew! it _is_ a weight,” said the king, poking the staff through the
bars. “I can’t think how you can carry it all day.”

“Funny,” they both said, and they laughed quite loud; the king, feeling
proud of his head that could carry so heavy a weight, and the shepherd
feeling proud of his right arm, grown strong from carrying so heavy a
staff.

“The dawn breaks,” he said. “I must return to my sheep.”

“Come again,” cried the king. “Come again and talk to me.”

So once in every year the little shepherd returned to the palace walls
and through the bars the boys talked long and eagerly. The king always
told the shepherd how stuffy it was within, and the shepherd always told
the king how cold it was outside, and during the rest of the year,
whenever the king’s discontentment grew, he remembered the weeping boy
who had tried so hard to get _in_. And whenever the shepherd wearied of
his lot, he remembered the boy who wept because he could not get _out_.

The king knew that the shepherd never forgot the heaviness of a king’s
crown, and the shepherd knew that the king never forgot the heaviness of
a shepherd’s staff, and thus each was braced to bear his own burden; for
it is a fact that our burdens are only unendurable when no one
understands how heavy is their weight.

These two boys grew into men. Sorrows they had—as all men have, yet to
each was given much happiness, for the one was a good king and the other
a good shepherd. Far and wide Olaf the Fair was famed as the “Shepherd
of all his People,” and Olaf the Dark, who guarded the royal sheep, was
called the “King of all Shepherds.”




                             The Simple Way

                                                                JOHN LEA


               Said Mr. Wise: “I’m one of those
               Who think a short and pleasant doze
               Will aid in solving, yea or nay,
               Such problems as perplex the day.”

               So, sitting in a comfy chair,
               He stretched his slippers, then and there,
               Toward the fire that glowed and leapt,
               And very soon he soundly slept.

               He soundly slept, or so he thinks,
               For little more than forty winks,
               Then rose with more than common might
               And went and set the world aright.

               To each expectant boy he showed
               The shortest and the straightest road
               That leads to fortune and to fame
               For those who like to play the game.

               To all the girls he made it clear
               How smiles and patience grace the year,
               And how a placid mind will foil
               The wear and tear of daily toil.

               He settled in the smartest way
               The hottest questions of the day,
               And, by a magic mode of thought,
               So deftly on opinion wrought,
               That politicians failed to see
               Why they should longer disagree,
               And forthwith formed, by joint consent,
               _One_ party in our parliament.

               In short, his triumphs were so bright
               While setting all the world aright,
               That when he waked, ’twas sorrow deep
               To find the labours of his sleep
               Had failed the slightest mark to make
               Upon the world he’d left awake.

[Illustration]




                                 Finis

                                                           HENRY NEWBOLT


                           Night is come,
                               Owls are out;
                           Beetles hum
                               Round about.

                           Children snore
                               Safe in bed,
                           Nothing more
                               Need be said.

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to
   16 A crimson-lanterned garden-hous  A crimson-lanterned garden-house

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLYING CARPET ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


