The Project Gutenberg eBook of It pays to advertise
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: It pays to advertise
        A farcical fact in three acts

Author: Roi Cooper Megrue
        Walter Hackett

Release date: January 29, 2025 [eBook #75246]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Samuel French, 1914

Credits: Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE ***






                           It Pays To Advertise

                      A FARCICAL FACT IN THREE ACTS

                                    BY
                   ROI COOPER MEGRUE and WALTER HACKETT

         COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY ROI COOPER MEGRUE and WALTER HACKETT
                  COPYRIGHT IN GREAT BRITAIN AND CANADA
                    COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY SAMUEL FRENCH

                           ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

      CAUTION: Professionals and amateurs are hereby warned that “IT
      PAYS TO ADVERTISE,” being fully protected under the copyright
      laws of the United States, is subject to a royalty, and any
      one presenting the play without the consent of the owner or
      his authorized agents will be liable to the penalties by law
      provided. Application for amateur acting rights must be made to
      SAMUEL FRENCH, 28-30 West 38th Street, New York. Applications
      for the professional acting rights must be made to the AMERICAN
      PLAY COMPANY, 33 West 42d Street, New York.

                                 NEW YORK
                              SAMUEL FRENCH
                                PUBLISHER
                          28-30 WEST 38TH STREET

                                  LONDON
                           SAMUEL FRENCH, Ltd.
                          26 SOUTHAMPTON STREET
                                  STRAND

Especial notice should be taken that the possession of this book without
a valid contract for production first having been obtained from the
publisher, confers no right or license to professionals or amateurs to
produce the play publicly or in private for gain or charity.

In its present form this play is dedicated to the reading public only,
and no performance of it may be given except by special arrangement with
Samuel French, 28-30 West 38th Street, New York.

SECTION 28—That any person who wilfully or for profit shall infringe any
copyright secured by this act, or who shall knowingly and wilfully aid or
abet such infringement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment for not exceeding
one year, or by a fine of not less than one hundred nor more than one
thousand dollars, or both, in the discretion of the court.

_Act of March 4, 1909._

                 GEORGE M. COHAN THEATRE, NEW YORK CITY,

                          _September 8th, 1914_

                             COHAN & HARRIS

                          IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE

                    A FARCICAL FACT IN THREE ACTS BY

                  ROI COOPER MEGRUE and WALTER HACKETT

               _Staged under the direction of Sam Forrest_

      _The characters appear in the order in which they are named_

                                           ORIGINAL CAST
               MARY GRAYSON                _Ruth Shepley_
               JOHNSON                 _George Schaeffer_
               COMTESSE DE BEAURIEN         _Louise Drew_
               RODNEY MARTIN             _Grant Mitchell_
               CYRUS MARTIN                   _John Cope_
               AMBROSE PEALE                _Will Deming_
               MARIE                     _Cecile Bretone_
               WILLIAM SMITH             _Harry Driscole_
               DONALD MCCHESNEY             _W. J. Brady_
               MISS BURKE                 _Vivian Rogers_
               ELLERY CLARK                _Kenneth Hill_
               GEORGE BRONSON            _Sydney Seaward_

                           SYNOPSIS OF SCENES

               ACT   I. Library at Cyrus Martin’s.
               ACT  II. The office of The 13 Soap Company
               ACT III. Same as ACT I.




IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE




THE CAST

(_In the order of their appearance._)


    MARY GRAYSON
    JOHNSON               _Butler at the Martins’_
    COMTESSE DE BEAURIEN
    RODNEY MARTIN
    CYRUS MARTIN
    AMBROSE PEALE
    MARIE                   _Maid at the Martins’_
    WILLIAM SMITH
    MISS BURKE                             _Clerk_
    GEORGE MCCHESNEY
    CHARLES BRONSON
    ELLERY

    ACT   I. The library at CYRUS MARTIN’S.
    ACT  II. RODNEY MARTIN’S Office.
    ACT III. Same as ACT I.

AUTHOR’S NOTE: The advertising statistics used in the play are facts, not
farce.




ACT I


    _SCENE: The library of CYRUS MARTIN’S home in New York City: a
    very handsome room, in tapestry and dark oak. Doors up left,
    down left, and down right. Books, chairs, divans, as necessary.
    Down left is an oak typewriting table with a typewriter on it.
    It is obviously out of place in the room, and is evidently only
    a temporary arrangement. Handsome walnut furniture. Mantel set
    on mantel. Fire dogs and irons in fireplace. All-over carpet.
    Handsome busts on bookcases. Chandelier and four brackets.
    Curtains on windows at back. It is seven o’clock in the
    evening—early September._

    _AT RISE: MARY GRAYSON is seated at typewriter; she strums the
    keys idly and indifferently with one finger. She might hum a
    turkey-trot, keeping time with a one-finger accompaniment. In
    a moment JOHNSON, a typical English butler, enters from door
    upper L._

JOHNSON. I beg pardon, Miss Grayson.

MARY. (_Whirling about eagerly_) What is it, Johnson? Has young Mr.
Martin come in yet?

JOHNSON. No, Miss.

MARY. But I told you not to interrupt me until he did.

JOHNSON. I know, Miss, but it’s that Mr. Ambrose Peale again; he’s called
four times.

MARY. Say that Mr. Martin will be back at eight o’clock.

JOHNSON. Yes, Miss. There’s a lady waiting, too, Miss, to see Mr. Martin
Senior. Here’s her card.

MARY. Mme. la Comtesse de Beaurien. Tell her that Mr. Martin Senior can
see no one.

JOHNSON. I can’t make her comprehend anything I say. She just sits and
waits.

MARY. Oh, bring her in, then. I’ll make her understand somehow, but,
Johnson, don’t fail to let me know the minute young Mr. Martin gets home.

JOHNSON. (_Going to door up L._) Yes, Miss.

(_MARY rises from typewriter, takes off her sleeve-protectors and
smoothes out her skirt._)

JOHNSON. (_Announcing_) Countess dee Beauree-en——

(_The COUNTESS enters from door upper L. She is a very smart-looking girl
of about twenty-six or twenty-seven, typically French in manner and does
not speak a word of English. He exits._)

MARY. (_To COUNTESS_) How do you do?

COUNTESS. (_Advancing to her_) Mam’selle Martin?

MARY. Oh, no, I’m Miss Grayson, Mr. Martin’s secretary.

COUNTESS. (_Blankly_) Sec-ree-taree?

MARY. I’m sorry, but it’s quite impossible for you to see Mr. Martin. He
is confined to the house with a severe attack of gout. If you will write
him I will see that he gets your letter. You can address him here instead
of the office; while he is ill I come here every day for the mail.

COUNTESS. Pardon, mais je ne comprends pas—je ne parle pas l’anglais.
Vous parlez Français peut-être?

MARY. (_Blankly_) You see, Mr. Martin is ill....

COUNTESS. Je répète que je ne parle pas anglais. Mr. Martin est-il ici?

MARY. It’s quite useless for you to talk: I don’t understand French.

COUNTESS. Un moment, Mam’selle—peut-être je parle trop vite.... (_More
slowly_) Je désire parler à M. Martin àpropos des affaires. Je suis
riche. Mais on peut toujours être plus riche. Si je pouvais obtenir
l’agence du savon Martin pour la France ça serait une belle affaire. Je
donnerais cinquante mille francs pour cette agence. Répéter cela à M.
Martin et je suis sûre qu’il me recevra immédiatement. Vous comprenez
maintenant——

MARY. But I really don’t understand French. (_Slowly and loudly_) Mr.
Martin is ill—sick! He can see no one—you’ll have to go—please do——

COUNTESS. Mon Dieu! Vous êtes stupide.... (_Sitting down in chair L. of
table_) J’attendrai M. Martin.

MARY. There’s no use your sitting down. (_She goes to her_) Mr. Martin
doesn’t understand French, either.

COUNTESS. C’est bien, c’est bien, mam’selle; je ne suis pas pressée.

MARY. I don’t understand. Please go—(_She waves her hands_)

COUNTESS. Ah, laissez-moi donc tranquille—vous m’embêtez.

MARY. Oh, dear!

(_JOHNSON enters._)

JOHNSON. Young Mr. Martin’s come in; he’ll be here directly.

MARY. Good Heavens! (_She goes over and makes a wild sweeping gesture_)
Mr. Martin is out—out.

COUNTESS. (_With marked accent_) Out?

MARY. (_Nodding her head_) Oui——

COUNTESS. (_Rapidly_) Oui? Ah vous parlez Français? Je voudrais savoir si
Mr. Martin est ici. Je voudrais lui parler tout de suite.

MARY. Heavens! She’s off again; let’s act it for her. Let’s see—(_She
points to JOHNSON_) That is Mr. Martin.

COUNTESS. Eh?

MARY. We’re pretending that is Mr. Martin.

COUNTESS. (_Shaking her head_) Ah, non, ça ce n’est pas M. Martin.

MARY. We’re pretending—see, pretending? Now, you see—Mr. Martin is
out—see?

(_JOHNSON exits and enters immediately._)

COUNTESS. (_Suddenly_) Ah, Mr. Martin n’est pas ici! Je comprends.

MARY. Heavens, she understands, Johnson! Take her by the arm and lead her
out. (_Crosses L._)

JOHNSON. (_Starting to do so as COUNTESS rises to go out_) Yes, Miss.

COUNTESS. Attendez! A quelle heure M. Martin rentrera-t-il? (_She sits
again_)

JOHNSON. Now what’s the matter? You’d better come quietly, Miss—(_He
takes her by the arm_)

COUNTESS. (_Shaking him off_) A quelle heure rentrera-t-il? (_There
is a blank pause. To MARY_) Maintenant—faites attention à votre tour.
Regardez-moi: je suis M. Martin, vous comprenez? Moi je suis M. Martin——

MARY. (_Nodding_) Mr. Martin.

COUNTESS. (_Going to door_) Mr. Martin n’est pas ici; il est sorti—il
est au bureau. Enfin s’il n’est pas au bureau c’est pas mon affaire.
Maintenant je voudrais savoir à quelle heure rentrera-t-il?

MARY. (_As COUNTESS goes_) Heavens, she’s going. (_She turns at door_)
She’s coming back.

COUNTESS. (_Returning to MARY_) A quelle heure M. Martin rentrera-t-il?
(_There is another pause. Suddenly the COUNTESS takes out her watch_)

MARY. (_Eagerly_) Oh, she wants to know when he’ll be in! (_She runs over
and points to clock_) Eight o’clock—eight—o’clock.

COUNTESS. Oui—Oui, huit heures—je comprends. Merci bien—je m’en vais
maintenant, mais je reviendrai. Au revoir.

MARY. I can understand that! Au revoir—au revoir—good night.

COUNTESS. (_Going_) Merci—merci—à huit heures—bonsoir—bonsoir—(_She
exits_)

MARY. Don’t let her in here again unless you have an interpreter.

JOHNSON. Very good, Miss. (_He exits door upper L._)

(_MARY primps, and sits at typewriter again, and idly touches the keys
with one finger, maintaining an eager watch on the door. She hears
someone coming and hastily and busily bangs away at the typewriter.
RODNEY MARTIN enters door L. He is a young man of twenty-four with a
certain quaint frank charm, in spite of his funny little mustache,
English morning coat, spats and white carnation. He is by no means
brainless, but simply undeveloped by reason of the kind of life he has
led under appallingly frictionless conditions._)

RODNEY. Miss Grayson!

(_MARY’S previous business-like air has entirely disappeared, and she
assumes the fluttering airs of a timid ingenue, overdoing it for anyone
except a boy madly in love with her._)

MARY. What a surprise! (_RODNEY goes and locks both doors L._) Why, Mr.
Martin ... what are you doing?

RODNEY. (_Coming to her and facing her over back of chair_) I want to
talk with you. Mary, will you marry me?

MARY. Why, really——

RODNEY. You love me, don’t you?

MARY. I—I don’t know what to say——

RODNEY. Say Yes.

MARY. (_Shyly_) Yes.

RODNEY. (_Trying to grab her_) You angel!

MARY. (_Eluding him_) Wait!

RODNEY. We’ll be married right away.

MARY. But suppose your father disapproves?

RODNEY. He won’t know anything about it until we’re married, and then
what could he do?

MARY. He might cut you off.

RODNEY. Would you care?

MARY. (_Hastily_) I? No, no, indeed. I was thinking of you, dear.

RODNEY. Don’t you bother about me. We’ll be married to-morrow, and then
come home for the parental blessing.

MARY. Oh, I couldn’t do that. It wouldn’t be square. I’m his private
secretary: he trusts me. To bring me here to his home and then to find
I’d married his son on the sly—we couldn’t do that.

RODNEY. You do make it sound rather bad. I wouldn’t want us to give
father the worst of it; we’ve always been pretty good friends, he and I.
I guess I’d better tell him—in a week or so.

MARY. Why, Rodney, if you love me, we must get this awful suspense over.

RODNEY. But suppose he does object?

MARY. Even then I wouldn’t give you up.

RODNEY. Mary!

MARY. You could go into business, make a big man of yourself, make me
proud of you——

RODNEY. You talk just like the heroine in a play I saw last night.
She wanted the hero to go to work, and he did, and then for four acts
everybody suffered.

MARY. Don’t you want to work?

RODNEY. (_Seriously_) I should say not. Imagine going to bed every night,
knowing you’ve got to get up in the morning and go to business.

MARY. You’d be happier, wouldn’t you, if you had a job?

RODNEY. Please don’t talk like father; he’s preached a job at me ever
since I left college. Why should I work? Father made millions out of
soap and is forever complaining that he’s always had his nose to the
grindstone, that he’s worked fourteen hours a day for thirty years, that
he’s never known what fun was, that it’s all made him old before his
time. I can’t see the sense of following an example like that—I really
can’t. He’s got enough for you, and me, and our children. Yes, and our
children’s grandchildren. I’ve explained all this to him but I can’t seem
to make him understand. But it’s simple: why work when there’s millions
in the family? And why even talk of money when you and I are in love?
Come, kiss me. (_He leans towards her; she moves away to L. He crosses
R._)

MARY. No, you mustn’t—not till you’ve spoken to your father.

RODNEY. You won’t kiss me till I tell him?

MARY. No.

RODNEY. And you will when I do?

MARY. Yes.

RODNEY. Then I’ll tell him right away. (_He goes toward door L. She
crosses R._)

MARY. Oh, Rodney, you’re splendid! And don’t be afraid.

RODNEY. Afraid! (_Pausing_) You don’t think I’d better wait till the
morning?

(_CYRUS MARTIN knocks at the door violently, and says “ouch” in a loud
tone._)

MARTIN. (_Off-stage_) Why is this door locked? What the devil does this
mean?

MARY. If you don’t ask him now, I’ll never marry you.

MARTIN. (_Off-stage_) Open the door.

RODNEY. Coming, father, coming. (_He goes and unlocks both doors_)

MARTIN. (_Loudly_) Ouch, ouch! The devil! (_He enters_) Why was that door
locked?

RODNEY. Was it locked?

MARTIN. You young fool, didn’t you just unlock it? (_Crosses to R._)

RODNEY. (_Nervously_) So I did!

(_MARY has gone to her typewriter and now begins typing._)

MARTIN. Stop that noise! (_She does so. RODNEY looks at her, discouraged.
She motions to him to go on. Meanwhile MARTIN has painfully limped to a
chair down-stage by table and sinks into it. His foot gives him another
twinge._) Ouch! Oh, my poor foot!

(_RODNEY hastily picks up footstool and comes with it to his father._)

RODNEY. I’m afraid your foot hurts.

MARTIN. Not at all—I just pretend that it does!

RODNEY. (_Fervently_) I hoped you were better.

MARTIN. Well, I’m not. What have you got there?

RODNEY. A footstool—I thought it might make you more comfortable.

MARTIN. How much do you want?

RODNEY. Why, nothing, father.

MARTIN. Well anyhow, the answer is not a nickel——

RODNEY. You do me an injustice. I’m just sorry to see you in pain.

MARTIN. Well, you want something, that’s certain.

RODNEY. Why do you say that?

MARTIN. I know you—and whatever it is, you can’t have it.

(_RODNEY turns appealingly to MARY. She ignores him. He turns back to his
father and tries to muster up his courage._)

RODNEY. (_Clearing his throat_) Well, as a matter of fact, I did want——

MARTIN. Now we’re getting to it.

RODNEY. I wanted to have a talk with you—an important talk——

MARTIN. Curious! That’s just what I wanted with you—I’ve wanted it all
day ... and now we’ll have it—Miss Grayson!

MARY. Yes, sir? (_Rises_)

MARTIN. Get out. (_She exits through door upper L., without noticing
RODNEY, who stands looking after her dejectedly. As he hears the door
close_) Now, what do you mean by overdrawing your allowance again?

RODNEY. (_Innocently_) What it simply proves is that I was right when I
told you my allowance was too small.

MARTIN. (_Aghast_) What!

RODNEY. And if my allowance is too small for one, it’s much too small for
two.

MARTIN. For two?

RODNEY. Father, has it ever occurred to you that I might marry?

MARTIN. Of course it has! You’re fool enough for anything.

RODNEY. I don’t consider a man a fool because he’s married.

MARTIN. That’s because you’ve never tried it.

RODNEY. I intend to try it.

MARTIN. Who is the girl?

RODNEY. (_Nervously_) The girl?

MARTIN. Yes, girl—you’re not going to marry an automobile or a polo
pony—you’re going to marry a girl, aren’t you? Some blue-eyed,
doll-faced, gurgling, fluttering little fool. Oh, why doesn’t God give
young men some sense about women?

RODNEY. I object very strongly to your speaking in that way of Miss
Grayson.

MARTIN. Miss Grayson? Miss Grayson? You’re not going to marry a
typewriter?

RODNEY. Yes, sir.

MARTIN. Does she know it?

RODNEY. Yes, sir.

MARTIN. Of course she knows a good thing like you when she sees it!

RODNEY. I won’t listen to you talk of Miss Grayson in that way.

MARTIN. You’ve got to listen. I won’t permit any such absurd, ridiculous
marriage! Thank Heaven, you had sense enough not to elope——

RODNEY. I wanted to, but she wouldn’t. She insisted on your being told,
so you see what an injustice——

MARTIN. Injustice? Can’t you see that she wished me to know, so that if
I disapproved and cut you off, she’d not be stuck with _you_ on her hands.

RODNEY. Please, father—it’s quite useless. (_He starts to go_)

MARTIN. No, my boy, wait a minute. Remember, I’m your friend even if I am
your father. (_Rises, goes to door R. to ring bell_) Don’t you believe
it’s only your money she wants?

RODNEY. I know it isn’t.

MARTIN. (_Pushing bell_) I’ll prove it is.

RODNEY. What are you going to do?

MARTIN. Send for Miss Grayson.

RODNEY. You shan’t humiliate her.

JOHNSON. (_Entering from door upper L._) Yes, sir?

MARTIN. Ask Miss Grayson to come here at once.

JOHNSON. Yes, sir. (_He exits_)

MARTIN. I’ll tell that scheming secretary that if you persist in this
marriage, I’ll disinherit you! Then watch her throw you over.

RODNEY. Even if you are my father, you shan’t insult the girl I love.

MARTIN. Poppycock! You’re afraid to put her to the test: you’re afraid
she will chuck you.

RODNEY. (_Quickly_) I am not afraid.

MARY. (_Entering from door upper L._) You wanted me, Mr. Martin?

RODNEY. (_Going to her, she crosses to C._) Mary!

MARTIN. Wait a minute. My precious son informs me that you and he intend
to marry.

MARY. (_Timidly_) Oh, sir——

MARTIN. And I wish to tell you that if he marries you, he doesn’t get one
penny of my money, and that means he’ll starve.

MARY. Then at least we can starve together. (_They hold hands_)

RODNEY. Mary!

MARTIN. Making a grand-stand play, eh? You think I’m too fond of him not
to relent? Well, you’re wrong. Neither of you can get a nickel from me:
you can both starve together.

RODNEY. We won’t starve.

MARTIN. What can you do? You’re not a producer—you never will be.
(_Crosses to L._) You’re just an idler. You couldn’t earn five dollars
a week, but you’ll have a chance to try. You’ll get out of my house
to-night or I’ll have you thrown out.

RODNEY. Now, father——

MARTIN. Not another word, sir, not another word! (_He kicks chair, and
stamps out angrily, thru lower L. door_)

RODNEY. (_To MARY_) It’s getting more like that play every minute.

MARY. (_Half crying_) Oh, Rodney, Rodney, what have I done? I’m so—so
sorry.

RODNEY. You haven’t done anything—neither of us has. Father didn’t seem
to give us a chance to. He did it all——

MARY. Oh, Rodney——

RODNEY. You were bully the way you stuck up for me. When you said we’d
starve together, I just choked all up.

MARY. (_Genuinely_) Please don’t, Rodney.

RODNEY. Just because he’s got a lot of money he seems to think there
isn’t any left, but I’ll show him. I may not have much at the start, but
watch my finish.

MARY. What are you going to do?

RODNEY. I’m going to work.

MARY. (_Excited_) You are—really? (_Rises_)

RODNEY. Yes, indeed—father couldn’t make me do it, but you have. I’ll
work for you.

MARY. Oh, you are splendid. Will you get a position?

RODNEY. I should say not! Work for someone else? No, sir—I’m going in
business for myself—for you. I’m going to show the stuff that’s in me. Of
course, we can’t get married till I’ve made good. Will you wait?

MARY. (_Shyly_) Yes, dear.

RODNEY. You’re a dandy.

MARY. What business are you going in?

RODNEY. I don’t know yet. I’m going upstairs to pack a suit-case and
think. (_Crosses to R._) I’ll be back in fifteen minutes. (_He grabs her
and kisses her hastily but heartily_)

MARY. Oh, oh—please——

RODNEY. Don’t mind, Mary. You’ll get used to ’em. (_Exits door lower R._)

(_She goes over and raps three times on the door through which MARTIN
left, and backs away from it. She stands there expectantly. In a moment
MARTIN tiptoes in with no trace of a limp. She puts her fingers to her
lips to indicate silence, and points off-stage R. to indicate where
RODNEY has gone. MARTIN tiptoes nearer, nodding his head, questioning and
eager. MARY smilingly nods her head in reply._)

MARTIN. (_In stage-whisper_) You mean our scheme worked?

MARY. (_Delighted_) Yes, yes.

MARTIN. You really have got him to go to work?

MARY. I have!

MARTIN. (_Gleefully_) By George, that’s great!

MARY. Isn’t it!

MARTIN. You’re sure he wasn’t just talking?

MARY. No, he’s gone upstairs to pack and go out and make a name for
himself.

MARTIN. You’re a wise girl. Isn’t it wonderful?

MARY. And you said I couldn’t do it.

MARTIN. I said I didn’t think you could, but you have, and I owe you
$2,500. (_Crosses to chair L. of table to make out check_)

MARY. Oh, there’s no hurry.

MARTIN. Never put off till to-morrow the money you can get to-day.

MARY. Aren’t you proud I’ve been so successful?

MARTIN. Proud? I’m so doggone happy I’m making this out for $5,000.

MARY. Oh, Mr. Martin!

MARTIN. And it’s worth $50,000 to me to have my boy really want to work,
not just to do it to please me. What a difference an incentive makes!
(_Hands her the check_)

MARY. (_Smiling at check_) Doesn’t it?

MARTIN. (_Crosses to L._) Especially if it’s a girl. And to think I
begged and threatened Rodney for months, and then you plan this scheme,
you invent my gout, you rehearse me, you come up here for six short weeks
and—Bing, you get him so he’s in love with you.

MARY. Or thinks he is.

MARTIN. But, say, what about your marriage? (_Sits in chair L. of table_)

MARY. He said he wouldn’t marry me till he’d made good—if I’d just wait.
(_Sits in chair R. of table_)

MARTIN. (_Anxiously_) Do you think perhaps he may really love you?

MARY. Of course not.

MARTIN. It’s the first time he’s actually wanted to marry anybody.

MARY. Oh, it’s just that I’ve been very blue-eyed and baby-faced.

MARTIN. I guess you’re right!

MARY. Of course I am. When I break our engagement he may feel sort of
lonely for a while and give up women forever, but pretty soon some
charming girl of his world will come along—some limousine lady, and
they’ll live happy ever after.

MARTIN. I sort of begin to wish this marriage were going to be on the
level.

MARY. It wouldn’t work out. I’m a business woman. Even if your son did
love me—really love—I wouldn’t marry him. Just now he’s twenty-four with
an India-rubber heart that is easy to stretch and easier to snap back.
All boys at twenty-four are like that.

MARTIN. (_Reminiscently_) I guess so. I remember when I was a young
man, there was a girl ... my heart was broken for a week—perhaps ten
days. I went down to the club one night and got spifflicated—however,
however—(_Abruptly changing the subject_) What’s my son going to work at?

MARY. I don’t know yet.

MARTIN. Do you think he’ll make good?

MARY. He will if he keeps at it. (_Rises and goes R._)

MARTIN. Well, you’ll keep him at it? (_Rises and goes R._)

MARY. That wasn’t our agreement. I only undertook to get him to start to
work.

MARTIN. Hum.

MARY. (_Quickly_) Isn’t that true?

MARTIN. Quite—quite. I was just thinking we might make some new agreement
to have you keep him on the job.

MARY. (_Rubbing her fingers as if handling money_) I’m a business woman.

MARTIN. What strikes you as fair?

MARY. I’d rather the proposition came from you.

MARTIN. What do you say to your present salary, and at the end of the
year I will personally give you a check for twenty-five per cent of what
Rodney has made.

MARY. Oh, that wouldn’t interest me at all.

MARTIN. What’s your proposition, then?

MARY. (_Promptly_) My present salary doubled.

MARTIN. Um—that’s pretty steep.

MARY. You told me what I’d done _already_ was worth $50,000 to you.

MARTIN. Merely a figure of speech, my dear. Let’s see, you’re getting $40
a week, and....

MARY. $50, and I want $100.

MARTIN. Sounds like a hold-up. (_Crosses R._)

MARY. Then let’s drop it. This new contract was your idea, not mine.
Good-evening. (_She starts to go, gets to door, which she bangs as if she
had gone. She remains however in the room_)

MARTIN. Hold on—hold on—(_He turns and sees her, and then chuckles at her
joke on him. She laughs, too_) I was simply figuring. Tell you what I’ll
do: $75 a week and 10 per cent of what Rodney makes.

MARY. Seventy-five a week and 10 per cent of what he makes? All right,
I’ll go you.

MARTIN. Good.

MARY. (_Goes to desk, takes note-book_) Will you just write me a note
stating the facts and the consideration?

MARTIN. You want it in writing? (_Crosses to table R. and sits_)

MARY. Certainly, it’s always safer that way. (_He writes. As he writes_)
As soon as you see Rodney, you’ll have to discharge me.

MARTIN. I will, violently. I make a pretty good actor under your
direction. How did you like that irate father stuff?

MARY. Great! You needn’t make the note long. Just a memorandum.

MARTIN. (_Holding up paper_) How’s that?

MARY. (_Reading_) I think that covers it—if you’ll sign it.

MARTIN. (_Confused_) Didn’t I sign it?

MARY. (_Smiling_) No, and never put off till to-morrow what you can sign
to-day.

MARTIN. (_Signing_) There you are. (_Hands MARY paper_)

MARY. (_Sits on table_) Thanks. Now, Mr. Martin, there’s just one
question I’d like to ask.

MARTIN. Go ahead, I’ll answer you anything.

MARY. Why is it, when Rodney’s been out of college for _two_ years, that
it’s only the last three months you’ve been so persistent about getting
him to work?

MARTIN. It’s like this. You know old John Clark?

MARY. The man you dine with so often?

MARTIN. Yes, friends and rivals for thirty years.

MARY. He’s in Ivory Soap, isn’t he?

MARTIN. (_Emphatically_) I should say he is—one of the big men there.
We’ve fought all our lives over soap, but he’s never been able to lick
me, and—well, I haven’t been able to lick him, either.

MARY. Perhaps that’s why you’re such good friends.

MARTIN. Perhaps it is. Anyhow, as it’s fifty-fifty in business, we’ve
lately narrowed the fight down to a family matter. You know old John
Clark has a son, too: Ellery—nasty, egotistical, self-satisfied young
puppy.

MARY. I know, I’ve talked to him.

MARTIN. Well, old Clark thinks Ellery is the prince of all modern
business, and he kept pitying me so much about Rodney’s being an idler—a
rich man’s son—it got on my nerves, so lately I made a bet with him.

MARY. A bet!

MARTIN. I bet him thirty thousand dollars my son could make more in a
year than his son could. So I had to get Rodney busy, and he’s got to
make good. He can’t be such a pin-head as he looks! If there’s anything
in heredity there must be something of me in him, and we’ve got to find
it—we’ve got to develop Rodney, dig deep, maybe blast. If he doesn’t win
out——

MARY. But he will, I’m sure he will.

MARTIN. It isn’t just the money. I guess I’m a sentimental old fool, but
I’m proud. I want my boy to be Rodney Martin, not just Cyrus Martin’s
son, and I want to show old Clark that as a judge of character he’s a
bigger fool than I am. If I don’t get that bet——

MARY. But you’re going to, I’m sure you are.

MARTIN. By George, Miss Grayson, if I weren’t a bit old and on the
shelf, I’d marry you myself. You and I could clean up all the loose
change in America. (_RODNEY enters R. MARTIN, seeing him, changes his
whole attitude. Rises_) I don’t care to discuss the matter further, Miss
Grayson: consider yourself discharged. Good evening. (_Crosses to L._)

RODNEY. It’s all right, Mary. You can have a job in my office. (_Crosses
to C._)

MARTIN. (_Scornfully_) Your office, ha! (_Suddenly_) Oh, my foot, my poor
foot! (_He limps painfully towards door_) Your office! It’s a joke, young
man!

RODNEY. Oh, you needn’t laugh! I’ll show you. (_Crosses L. C._)

MARTIN. (_Winking at MARY_) Silence, you young puppy. Oh, my poor foot!
(_He exits_)

MARY. Oh, Rodney! (_Sits on sofa_)

(_RODNEY goes up-stage, and passes behind sofa so that he is at the R.
end of sofa._)

RODNEY. Gout’s an awful thing, isn’t it? (_Sits on sofa_)

MARY. Oh, Rodney, I’m afraid I’ve spoiled everything for you—your future——

RODNEY. Nonsense, you’ve made my future. Without you, I’d never have got
the idea, the big idea.

MARY. Idea for what?

RODNEY. The idea to make money out of; that’s all you need. And, just
think, I found it in this book.

MARY. What idea? What book?

RODNEY. It’s a cook-book.

MARY. What on earth——?

RODNEY. Well, you see, when I was packing I stumbled across this book; it
fell open at this page—fate was on the job—it was a hunch. Look!

MARY. (_Looking_) But what is it?

RODNEY. It’s an old family recipe for making cheap soap. It says it’s the
cheapest soap in the world. Cheaper even than the manufacturers make it.
I’m going into the soap business.

MARY. (_Amazed_) What?

RODNEY. Sure. Father did; look at the money he made. Why shouldn’t I?

MARY. (_Rises, goes L._) You’re joking.

RODNEY. I’m in dead earnest. I’m going to buck the trust. (_Rises_)

MARY. But how can you?

RODNEY. I don’t know, but I will. You see, I’ll have all the popular
sympathy: independent young son of soap-king fights father; don’t buy
from the trust.

MARY. But is that very nice to your _father_?

RODNEY. Has he been nice to me? It’s great! Down with monopoly! Hurrah
for the people! I’ve heard political speeches like that. Hurrah for the
people’s soap! That isn’t a bad name, either. The People’s Soap. (_Lays
book on table_)

MARY. But you haven’t any capital.

RODNEY. (_Dejected_) I never thought of that.

MARY. You’d need a lot of money.

RODNEY. (_Bracing up_) Well, I’ll just have to get it, that’s all, and
you’ll be my secretary. Of course, till I make big money I wouldn’t
ordinarily have thought of taking you away from father—but as long as he
discharged you—well, you work for me now. What does father pay you?

MARY. Fifty dollars a week.

RODNEY. I’ll pay you a hundred and fifty.

MARY. But you haven’t any money.

(_JOHNSON enters from door upper L._)

JOHNSON. Beg pardon, Mr. Rodney, but Mr. Ambrose Peale is here to see you.

MARY. For the fifth time——

RODNEY. (_Puzzled_) Ambrose Peale? Oh, yes, I remember. Ask him to come
in.

JOHNSON. Yes, sir. (_He exits door upper L._)

MARY. Who is he?

RODNEY. He’s got something to do with the theater. When I was in Harvard
two years ago I met him one night in the lobby of the theater. I haven’t
seen him since—it was the night we had our egg fight.

MARY. You and Mr. Peale?

RODNEY. No, no, the fellows threw eggs at the people on the stage. You
see, it was a college play——

MARY. Did you throw eggs?

RODNEY. I forgot to bring any. Peale was the manager of the show and was
mighty decent to me—kept me out of jail.

(_PEALE enters from door upper L._)

PEALE. Well, well, Rodney Martin, how are you? (_To MARY_) How are you,
dear lady?

RODNEY. How do you do? Miss Grayson—Mr. Ambrose Peale.

PEALE. Ambrose Peale—that’s me absolutely. Well, I’m still in the show
business. (_To MARY_) Ever see “The Belle of Broadway”? Great show, great
girls, great cast.

MARY. Oh, are you an actor?

PEALE. (_Scornfully_) An actor? I should say not. I’m a press-agent.

MARY. Oh!

PEALE. But, say, be sure to catch that show; it may leave the city
soon—out-of-town bookings, you know—but remember the name: “The Belle of
Broadway.” And now if you’ll excuse me, Miss, I came to talk business
with Mr. Martin.

RODNEY. Business? Surely—surely. (_Winking at MARY_) I’m a business
man—now.

MARY. I’ll be back in a few minutes.

RODNEY. Thank you, Miss Grayson. (_She exits door lower R._)

PEALE. Now, I’m not much on handing myself flowers across the footlights,
but do you happen to remember what I did for you the night of the egg
fight?

RODNEY. You fixed things with the chief of police and kept me from being
expelled.

PEALE. By George, you do remember. And you said any time you could do
anything for me——

RODNEY. That’s still true.

PEALE. You’re immense, son. Now, it’s this way—have a chair. (_He sits.
RODNEY does likewise_) Between you and me, “The Belle of Broadway” is an
awful thing—business gone to pot. Something’s got to be done. Some great
stuff pulled off to give it a boost, and that’s where you come in.

RODNEY. I?

PEALE. You’ve got an aeroplane, haven’t you?

RODNEY. Yes, but——

PEALE. Then everything’s all right. Now you abduct the leading lady,
Julia Clark, to-morrow night, in your aeroplane—elope with her——

RODNEY. What?

PEALE. Sure—some stunt, too—never been done. Julia’ll stand for it—she’s
game for any press gag——

RODNEY. But I couldn’t do that.

PEALE. Certainly you can. I’m telling you Julia’ll stand for it—a bird of
a story—no performance. Why? You’re up in the air with the leading lady.
The next night standing room only to catch a look at the girl you’re
stuck on. I can see the headlines now: Soap King’s Son Takes New Star
Among the Stars—with flashlights.

RODNEY. But it’s out of the question. (_Rises, takes chair to table_)

PEALE. What’s the matter with it?

RODNEY. I wouldn’t do it, that’s all.

PEALE. Gee, that’s tough!

RODNEY. I’m not backing down—anything in reason, but you see, there’s
someone who might object.

PEALE. A girl? (_RODNEY nods_) Her? (_Pointing to where MARY exited_)

RODNEY. Yes.

PEALE. (_Rises and puts chair back_) I guess it’s cold: girls are funny
about their beaux doing a little innocent thing like eloping with some
other girl.

RODNEY. Why don’t you try somebody else?

PEALE. I have! You were my last card. Well, I’m fired!

RODNEY. Fired?

PEALE. Sure, that stunt would have kept us going, but now, on the
level—well, the show’s so bad, people won’t even go see it on a pass.
We’ll close Saturday and I’m out——

RODNEY. A fake story like that would really have helped?

PEALE. Helped a whole lot: given us a fresh start, and then I’d have
pulled off some new stunts and saved my job.

RODNEY. Oh, nonsense. If that were true, I’d feel mighty uncomfortable
at not being able to oblige you, but an obvious trumped-up lie like that
can’t be any good.

PEALE. It can’t, eh?

RODNEY. Oh, I know it’s advertising——

PEALE. You bet it’s advertising. What made Anna Held? Milk baths. What
made Gaby Deslys? A dago king.

RODNEY. But that kind of advertising can’t be of real value. (_Sits_)

PEALE. Oh, you’re one of those guys who don’t believe in advertising, are
you? Now, don’t get me talking advertising. That’s where I live, where
I have my town house and country estate, my yacht and motors. That’s my
home. Maybe you think love is important? Piffle. Advertising, my boy, the
power of suggestion, the psychology of print; say a thing often enough
and hard enough and the other chap’ll not only believe you, he’ll think
it’s his own idea, and he’ll fight for it. Some old gink, a professor of
psychology, showed forty Vassar girls the other day two samples of satin,
one blue, one pink, same grade, same value, same artistic worth. One he
described as a delicate warm old rose, the other a faded blue. He asked
them to choose their favorite. Thirty-nine out of the forty picked the
old rose. Why? Because they’d been told it was warm and delicate; no
faded blue for theirs! What did it? The power of suggestion—advertising!

RODNEY. (_Amused_) You seem to know something about it——

PEALE. I not only seem to, I do. You heard me tell that girl of yours a
few minutes ago that “The Belle of Broadway” was the biggest hit in town.
Ask her to go to the theater. Give her her choice and I’ll bet you four
dollars to a fried egg she picks “The Belle of Broadway.” Advertising!

RODNEY. I don’t believe it.

PEALE. Well, try it—and say, what makes you go to the theater yourself?
I’ll tell you—it’s what you’ve read about the play or what some fellows
told you.

RODNEY. (_Beginning to be convinced_) Why, I suppose that’s true.

PEALE. And what he tells you, some other guy has told him. Ninety-seven
per cent of the public believe what they’re told, and what they’re told
is what the other chap’s been told—and the fellow who told him read it
somewhere. When you see a thing in print about something you don’t really
know anything about, you come pretty near believing it. And all the
advertiser has to do is to tell you right and you’ll fall.

RODNEY. But I never read advertisements.

PEALE. Oh, you don’t, eh? I guess you do. If I say His Master’s
Voice, you know that advertises a phonograph. You’re on to what
soap “It Floats” refers to. There’s a Reason—Uneeda—Quaker
Oats—Phoebe Show—Children Cry For it—Sapolio—Grape Nuts—Peruna—The
Road of Anthracite—Spearmint—Pierce Arrow—57 Varieties—Kodak—White
Seal—Gold Dust Twins—He Won’t Be Happy Till He Gets It—Bull
Durham—Pianola—Cuticura—Melachrino—Clysmic—Goodyear—Steinway—
Thermos—Coca-Cola—The Watch that Made The Dollar Famous. I suppose
you don’t know what any of them mean?

RODNEY. (_Amused_) Why, I know what they all mean.

PEALE. You bet you do. What kind of garters do you wear?

RODNEY. Why, let me see: Boston.

PEALE. Exactly. What do you know about ’em? Nothing. Are they any better
than any other garter? You don’t know—I don’t know—but all my life, every
magazine I’ve ever looked into has had a picture of a man’s leg with a
certain kind of garter on it—Boston—so when I go into a store to buy a
pair of garters I just naturally say Boston; so do you. What do you know
about Mennen’s Talcum Powder? Nothing, except that it has the picture
of the homeliest man in the world on the box and it’s so impressed your
imagination, you just mechanically order Mennen’s. If I say to you, E.
& W., you don’t think it’s a corset, do you? If I say C. B., you don’t
think it’s a collar, and what about the well-known and justly famous B.
V. D.’s? You don’t read advertisement? Rot!

RODNEY. But——

PEALE. No ‘but’ about it: advertising’s responsible for everything.
When a department store advertises a seven-dollar shirt-waist for four
dollars, you don’t believe it’s on the level, do you?

RODNEY. No, I don’t.

PEALE. Neither do I, but there’s a hell of a lot of women who do. When
Bryan advertised the Grape Juice Highball, do you know that its sale went
up 652 gallons a day?

RODNEY. How do you know it was 652?

PEALE. I’ll let you into a little secret: I don’t know. I don’t know a
damned thing about grape juice, and as long as my health and strength
keep up, I hope I never will, but if I said I’d read in a newspaper that
the sale had gone up 652 gallons, you wouldn’t have doubted it, would you?

RODNEY. No, I suppose I wouldn’t.

PEALE. And you’d have told somebody else and he’d have believed you, too.
Say, do you drink much?

RODNEY. No.

PEALE. Can you tell the difference between a vintage wine and last year’s
champagne? Sure, you can: it costs more. Son, the world is full of bunk.
Ninety-seven per cent of the people are sheep, and you can get ’em all by
advertising.

RODNEY. You are gradually making me come to the conclusion that you
believe in publicity.

PEALE. Believe in it! It’s my life. What kind of eggs do you eat?

RODNEY. Why, hen’s eggs, of course.

PEALE. Why “of course”? Did you ever eat a duck’s egg?

RODNEY. Why, no.

PEALE. Do you know anything against the duck?

RODNEY. No.

PEALE. Exactly. When a duck lays an egg it’s a damn fool and keeps quiet
about it, but when a hen does, my boy—cluck-cluck all over the place!
She’s advertising. So you eat hen’s eggs.

RODNEY. You’re beginning to convince me.

PEALE. If I’m beginning to convince you, that’s advertising, too. Say,
are you for Roosevelt or against him?

RODNEY. I’m for him strong.

PEALE. I’m against him. I read one paper, you read another. I think he’s
a faker, you think he’s a great man. But does either of us really know
anything about him except what we’ve read? Have you ever met Roosevelt
or talked to him or known anybody who did know him? I haven’t, but the
point is, whatever we may think, good or bad, we’ve heard a lot about
him, because he’s the best advertiser in the world. And that, my son, is
the whole secret of it: get ’em talking about you, get ’em praisin’ if
you can, or get ’em cussin’, but for the love of Heaven, don’t let ’em
be quiet. Mention your name—have ’em argue about you—boost or knock—be a
hero or a villain, but don’t be a dub. Why, give me the money, a little
time, a few pages of advertising, and I can sell you shares in the
Atlantic Ocean!

RODNEY. (_Excited_) You really believe that with proper advertising you
could build up a great business?

PEALE. Believe! Look around you: everything’s doing it.

RODNEY. And you are out of a job.

PEALE. Unless you do the aero-elopement.

RODNEY. (_Rises_) Then you’re out of it. Do you want to work for me?

PEALE. Sure.

RODNEY. When can you begin?

PEALE. Now.

RODNEY. What’s your salary?

PEALE. I’ve been getting $60, but I’m worth $75.

RODNEY. I’ll give you a hundred.

PEALE. What is your business? Counterfeiting?

RODNEY. No, it’s——

PEALE. Don’t tell me. As long as it don’t send me to state’s prison or
the chair, it’s all right. Could I have about $25 advance on my salary
now?

RODNEY. Is that customary?

PEALE. It is with me.

RODNEY. Oh, all right. (_He gives him the money_)

PEALE. Just as an evidence of good faith. (_He counts money_) Well, now
I’m working for you, what business are you in?

RODNEY. The soap business.

PEALE. (_Grinning_) Nice clean business. With father?

RODNEY. Against him!

PEALE. Oh!

RODNEY. My father and I have had a quarrel.

PEALE. I know, I know: fathers are very unreasonable these days.

RODNEY. I’m going to fight the soap trust.

PEALE. Well, you’re no piker. You’ve picked out a nice refined job. How
long have you been at it?

RODNEY. Twenty minutes.

PEALE. How’s it going?

RODNEY. Fine, since I got an idea from you.

PEALE. They grow all over me—help yourself.

RODNEY. I’m going to get a factory, advertise like the very dickens: Soap
King’s son fights father—and licks him, too, by George!

PEALE. Wait a minute, wait a minute, do you know why your father is the
soap king?

RODNEY. I suppose because he controls all the soap business in the
country except Ivory.

PEALE. Exactly, and the way he keeps control of it is by buying out all
his live competitors. Now, here’s a blue-ribbon champion of the world
scheme. Why don’t we make good and sell out to father?

RODNEY. No, I don’t care to do that. I want to make good myself.

PEALE. Well, if father is forced to buy you out, isn’t that enough? What
do you want?

RODNEY. I’ve got to be a success on my own. I’ve got to show father,
and—Miss Grayson.

PEALE. (_Comprehending_) Oh! Making good with the dame, eh?

RODNEY. You see, father says I can’t earn five dollars a week.

PEALE. He isn’t right, is he?

RODNEY. No, sir, you’ll see.

PEALE. I hope so. Pretty tough if you couldn’t. Some job trying to sell
soap if father’s against us.

RODNEY. I suppose it is.

PEALE. I tell you: why not make such a hit with the soap, advertise it so
strong, he’ll just have to back you?

RODNEY. Now that’s settled, we’re going to lick father.

PEALE. Yes, that’s settled. What do I do?

RODNEY. You write the ads that make us.

PEALE. It’s my chance. Think, I’ll never have to see “The Belle of
Broadway” again! I’ll write ads, I’ll conduct a campaign that’ll keep
your father awake, and in three months at the most he’ll be begging for a
chance to back us.

RODNEY. I believe we’ll do it.

PEALE. Come on, come on. Let’s get busy. What’s the name of the soap?

RODNEY. It hasn’t been named.

PEALE. Well, what is there about it that makes it different from any
other soap?

RODNEY. I don’t know.

PEALE. Well, what could there be about some soap that was different from
some other soap?

RODNEY. Well, let’s see.

PEALE. Where did you get it from?

RODNEY. From this cook-book.

PEALE. Are you kidding me?

RODNEY. No. Half an hour ago I decided to go in to business, and I
happened to find this recipe for soap in a cook-book—it’s the cheapest
soap in the world. (_Reflecting_) That’s not a bad title: the cheapest
soap in the world. (_A pause. They reflect_)

PEALE. You’re wrong, son. There’s an awful bunch of people that buy a
lot of expensive stuff, not because it’s better, but because it costs
more—and the poor nuts think it ought to be better—so can that cheap
stuff.

RODNEY. Well, how about The Most Expensive Soap in the World?

PEALE. My boy, I could kiss you. A pupil after my own heart—fifty cents a
cake.

RODNEY. A dollar, and we’ll make it a warm delicate old rose.

PEALE. Each cake in a separate box with a paper rose on the lid.

RODNEY. Great.

PEALE. But what’ll we call it?

RODNEY. Old Rose.

PEALE. Rotten—doesn’t mean anything.

RODNEY. Let’s think.

PEALE. I am thinking. I never stop.

RODNEY. The Soap that Made Pittsburg Clean.

PEALE. Too long, and no good anyway, because Pittsburg isn’t clean. You
need something catchy.

RODNEY. I had an idea a while ago: The People’s Soap.

PEALE. Not if you’re going to catch the rich boobs.

RODNEY. That’s true.

PEALE. We need something that’s universally appealing. What is it? What
is it?

RODNEY. (_Looking off-stage toward where MARY went_) Love.

PEALE. Slush.

RODNEY. Money.

PEALE. (_Suddenly_) I’ve got it: Superstition—everybody’s superstitious.

RODNEY. Rot! I’m not.

PEALE. I say, there’s a bit of luck for us right at the start—a pin with
the head toward you. (_RODNEY stoops to pick it up_) See, you were going
to pick it up! Everybody is superstitious. Oh, they say they’re not, just
as you did, but did you ever meet a guy who, if he didn’t mind walking
under a ladder, didn’t hate to spill salt, or else he wanted to see the
moon over his right shoulder—or he picked up pins, or carried a lucky
coin, wouldn’t do things on Friday? Why, the whole world’s superstitious.
Get something on that and you hit everybody. I’ve got eighty-six
horseshoes home myself. I never saw a gink that would sit thirteen at
table. We’re all crazy. (_They pause and think. They both sit on end of
table_)

RODNEY. Could we—?

PEALE. What?

RODNEY. No. (_They pause_)

PEALE. Suppose we—?

RODNEY. What?

PEALE. No—(_Pause_)

RODNEY. Wait! Wait—listen! The Thirteen Soap—Unlucky for Dirt.

PEALE. (_Coming over and kissing RODNEY on the brow_) Son, it’s all over:
the old man’ll be on his knees in a month.

RODNEY. We open the office Monday.

PEALE. Where’s the office?

RODNEY. Let’s get one.

PEALE. With furniture and everything. Say—(_MARY enters from door lower
R. Seeing her_) There’s the dame; ask her to go to the theater, just to
prove what I say. See for yourself. (_He goes up-stage_)

RODNEY. (_Turning to her_) Oh, Mary, to celebrate, let’s go to the
theater to-morrow night?

MARY. I’d love to.

RODNEY. What do you want to see?

MARY. I hear “The Belle of Broadway” is very good.

(_PEALE yawns and stretches out his arms complacently._)

PEALE. (_To RODNEY_) I guess I don’t know about advertising, eh? (_To
MARY_) My last official act is giving you a box for to-morrow night. (_He
writes_)

MARY. Oh, yes, you’re with that play, aren’t you?

PEALE. I am. (_Handing her pass_) Er—I was.

MARY. But isn’t it an imposition?

PEALE. Not on us, it isn’t.

MARY. Thank you. (_Crosses to RODNEY. To RODNEY_) I didn’t mean to bother
you, but I’m so interested: I thought, regarding Mr. Peale’s business,
I’d like to hear——

RODNEY. It’s all settled, Mary. Mr. Peale, my general manager. Mr. Peale,
my secretary. Mary, here it is: The Thirteen Soap—Unlucky for Dirt: The
Most Expensive Soap in the World.

MARY. (_Genuinely_) Why, that’s perfectly wonderful—who thought of it?
(_Looking at PEALE_)

RODNEY. I did.

MARY. (_Turning to him_) You did, really? Why, you’re splendid.

PEALE. Youth, brains, efficiency—that’s our motto.

RODNEY. We’ll make a hundred thousand dollars the first year—sure.

MARY. (_Reflectively_) And ten per cent of that is——

RODNEY. What?

MARY. (_Quickly_) Oh nothing, nothing—I was just figuring.

RODNEY. We’re going to make our soap famous by advertising, and then
force father to back us.

MARY. That sounds bully, and at the start you won’t need much capital.

RODNEY. Capital?

PEALE. With fifty thousand dollars I can make the Great American People
have hysterics for the Thirteen Soap.

RODNEY. Fifty thousand dollars, and I’ve got only a thousand. Oh! (_Sits
on chair R. of desk_)

MARY. Oh! (_Sitting on sofa_)

PEALE. (_Sitting in arm-chair L. of table_) But can’t you raise it?

RODNEY. (_To PEALE_) How?

PEALE. Don’t ask me. Raising money is the only thing I never got on to——

RODNEY. Peale, you’re fired.

PEALE. Well, it was a good job while it lasted.

RODNEY. (_Rises_) Gimme back that $25.

PEALE. (_Rises, take out money and returns it to RODNEY_) Good-bye, old
pal.

MARY. (_Rises, and comes down-stage between RODNEY and PEALE_) But
couldn’t you start with less?

RODNEY. Of course we could. Couldn’t we, Peale?

PEALE. Not and do it right. No use wasting money piking when you
advertise. Splurge, my lad, splurge or let it remain dormant.

RODNEY. I’ve got a thousand in the bank; the aeroplane’s worth four—it
cost eight.

PEALE. Then if you’re lucky it might sell for two.

RODNEY. The motors ought to bring another four. That’d be seven, isn’t
that something?

PEALE. Seven thousand is not to be spoken of venomously, but in
advertising—well, going easy, it might last you a week.

MARY. I have a——

PEALE. Some money?

RODNEY. We couldn’t take money from you.

MARY. No, I know a—a man that might put in five thousand.

RODNEY. That’s twelve.

PEALE. (_Suddenly_) Does your father advertise much?

RODNEY. I don’t think so; does he, Mary?

MARY. Not very much: he’s conservative. He doesn’t believe in reckless
advertising.

PEALE. Nothing sensational or exciting?

MARY. No.

PEALE. Why, he’s licked now, and I’ll tell you why. We can advertise just
for your father’s benefit alone.

RODNEY. I don’t quite understand your plan?

PEALE. Why, plaster this neighborhood with Thirteen Soap advertisements.
Do the same around your father’s office so that every time he went out or
came in he’d see Thirteen Soap. We could advertise only in the newspapers
he reads. We’d send him circulars every mail. I could make a splurge just
for him that would look like we were giving up $10,000 a day. Within a
month he’d think that Thirteen Soap was the only soap in the world.

RODNEY. How much would it take?

PEALE. Five thousand a week.

RODNEY. And you could land him in a month.

PEALE. My boy!

RODNEY. And we’ve got one thousand—all cash, and eleven thousand in
prospects. Go ahead.

PEALE. You mean I’m hired again?

RODNEY. Sure you are.

PEALE. Gimme back that $25.

RODNEY. (_Giving it back_) Certainly.

PEALE. The best thing you ever did was to engage me.

RODNEY. Peale, we’ll be rich men.

PEALE. With your money and my ideas, I’ll be a millionaire.

RODNEY. Well, I hope I will, too.

MARY. Me, too.

JOHNSON. (_Entering from door upper L._) Countess de Beou—ree—enn.

MARY. Oh, that dreadful woman again.

COUNTESS. (_Entering and coming over to RODNEY. To RODNEY_) Vous êtes M.
Martin?

RODNEY. (_Nods_) Yes.

COUNTESS. Ah, cher M. Martin—je suis enchantée de vous voir.

PEALE. The dame’s looney.

MARY. No, she’s French.

PEALE. Same thing.

RODNEY. What’s all this, anyhow?

MARY. She wanted to see your father, and she doesn’t speak English.

RODNEY. Well, let her speak to me. Fire ahead.

PEALE. Say, can you speak French?

MARY. (_Surprised_) Can you?

RODNEY. No, but I can understand it. (_Going to COUNTESS_) Fire ahead.

COUNTESS. Eh?

RODNEY. Let me see—oh, yes. Parlez.

COUNTESS. Ah, mon Dieu—enfin, quelqu’un qui comprend Français.

RODNEY. Oui.

COUNTESS. Puis-je vous parler pour cinq minutes?

RODNEY. Oui.

COUNTESS. Merci bien.

RODNEY. Oui——

PEALE. You’re immense, kid.

COUNTESS. (_Quickly_) Je suis madame la comtesse de Beaurien. Je désire
parler à M. Martin àpropos des affaires du savon. Je voudrais obtenir
l’agence du Savon Martin pour la France.

RODNEY. Wait a minute—wait a minute.

MARY. What did she say?

PEALE. She’s a speedy spieler all right.

RODNEY. (_To COUNTESS_) Would you mind saying that over and say it slow?

COUNTESS. Comment?

RODNEY. Oh.... Répétez ça s’il vous plait—pas vite.

COUNTESS. Je suis madame la comtesse de Beaurien. Je désire obtenir
l’agence du Savon Martin pour la France. Je peux donner cinquante mille
francs pour cette agence. Et enfin, voulez-vous arranger cette affaire
pour moi? Je suis riche, j’ai beaucoup de recommendations—je suis bien
connue à Paris.

RODNEY. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. (_To PEALE_) She wants the agency
for father’s soap for France and is willing to pay 50,000 francs for the
concession.

PEALE. How much is that in money?

RODNEY. Ten thousand dollars.

MARY. Had I better tell your father? (_Goes to door lower L._)

RODNEY. (_Inspired. Crosses to MARY_) No, no, why not keep father out of
this? We’ll sell her the agency for the Thirteen Soap—that’d be another
$10,000 for us. Peale, she’s a gift from the gods! (_Goes to COUNTESS_)

PEALE. She is. Go to it.

MARY. But how can you sell her your agency?

RODNEY. I don’t know—how can I?

PEALE. A pipe. Ask her if she’s superstitious?

RODNEY. Oh, if I only knew how to talk French!—Madame—êtes-vous
superstitious?

COUNTESS. Eh?

RODNEY. I mean—superstitieuse? (_COUNTESS looks blank_)

PEALE. She doesn’t get you.

RODNEY. No.

PEALE. (_He goes and takes the COUNTESS’ parasol_) Pardon me....
(_Starts to raise it. With a cry of protest: “Faites pas ça”, she stops
him_) She’s superstitious, all right—(_To her_) It ought to be a pipe to
land you.

RODNEY. Listen: je suis le fils de Museer Martin—vous savez?

COUNTESS. (_Delightedly_) Oui, oui.

RODNEY. (_Slowly_) Nous manfacturons, I mean manufacturong—un nouveau
savon—see? Savon Treize—(_He holds up his fingers to indicate thirteen_)

COUNTESS. Oui, oui.

PEALE. (_Impressed_) It must be great to have a college education.

RODNEY. Savon Treize—pas—bon—pour—what the deuce is dirt?

MARY. I don’t know.

RODNEY. Oh, yes—sal—pas bon pour sal——

COUNTESS. (_Laughing_) Savon Treize—pas bon pour sal—c’est bien—c’est
bien.

PEALE. (_Gleefully_) She likes it—she likes it.

RODNEY. Je start—je begin—je commence—un nouveau compagnie—le très grande
compagnie de la universe—je suis le president.

PEALE. Je suis le advertising agent. (_After laugh, JOHNSON enters from
door upper L. with a letter, and exits door lower L._)

RODNEY. I’m the whole thing, see—and if we can do business with you for
the French agency——

(_MARIE enters._)

COUNTESS. Mais non, mais non, mais non, monsieur, je ne comprends pas.

MARIE. I beg pardon.

MARY. What is it, Marie?

MARIE. (_In French dialect_) Where is M. Martin?

RODNEY. Marie! Another gift from Heaven.

MARIE. Mr. Smith to see your father.

RODNEY. That’s a man I might get money from. (_JOHNSON enters from door
lower L._) He’s a great friend of the family. Used to dangle me on his
knee, and all that sort of thing. (_He sees JOHNSON_) Oh, Johnson.

JOHNSON. Yes, sir?

RODNEY. Mr. Smith is downstairs—in one minute bring him up here.

JOHNSON. Yes, sir. (_He exits door upper L._)

RODNEY. Now, Marie, tell the countess you speak French.

MARIE. Je parle Français, Madame.

COUNTESS. Mon Dieu—enfin quelqu’un qui parle Français! Je suis Madame
la Comtesse de Beaurien—et je désire parler avec monsieur àpropos des
affaires du Savon Treize.

MARIE. (_Back at her quickly_) Ah mais oui—je comprends parfaitement. Je
dirai à monsieur ce que vous avez dit. Ah je suis ravie d’avoir trouvé
aux Etats Unis une compatriote avec laquelle je pourrai parler ma belle
langue de France. (_They talk together violently in French, and at the
end of the speech, the COUNTESS kisses MARIE_)

RODNEY. Mary, take them away—take them into the library. Explain to Marie
about the agency—Mary can translate your slang to Marie and she can turn
it into French.

MARY. I’ll do my best. Come, Marie. (_Crosses to door lower R., and opens
it_) Bring the Countess.

MARIE. Madame la comtesse, je vous montrerai le chemin——

COUNTESS. Bien.

(_MARIE and COUNTESS, chattering volubly in French, followed by MARY,
exit door lower R._)

PEALE. (_Looking after them_) Paris must be a hell of a place.

RODNEY. I’ll tackle Smith for a loan of $10,000.

PEALE. Will he fall?

RODNEY. (_Grandly_) My father’s oldest friend. Why, the way I’ll handle
him, ten thousand ought to be easy.

PEALE. Good luck.

(_Enter MR. SMITH from door upper L._)

RODNEY. Hello, Mr. Smith. That’s all now, Mr. Peale.

PEALE. Yes, sir, I understand. (_Winking_) He takes 50,000 shares at par.

RODNEY. Quite right.

(_PEALE exits door lower R._)

SMITH. Who the deuce is that, Rod?

RODNEY. One of my staff.

SMITH. (_Amazed_) One of your what?

RODNEY. Staff—I’ve gone into business.

SMITH. (_Laughing uproariously_) You’ve done what?

RODNEY. I’m a business man.

SMITH. That’s the funniest thing I ever heard of.

RODNEY. What’s funny about it?

SMITH. You in business! (_He laughs again_)

RODNEY. And as a business man I’d like to talk to you regarding a very
interesting business proposition in which I am now interested.

SMITH. Nothing doing.

RODNEY. (_Gulping_) I thought I’d like to borrow ten—say a few thousand
dollars.

SMITH. No.

RODNEY. Perhaps five thousand.

SMITH. If it was a new club or some tomfoolery, in a minute—but to put
money into your business—it’d be just throwing it away. Why don’t you get
your father to back you?

RODNEY. Father and I don’t agree on the value of advertising.

SMITH. Oh, that’s it, and you expect me to do what your father won’t?

RODNEY. Well, I thought as a friend of the family——

SMITH. You were wrong. Where is your father?

RODNEY. In there, I guess. (_Indicating door lower L._)

SMITH. I’ll bet he’ll think this as funny as I do. (_He exits L. RODNEY
sinks down dejectedly into a chair. PEALE enters with contracts_)

PEALE. Well?

RODNEY. (_Rises_) He wouldn’t give me a cent.

PEALE. He wouldn’t? Well, he sounds like your father’s oldest friend.

RODNEY. What about the Countess?

PEALE. (_Proudly_) I got her.

RODNEY. You did? $10,000?

PEALE. Fifteen thousand.

RODNEY. Holy jumping Jupiter.

PEALE. Pretty good, what?

RODNEY. Good? Why—why—I’ll have to raise your salary.

PEALE. Thanks, I supposed you would.

RODNEY. Where’s the money?

PEALE. Oh, we don’t get it till next week.

RODNEY. (_Dejected_) Oh!

PEALE. But it’s all right. We’re going to sign the contract with her
to-night.

RODNEY. But we must have some more cash to start with.

MARY. (_Entering_) The Countess wants to know how much longer she must
wait?

PEALE. Coming now. Sign the contract.

RODNEY. Sure, I’ll sign anything—I’ll sign it twice. (_Signs_)

PEALE. You know, this has got the show business beat a mile. (_He exits
door lower R._)

MARY. Oh, Rodney, did Mr. Smith lend you any money?

RODNEY. He did not.

SMITH. (_Re-entering_) Oh, Rod—(_Seeing MARY_) I beg your pardon.

RODNEY. That’s all right—you needn’t go, Mary. Mr. Smith, this is the
future Mrs. Martin.

SMITH. (_Crosses to MARY_) You don’t say so? Well, well, a thousand
congratulations!

RODNEY. I suppose you and father had your laugh?

SMITH. No, I didn’t tell him.

RODNEY. Thanks for that, anyhow.

SMITH. Of course, it sounded funny to me at first, but when I thought
things over, after all, why shouldn’t you be a success in business?

RODNEY. (_Amazed_) What?

SMITH. You have been in everything else you’ve tried.

RODNEY. Yes, yes, certainly—sure.

SMITH. Of course, you haven’t tried much. But as you said, I am an old
friend—and I figured if you gave me your word that you’d return the money
within a year—perhaps after all it would only be the act of an old friend
to take a chance. That’s what friends are for.

RODNEY. Why, that’s simply great of you, by George!

SMITH. How much was it you wanted?

(_MARY holds up fingers of both hands._)

RODNEY. (_Promptly_) Ten thousand dollars.

SMITH. But, didn’t you say—?

RODNEY. Oh, I’m sure I said $10,000—that’s the very least.

SMITH. Um—well I’ll mail you a check to-night.

(_MARY squeaks. SMITH looks sharply at her. She stops._)

RODNEY. (_Enthusiastically_) I’ll never forget it. I tell you, old
friends do count. Thanks, thanks.

SMITH. (_Embarrassed_) That’s all right—don’t thank me. Good-night, Miss
Grayson, and I hope you’ll be very happy.

MARY. Good-night.

RODNEY. Good-night. Good-night. (_SMITH exits door upper L. At door,
calling after him_) Oh, Mr. Smith, have you your car with you?

SMITH. (_Off-stage_) Yes.

RODNEY. Well, tell the chauffeur to drive slow and careful. (_RODNEY
grabs MARY by her two hands and dances around excitedly_) Ten
thousand—and he lent it to me. Oh, isn’t it great? (_He kisses her_) Wait
till I tell Peale. (_Exit door R._)

COUNTESS. (_Off-stage, to RODNEY_) Oh, Monsieur, c’est une affaire
magnifique. (_She enters, followed by MARIE—to MARIE_) Je vous remercie,
Marie, de ce que vous avez fait. Ah, les Américains ce sont des gens
d’affaires superbes mais les dames—oh, là, là, qu’elles se fichent au
diable! (_Exits door upper L._)

MARY. (_To MARIE_) What did she say?

MARIE. She said the American men are splendid but the women were crazy
and they could all go to hell. (_Exits door upper L._)

MARY. Oh! (_She goes over and knocks three times at door L._)

MARTIN. (_Entering_) Well, how goes it?

MARY. Oh, Mr. Martin, he’s perfectly splendid. So full of energy, hustle
and ideas. He’s a different man already. You were right: he only needed
development.

MARTIN. Good! Good! You’re not saying this to flatter an old man’s vanity?

MARY. Indeed, I’m not. We won’t have to blast.

MARTIN. (_Shrewdly_) Would you rather take a guarantee of $2,500
additional and give up that 10 per cent of his profits?

MARY. I should say not.

MARTIN. You know, Miss Grayson, you’re making me believe we’ll win that
$30,000 from old John Clark. (_Crosses down R._)

MARY. Oh, indeed we will: you should have just seen Rodney borrow $10,000
from Mr. Smith, without the least trouble.

MARTIN. (_Smiling_) Oh, that was my money.

MARY. What?

MARTIN. When Smith told me Rodney tried to touch him—well, I thought the
least I could do was to back my son, so I sent Smith to make good with
him.

MARY. That was nice of you.

(_RODNEY enters from door R., with dress-suit case._)

MARTIN. Well, I owed the boy a chance, anyhow. (_Seeing RODNEY, turns to
him, crossly_) So you’re still here, are you?

RODNEY. Yes, sir, but I’m going. Come, Mary. (_Crosses to MARY_)

MARTIN. Really going into business, eh? Well, when you fail, don’t come
sniveling back here! You can’t count on a dollar from me.

RODNEY. I won’t snivel—and I don’t want your money. I don’t need it. Why,
I’d have gone to work long ago if I’d known how easy it is to raise
$10,000.

MARTIN. (_Grinning at MARY_) You would, eh? Well, what soft easy-going
business have you picked out?

RODNEY. The soap business.

MARTIN. (_Genuinely annoyed_) What? Why, he can’t make any money out of
soap. (_Crosses to MARY_) That takes brains.

RODNEY. Oh, yes, I can.

MARTIN. I control all the important soap business in the country.

RODNEY. I know you do, but I am going to take it away from you.

MARTIN. What?

RODNEY. Yes, sir, I’m going to manufacture the Thirteen Soap: Unlucky for
Dirt: The Most Expensive Soap in the World! I’m going to break the trust;
I’m going to attack monopoly. I’m going to appeal to the American people
for fair play against the soap trust. You’ve always wanted me to go into
business. Well, I’m in, and forgive me, father, but I’m going to put you
out of business. I’m going to advertise all over the world.

MARTIN. You can’t fight the soap trust with advertising: we’re
established.

RODNEY. Yes, yes, we can: think what advertising means: the power of
suggestion—the psychology of print. Why, 97 per cent of the public
believe what they’re told, and what they’re told is what the other
chaps have been told, and the fellow who told him read it somewhere.
Advertising is responsible for everything. People are sheep, and
advertising is the way to make ’em follow your lead. (_He is beginning to
forget the speech_) Say, what makes you go to the theater? (_PEALE enters
from door R. MARTIN starts to speak_) Don’t tell me: I’ll tell you. It’s
what you’ve read of the play or what some fellows told you, and the
fellow that told him, read it—in a newspaper. (_Remembering—rapidly_)
And that, my boy, is the whole secret of it. You’ve got to be talked
about—get ’em praisin’ or cussin’, but don’t let ’em be quiet. I want to
tell you; what kind of duck eggs do you eat?

MARTIN. (_Aghast_) What?

(_The curtain begins to fall._)

RODNEY. Do you know anything against the duck? No, you don’t, but when
a duck lays an egg it’s a damn fool and keeps quiet, but when a hen
does—cluck, cluck, all over the place! Advertising!

(_The curtain is down._)

(_The Second curtain:—PEALE and RODNEY on either side of MARTIN, are
talking advertising, while MARY has her fingers to her ears._)

(_The Third curtain:—MARTIN is protesting angrily to MARY, while RODNEY
and PEALE are talking gleefully to each other and shaking hands._)

_Curtain._




ACT II


    _SCENE: The private office of the 13 Soap Company. A rather
    commonplace room, furnished comfortably but not elaborately.
    The walls have several posters extolling the virtues of 13
    Soap—such as “Do you believe in signs?” “13 Soap is unlucky for
    dirt.” “Be Clean. Cheap Soap for Cheap People.” “13 Soap is the
    most expensive soap in the world, one dollar a cake.” There is
    a particularly large stand in the up-stage wall bearing the
    legend:_

    _“The average cake of soap gives you 56 washes. A cake of 13
    soap gives you only 24,_

                                _But
                             What Washes!”_

    _There is a door on the left and two more at right. At back are
    windows through which the audience sees the building across the
    street literally covered with 13 Soap posters. There is a desk,
    down C., with chairs, cabinets, a hatrack, a water-cooler, a
    safe, etc., which complete the equipment of the room. Light oak
    office furniture. Three telephones, one on stand right, one on
    desk left, and one on desk center. Shades on windows. All over
    carpet. Four brackets._

    _The time is one month after the first act, about ten o’clock
    in the morning._

    _The curtain rises on an empty stage. RODNEY’S voice heard
    off-stage:_

RODNEY. (_Enters from door upper R._) Forward march! (_Six sandwich-men
enter door upper R., bearing boards: “13 Soap—unlucky for dirt”_) Halt!
(_They stop_) Now, you understand you’re all to go down to Mr. Cyrus
Martin’s office, 226 Broadway, and parade there all day—and to-morrow
the same thing. Be in front of his house to-night at six sharp, you
understand?

SANDWICH MEN. Yes, sir.

RODNEY. Then forward march! (_They exit through door L. RODNEY goes to
his desk. Business with papers, etc. PEALE enters from door upper R._)

PEALE. Hello, little boss. Holy Peter Piper, you’ve shaved off your
mustache!

RODNEY. (_Grinning_) Yes, I’m just beginning to get on to myself. By
George, I certainly used to look like the devil. Do you observe the
clothes?

PEALE. (_R. C. Crosses up; removes coat, and places it L. of C. corner L.
of desk_) Why, you are getting to be a regular business man.

RODNEY. Business is great stuff. I thought it’d bore me, but it’s
immense; it’s the best game I ever played. What’s the news with you?

PEALE. We only just got back from Buffalo this morning.

RODNEY. We?

PEALE. (_Sits in chair L. of desk_) Yes, your father and I. He went to
the Iroquois in Buffalo. I had all the billboards in the neighborhood
plastered thick—and 48-sheet stands along the streets to the Union
Station. From the time the old man got in until he got out, he couldn’t
look anywhere without seeing 13 Soap. I even found out the number of his
room and had a small balloon floating 13 Soap streamers right outside
his window. I took a page in all the Buffalo papers—bribed the hat boy
to keep putting circulars in his hat every time he checked it, and sent
him one of our new folders every mail. They have eight mails a day in
Buffalo. I came back with him on the train and when he went into the
washroom last night I had the porter say “Sorry, sir, we ain’t got no
Thirteen Soap, but you can’t hardly keep any on hand—it’s such grand,
grand soap.” (_Rises and crosses to R._)

RODNEY. Gee, that’s great. (_Crosses to L._)

PEALE. Well, what’s on for to-day?

RODNEY. I’ve got a bully new advertising scheme. When you go into a
barber shop where do you look?

PEALE. At the manicure.

RODNEY. No, no, at the ceiling—we’ll put ads on all the barber’s ceilings.

PEALE. (_Scornfully_) Old stuff! It’s been done—is that what you call a
new scheme?

RODNEY. Well, that wasn’t my big idea. (_Goes up-stage, sits in chair
behind desk_)

PEALE. (_Mockingly_) No? Well, what is your big idea?

RODNEY. Plans for our new factory.

PEALE. Plans for what? Have you gone dippy?

RODNEY. Here they are. (_He produces large blue-print_) Pretty real
looking, aren’t they?

PEALE. You don’t mean you’ve actually got some nut to build us a factory?

RODNEY. No, no, they are for father.

PEALE. Oh, yes, I must admit that is some idea. (_Takes blue-print_)

RODNEY. If he ever does drop in to make a deal I thought we ought to have
something to make a front, something that looks like a plant.

PEALE. _Plant_ is right.

RODNEY. And by the way, if we can, let it leak out that it’s the Ivory
Soap people who are backing us with unlimited capital.

PEALE. The Ivory Soap people?

RODNEY. Sure, father’s always hated ’em in business. His oldest friend,
though, is John Clark, one of the big bugs in Ivory Soap. Clark’s got
a son, Ellery, that father dislikes because he’s such a success in
business—always held him up to me as a model son to pattern by. It’d
make father wild if he thought that old Clark was going to back us; Ivory
Soap’s the only bunch he’s never been able to lick. (_Rises and goes down
R._)

PEALE. (_Goes down L._) Then that scheme ought to be good for a great
rise out of father.

RODNEY. Say, by the way, I put over a corker on him this morning: I
arranged for a parade of sandwich-men up and down in front of his house.
I just sent another bunch to his office.

PEALE. Oh, we’re bound to land him sooner or later, keeping after him the
way we have.

RODNEY. Funny, though, nobody’s tried to buy any soap from us yet.

PEALE. Well, it takes time to create a demand. These 200 cakes of pink
castile you bought looked swell in our old rose wrappers, didn’t they?

RODNEY. Say, where’s Miss Grayson? Have you seen her to-day?

PEALE. No, and it’s after eleven.

RODNEY. I’ll bet she was here before either of us—she always is. By
George, isn’t she a corker?

PEALE. (_Indifferently_) Oh, she’s all right. (_Takes pad and pencil from
pocket and sits in arm-chair L._)

RODNEY. All right!? Why, the girls you read about don’t mean anything
compared to Mary. She’s got Juliet beat a mile. Every time I think of
her I want to yell or do some darn fool thing, and every time I see her
I just want to get down and kiss her shoes. I just want to walk around
after her all the rest of my life and say “Are you comfortable, my love?
Are you happy? If there is anything on the wide earth you want, let me
get it for you, Mary.” What a wonderful name that is—just like her,
simple and honest and beautiful! Mary!

PEALE. (_Reflectively_) If we could only land one hard wallop on father
after that Buffalo business!

RODNEY. (_Indignantly_) Didn’t you hear what I said?

PEALE. Not a word.

RODNEY. I was talking about Mary.

PEALE. I know you were. That’s why I didn’t listen.

(_MARY enters from door upper R. with MSS. case. Hangs up hat, then goes
to desk, sitting back of it C._)

MARY. Good-morning.

RODNEY. (_To MARY_) Ah, you’re here—now everything’s all right, it’s a
great world.

MARY. Don’t be silly; this is a business office.

RODNEY. By George, Mary——

MARY. Miss Grayson!

RODNEY. By George, Miss Grayson, you do look simply stunning! You’re
twice as pretty to-day as you were yesterday, and to-morrow you’ll be——

PEALE. Hey, hey, change the record or put on a soft needle!

MARY. (_To PEALE_) Quite right—in business hours, only business. (_Takes
list of assets and liabilities from case_)

RODNEY. But you are the prettiest thing——

MARY. Never mind that—you listen to me. This firm’s broke.

RODNEY. That we can’t be——

PEALE. It must be some mistake in the books——

MARY. Is it? I was surprised myself when I balanced our accounts this
morning. I have here a statement of our assets and liabilities. We owe
$22,818.09.

PEALE. What’s the 9 cents for?

RODNEY. What are our assets?

MARY. $133.13.

RODNEY. That’s quite a showing for a month.

MARY. Mr. McChesney, the advertising man, was here this morning, and he
won’t wait any longer for his money.

RODNEY. But we paid him $5,000.

MARY. (_Looking at statement_) Yes, and owe him $9,400. And unless he has
$2,500 of it to-day he’ll put you out of business.

PEALE. That’s the trouble of dealing with business men. They’re so
particular about being paid. Now, you take a lot of actors——

MARY. But what about McChesney?

RODNEY. Yes, what are we going to do when McChesney comes here to-day for
money—cash?

PEALE. Well, we don’t do any more business with him.

MARY. No, I guess we won’t.

PEALE. Well, don’t you worry, old son, we’ll fix father somehow. Nobody
can stop good advertising. Why, I met a little fellow on the train last
night. He gets $50,000 a year just for writing ads. He says a good
trade-mark is 70% of the battle, and we’ve got the best trade-mark I ever
heard of.

MARY. You think we ought to keep on advertising?

PEALE. Sure, if we can get credit.

RODNEY. I suppose we might as well owe forty thousand as twenty.

PEALE. Absolutely. Half of all modern advertising success is based on a
good trade-mark, and ours is a bird.

RODNEY. By George, that’s true, we simply have got to keep going. We’ll
manage somehow.

MARY. I like to hear you say that.

PEALE. Now you’re talking. We’ll conduct the greatest campaign since
George W. Advertising was a young man.

MISS BURKE. (_Entering with one letter from door upper R._) Here’s the
morning mail. (_RODNEY takes letter, returns front of desk, MISS BURKE
exits R._)

PEALE. Pretty heavy mail. (_Coming down L. of RODNEY_)

MARY. I’ll bet it’s another bill. (_Coming down R. of RODNEY_)

RODNEY. Hurrah! Hurrah! It’s from the Countess.

MARY. What does she say?

PEALE. (_Grabbing letter, and looking at it_) Oh, French stuff.

RODNEY. She says she was delayed abroad, but that she’s due to-day on the
Imper_a_tor or Rotter or whatever you call it, this morning, and that
she’s coming to see us at eleven.

MARY. It’s half-past eleven now. Oh, dear.

PEALE. Fear not. Remember, though a Countess, she is still a woman: give
her time.

MARY. Does she say anything about the $15,000?

RODNEY. No.

PEALE. Well, I’ve got a hunch everything’s going to be all right, or she
wouldn’t have written us at all.

RODNEY. Her $15,000’ll keep us going for quite a while.

MISS BURKE. (_Entering from door upper R._) Mr. McChesney is here to see
you.

MARY. The advertising man. (_Goes to typewriter desk, and pounds on it_)

MISS BURKE. He seems very angry, too.

RODNEY. Tell him I’m out. (_Goes to chair behind desk and sits_)

MCCHESNEY. (_Entering from door upper R._) Thought I’d come right in
instead of waiting to have her tell me you were out. (_Going to RODNEY_)

(_MISS BURKE exits._)

RODNEY. (_Genially_) Why, hello, Mr. McChesney.

PEALE. (_Trying to shake hands_) How are you, Mac?

MCCHESNEY. (_Throwing him off_) You may be in the soap business, but cut
out the soft soap with me. Where’s my money? Have you got it?

RODNEY. Why—er—the fact is——

MCCHESNEY. That means you haven’t.

RODNEY. Well, you see——

MCCHESNEY. That doesn’t go with me. Do you think you can put me off? You
can bet your blooming liabilities you can’t. I think this whole concern
is bunk and I’m going after you good——

RODNEY. I don’t care for that kind of loud talk. Drop it.

PEALE. Drop it.

MCCHESNEY. (_Surprised_) What?

PEALE. He said, drop it.

RODNEY. It’s simply that I haven’t had time to examine your bill in
detail. This afternoon, however, I——

MCCHESNEY. I’ve heard that before. Now, see here, Mr. Martin—your
father’s an honest man: he won’t stand for his son not paying me my
money. I’ll see him now. (_He starts for door_)

RODNEY. Wait a minute, wait a minute. I’ll give you a check for $2,500 on
account. I presume that will be satisfactory.

MCCHESNEY. (_Taken aback_) Why, yes—sure—but——

RODNEY. You understand, Mr. Peale, that not a cent of that fifty thousand
dollars we appropriated for our October advertising campaign is to go to
him?

PEALE. Absolutely.

MCCHESNEY. Now, Mr. Martin, I’ll admit I’m hasty tempered. I’m sorry I
made a mistake, but a contract is a contract and——

RODNEY. Here’s your check. Good-day.

MCCHESNEY. But, Mr. Martin——

RODNEY. Show Mr. McChesney out.

PEALE. (_Goes to MCCHESNEY, takes his arm and leads him to door upper
R._) Come on, Mac—this way to the elevator. (_Delighted_) Watch your step.

(_MR. MCCHESNEY exits._)

RODNEY. (_Gleefully_) Well, I fixed him, didn’t I?

MARY. (_Rises and goes to RODNEY_) No, you’ve only got us into more
difficulty. You know, there’s no money in the bank.

RODNEY. But the check won’t go through the clearing-house until to-morrow
morning and by then we’ll have the $15,000 from the Countess.

PEALE. But where is the Countess?

MARY. I’ll go telephone now to see if the Imperator’s docked yet.

PEALE. I’ll bet she sank in mid-ocean!

MISS BURKE. (_Entering_) Mr. Ellery Clark to see you.

RODNEY. How I hate that fellow!

PEALE. What’ve you ever done to him?

RODNEY. Nothing. I wish I could. That’s the fellow I told you about. John
Clark’s pride.

PEALE. Oh, yes, the son of Ivory Soap. Let’s have a peek at him?

MISS BURKE. Yes, sir. (_She exits_)

PEALE. I never saw a model son before.

MARY. (_She starts down R._) Oh, Rodney, find out how Ellery’s doing in
business, will you?

RODNEY. Oh, I suppose so.

(_MARY exits door lower R._)

PEALE. (_Crosses to arm-chair L._) You’re spoiling that girl. She used
to be a good business woman. Now half the time, instead of using her
brains she just sits and looks at you as if you were some marvellous
antique work of art. (_Sits_)

(_ELLERY enters door upper R._)

ELLERY. Hello, Rodney, mind if I come in?

RODNEY. I’m very busy to-day, Mr. Clark.

ELLERY. Oh, I suppose you are. Must take a lot of time to get up your
advertisements.

PEALE. (_Rises, goes to ELLERY and offers hand_) You like ’em? I write
’em! My name’s Peale! (_Goes back to chair L. Sits_)

ELLERY. (_Turning from him, bored_) How do you do? (_Sits in arm-chair
R._)

RODNEY. What is it, Mr. Clark?

ELLERY. You see, it’s like this, old top. I’ve been having rather a time
with father lately—silly old man—insisted on the absurd idea of my going
into business. Beastly bore.

RODNEY. But you wanted to do that?

ELLERY. I should say not.

RODNEY. But I thought you loved work?

ELLERY. It’s a preposterous idea—men of intelligence go in for the
professions. I paint.

PEALE. (_Half aside_) You look it!

RODNEY. I’d heard you were a model son.

ELLERY. But I don’t consider it a compliment to be a success in
business—think of all the blighters who are.

PEALE. Yes, the bally rotters!

ELLERY. Father keeps reminding me of your success every day—most
irritating. You see, of course he’s sore, because I never bothered much
about business. Oh, I have tackled a thing or two. But luck was always
against me. It just happened it didn’t work out right. Not my fault, you
understand?

PEALE. You couldn’t be to blame.

ELLERY. Of course, if I ever devoted myself to business! But, after all,
when you know you can do a thing you want to, why bother to do it, if it
bores you?

PEALE. Yes, life is a damn nuisance.

ELLERY. (_Sighing_) And father has been so offensive lately, I’ve decided
to give a little time to business and make a success of it. I can, you
know.

RODNEY. Indeed?

PEALE. Seems simple.

ELLERY. Oh, rather. I have it all figured out. For my scheme I’ve got to
raise seventy-five hundred dollars, and I wanted to talk to you about it.
This idea of mine is an automobile proposition. I really need $10,000,
and I’ve only got $2,500.

(_RODNEY and PEALE exchange looks and walk over to ELLERY, one on each
side of him._)

RODNEY. Ellery, why do you want to go into the automobile business? It’s
dangerous—unsafe——

PEALE. The risk’s tremendous.

RODNEY. Ellery, our families are old friends. Now, if you really want to
show your father you’re a money-maker, why don’t you buy some shares in
our company?

ELLERY. I don’t care much about the idea of being in the soap
business—rather vulgar.

RODNEY. But you don’t have to be in the business.

PEALE. Absolutely not.

RODNEY. It’s a very simple proposition. All you do is invest and then sit
still and deposit your checks when we pay dividends.

ELLERY. I say, that sounds a bit better.

RODNEY. We’re not letting the general public in—but it’d be such a joke
on your father for you to make money.

ELLERY. Yes, wouldn’t it? (_They all laugh_) I fancy he’d be mighty glad
I had sense enough to go in with you.

RODNEY. Yes, wouldn’t he?

ELLERY. But is it a safe investment?

RODNEY. Why, we’d guarantee you against loss from our assets.

PEALE. Yes, from our assets.

ELLERY. That sounds rather ripping. But what would I get for my
twenty-five hundred?

PEALE. A receipt.

ELLERY. I know, I know, but what interest in the business?

RODNEY. Two and one-half per cent.

ELLERY. I say, is that much?

RODNEY. Think what two and a half per cent in the steel trust would mean.

PEALE. And more people use soap than steel.

ELLERY. (_Wisely_) Isn’t steel dearer?

RODNEY. It’s quantity that counts.

PEALE. Four cakes a year to every person in this country would represent
an annual output of 400,000,000 cakes—and think of all the babies who’ll
be born next year. They’ll all have to be washed.

ELLERY. Very true, very true. What is the annual birth-rate?

RODNEY. Let me see, let me see; do you know, Peale?

PEALE. There’s one born every minute.

ELLERY. I fancy that’s true.

PEALE. You can bet it is.

RODNEY. Now, what do you say, Ellery, about investing in our company?

ELLERY. (_After a long pause, rises and shakes hands with RODNEY_) I’ll
do it.

PEALE. God’s in His Heaven, all’s right with the world! (_Crosses L._)

RODNEY. Have you the money with you?

ELLERY. Why, no.

PEALE. Then you’ll send us a check to-day?

ELLERY. I don’t get the money until next week.

RODNEY. Why not?

ELLERY. Father didn’t promise it to me till next Monday.

PEALE. Well, ask him for it now.

ELLERY. Oh, I’m afraid I can’t. He’s out of town.

RODNEY. We can’t agree to hold the matter open until next Monday. (_Goes
to chair behind desk and sits_)

PEALE. No, not till way next Monday. Why don’t you telephone him?

ELLERY. Yes, that wouldn’t be so distressing. If I can get him—I find him
considerably easier to talk to on the ’phone. I can always ring off.

PEALE. Come this way—it’ll be quieter for you if he’s noisy. (_Goes to
ELLERY, takes his arm, and leads him to door lower R._)

MARY. (_Enters door lower R._) Oh, how do you do, Mr. Clark?

ELLERY. Oh, how do you do? (_They shake hands_)

PEALE. (_Pushing him out_) Never mind the social chatter. Ellery, you
don’t mind my calling you Ellery—do you, Ellery? (_To her_) You see,
Ellery has work to do. (_Exit ELLERY. MARY goes to L._) If that’s a model
son, thank God I was born a black sheep!

RODNEY. (_To MARY_) Has the Imperator docked?

MARY. Three hours ago.

PEALE. Then I’ll bet the Countess has been hit by a taxi! (_Drinks_)

MARY. Oh, Rodney, did you find out how well Ellery’s doing?

RODNEY. Oh, great! Hasn’t made a cent. Wanted to borrow some money from
me.

MARY. Your father’d be glad to hear that.

PEALE. Oh, where is our wandering Countess? (_Crosses to L._)

MISS BURKE. (_Entering_) The Countess de Boureen.

PEALE. By golly, she enters on the cue.

RODNEY. We’re saved now.

MARY. Oh, I do hope so.

RODNEY. Get her right in here, quick.

(_MISS BURKE exits._)

ELLERY. (_Sticking his head in at door_) How do you use this ’phone? I’ve
never run a switchboard!

MARY. Oh, I’ll come show you. (_Crosses to R._)

ELLERY. Oh, thank you. I’m not much at mechanical problems. (_He exits_)

RODNEY. (_To MARY as she goes_) And get his father for him; it may mean
$2,500 more for us.

PEALE. (_Runs to door R. shouting to MARY_) Do anything: hold his
hand—kiss him! (_She exits. To RODNEY_) Do you need an interpreter for
the Countess?

RODNEY. (_As he speaks, goes over and pulls down a shade on which is
painted an advertisement in French_) I can understand anything she says
about money. You can help me count it.

PEALE. That’s the grandest sensation I know. (_Crosses to L._)

MISS BURKE. (_Announcing_) The Countess de Bowreen.

(_COUNTESS sweeps in. RODNEY delighted. Goes to her and kisses her hand._)

RODNEY. Ah, bonjour—bonjour.

COUNTESS. Bonjour—bonjour.

RODNEY. (_Pointing to window shade_) Regardez.

COUNTESS. Ah, magnifique, superbe, superbe! Je suis désolée d’être si en
retard, mais c’est très compliqué à la douane. (_Coming down in front of
desk_)

RODNEY. Not at all. (_Going to her_)

PEALE. Not at all. (_Going to her_)

COUNTESS. (_Threatening_) Vous avez reçu ma lettre?

RODNEY. Letter? Yes, I got your letter.

PEALE. (_Leaning forward eagerly to her_) Oh, you little life-saver.

RODNEY. (_To her_) Mon manager, you remember?

COUNTESS. Je suis enchantée de vous revoir.

(_PEALE bows very low._)

RODNEY. Kiss her hand—it’s French stuff.

(_PEALE kisses her hand._)

PEALE. She looks like money—ask her—ask her.

RODNEY. (_Nervously_) You have the money?

COUNTESS. Eh?

PEALE. (_Snapping his fingers_) Come on, kid, say yes, say yes.

RODNEY. Vous avez argent?

COUNTESS. Oui, oui, j’ai l’argent.

PEALE. What does she say?

RODNEY. She says yes.

PEALE. Shall I kiss her?

RODNEY. Do you want to spoil everything? Don’t kiss her till we get the
money. The money with you?

COUNTESS. Eh?

RODNEY. Argent avec vous?

COUNTESS. Oui, j’ai l’argent ici. (_Opening bag and taking out check_)

PEALE. It’s real.

COUNTESS. C’est un chèque de Morgan Harjes pour cent mille francs.

RODNEY. (_Looking at it_) Draft for $20,000 in full payment for French
rights of the 13 Soap.

COUNTESS. Je vous donnerai ce chèque pour vingt mille dollars, mais comme
je ne vous dois que quinze mille, vous pourrez me donner votre chèque
pour cinq mille. Cela finira notre affaire.

PEALE. Slip it to me, kid, slip it to me. I’m dying on my feet. (_Takes
check from RODNEY_)

RODNEY. She says she’ll give us the draft for $20,000, but as she only
owes us $15,000, we must give her back our check for $5,000.

PEALE. That seems simple, give her the check.

RODNEY. But we haven’t any money in the bank. Suppose we get her check
cashed first. Then we can pay her.

PEALE. Sure, great! I’ll go right over to the bank to get it certified.
(_COUNTESS takes check from PEALE and tears it up_) What’s the matter
with you? What’s the matter?

(_COUNTESS is smiling._)

RODNEY. She’s crazy——

COUNTESS. Ah mais non, l’affaire c’est fini maintenant——

PEALE. Talk French to her.

RODNEY. Pourquoi tear it up—pourquoi—pourquoi?

COUNTESS. Gee, but you’re funny!

RODNEY. She spoke English! She’s a fake. (_RODNEY and PEALE stare at her
speechless, PEALE pointing toward the draft_)

PEALE. The draft was phoney, too.

COUNTESS. (_Smiling_) Sure it was.

PEALE. But what’s the idea, kid?

COUNTESS. (_Sits on desk_) You see, I was going to trim you out of your
$5,000 check, but as long as you haven’t any money, your check’s no good,
so you’ve busted up my whole scheme.

PEALE. But why pick on us?

COUNTESS. I didn’t start out to: you wished it on yourselves. I came to
trim your father. You remember, I wanted to see him, but I looked so
soft you thought you’d grab me off and sell me the French agency of your
Thirteen Soap. I didn’t think your father could be as big a boob as you
were, so I changed my plans. Do you get me?

PEALE. Yes, I get you and now I’m going to get the cops to get you.
(_Starts up-stage_)

COUNTESS. (_Laughs. Crosses down L._) I should burst into laughter. Why,
you pikers, I’m on: you’re busted. You haven’t any money and you have got
a phoney company.

RODNEY. Now, see here—(_Goes to her_)

COUNTESS. Preserve it. Preserve it. (_Crosses to center_) Don’t forget,
I’ve understood everything you two guys were talking about.

PEALE. Whew! (_Sits in arm-chair R._)

RODNEY. Gee! (_Goes to arm-chair L._)

COUNTESS. (_To RODNEY_) “Kiss her hand—it’s French stuff.” (_To PEALE_)
“Ah, there, you little life-saver.” (_To RODNEY_) “The money with
you—argent avec vous?” Gee, your French is rotten. (_To PEALE, who moves
away_) “Shall I kiss her?” (_A pause_) Send for the cops and I’ll blow
the whole thing to the papers. (_A pause_) Well, I guess we’re quits. If
you had any money I’d ask for a piece of change to keep me quiet, but as
it is, I can’t waste my time.

RODNEY. (_Rises_) You’re not French at all?

COUNTESS. I was educated over there—immense, wasn’t I? You never tumbled
at all.

PEALE. (_Rises_) But why the foreign stuff?

COUNTESS. Well, I can talk good French—but my English is punk. (_Sits on
desk_)

RODNEY. You won’t say anything now?

COUNTESS. No, I don’t hit a fellow when he’s down. Anyhow, we’re all in
the same class. Three fakes.

PEALE. She has spilled the beans.

RODNEY. Great Scott! And McChesney has our check for $2,500.

PEALE. (_To RODNEY_) Gee! We will just have to get that $2,500 from
ELLERY.

RODNEY. What’s happened to Ellery? Let’s find him. (_They start for door
R._)

PEALE. If he falls down on us——

ELLERY. (_Entering_) Can I see you a moment?

RODNEY. I should say you could.

PEALE. You seem very beastly pleased, Ellery.

ELLERY. Oh, I am.

RODNEY. Then everything’s all right about father?

ELLERY. Oh, yes, so to speak—in a way.

RODNEY. Ah?

PEALE. (_Suddenly suspicious_) What do you mean—so to speak, in a way?

ELLERY. Well, I couldn’t reach the old man on the ’phone, and that did
make matters so much easier. I don’t fancy talking to father on the
’phone.

PEALE. Why couldn’t you reach him?

ELLERY. (_Smiling happily_) Why, he’s on his yacht somewhere on the
Sound—he won’t be home till Monday, so I can’t possibly get the money for
you to-day.

(_RODNEY and PEALE walk up-stage while the COUNTESS drops her
handkerchief. ELLERY picks it up and smiles back delightedly at her. MARY
enters from door lower R._)

MARY. Look out. McChesney’s coming back here—I just saw him across the
street.

PEALE. Try and keep him out.

MARY. I’ll do my best. (_She exits door upper R._)

RODNEY. Ellery, you’ll have to go—we’ve got a big job on our hands. Au
revoir, Countess.

COUNTESS. Au revoir, Monsieur. (_With marked accent_) Is there no one to
see me to my taxi? These American buildings are so big I am lost.

RODNEY. Ellery, you take the Countess.

ELLERY. Oh, I’d love to.

RODNEY. Madame la comtesse de Beaurien—Ellery Clark.

COUNTESS. Dee-lighted.

ELLERY. So am I.

RODNEY. (_Opens door lower L._) You can go out the private entrance.

ELLERY. (_Going toward left_) Oh, certainly.

COUNTESS. (_As they go_) You speak the French?

ELLERY. No, not at all.

COUNTESS. A pitee.

ELLERY. But I can speak German.

COUNTESS. Aber prachtvoll—Ich habe die Deutche sprache so furchtbar gern.

ELLERY. Ich auch——

COUNTESS. Warum laden sie mich nicht zum Biltmore zum Thee ein?

ELLERY. Mit dem grössten——

COUNTESS. Vergnuegen?

ELLERY. (_Relieved_) Yes, that’s the word—Vergnuegen.

PEALE. I’ll bet there’s a Berlitz in her family somewhere.

COUNTESS. Au revoir, Mr. Martin—(_Turning to RODNEY_) Vous êtes trop
aimable. Je vous remercie beaucoup de votre politesse. Au revoir—(_Goes
to PEALE—in undertone_) So long, kid, call me up sometime. (_And then,
chattering a stream of German to ELLERY, they exit door left_)

RODNEY. (_Closes door after COUNTESS exits_) Well, I’ve got to hand it to
her. The Countess is a fake. Ellery is a flivver and McChesney’s on his
way here with that phoney check. (_Goes to his chair behind desk_)

PEALE. I can see Sing-Sing from here. (_Goes to chair L. corner, sits
quickly_)

(_MCCHESNEY bursts in, followed by MARY._)

MCCHESNEY. No, I won’t wait. You’re two swindlers. I’ve just come from
the bank. Your check’s no good.

RODNEY. No good! That’s impossible.

PEALE. Absolutely.

MCCHESNEY. You haven’t any money in the bank.

RODNEY. It must be some mistake on the part of our cashier.

MCCHESNEY. Yes it is—ask him.

RODNEY. He’s at lunch.

MCCHESNEY. I’m going to the sheriff now, and unless you make the check
good at my office in an hour, I’m going to cancel your advertising, cover
up your billboards and send you both to jail, and that goes. (_He exits_)

MARY. Can’t you pay him?

RODNEY. With what?

MARY. What happened to the Countess? Didn’t she give you the money?

RODNEY. No, and she nearly got us for five thousand dollars.

MARY. What?

RODNEY. She’s a fake.

MARY. The swindler! And the man from the Edison Company is here to say
that unless they get some money at once they’ll cut off the current from
all our signs, and the agent of the landlord is waiting for the rent. He
seems very suspicious and wants to be paid for last month right away.
What can I say to them?

(_RODNEY shakes his head._)

PEALE. I don’t know.

MARY. Oh, please send for your father and give in.

RODNEY. No.

MARY. You know I want you to succeed, but there’s no use fighting odds
like these—you haven’t any money, you’re way in debt, and you mustn’t be
disgraced. Please send for your father. I’m sure he’ll help you.

RODNEY. I wonder if I’d better? What do you think, Peale?

PEALE. I don’t know.

MARY. Do telephone him right away. (_Crosses to door lower R._) Now I
must try to fix the Edison man and the landlord, or they’ll be in here.
(_To PEALE_) What can I say to them?

PEALE. I don’t know.

MARY. Oh, I’ll say you’re both out. (_She exits door lower R._)

PEALE. That’ll be a new one.

RODNEY. Do you happen to know the sheriff?

PEALE. Not yet. I’d like to have a pull enough to get a cell with a
southern exposure.

RODNEY. What are we going to do?

PEALE. I don’t know.

RODNEY. What are you here for?

PEALE. I know, but I can’t think.

MISS BURKE. (_Entering_) Mr. Cyrus Martin to see you.

PEALE _and_ RODNEY. Who?

MISS BURKE. Mr. Cyrus Martin.

RODNEY. Have him wait.

PEALE. Have him what? (_Rises and goes to RODNEY_)

RODNEY. Just a minute till I think. When I ring, show him in.

MISS BURKE. Yes, sir. (_She exits_)

PEALE. He must be here to make a deal. Our scheme worked—we’ve put it
over, and what did it? Advertising.

RODNEY. But father’s no fool. We’ve got to be very careful. How’ll we
handle it? I’m not used to putting it over on father.

PEALE. Don’t forget the factory and the Ivory Soap people and the plans,
and get busy. You know. (_He makes motions and brings letter-file from
rack and throws contents on desk_) That rubber-stamp stuff.

RODNEY. But isn’t this playing it rather low down on father?

PEALE. Oh, don’t get cold feet now?

RODNEY. We really haven’t anything to sell him.

PEALE. Yes, we have—a trade-mark. You know it’s good, so do I. We only
need your father to back us and we’ll make a lot of money for him in
spite of himself.

RODNEY. I guess that’s true.

PEALE. Sure it is, and anyhow all’s fair in love and business.

ELLERY. (_Coming in at private door left_) Oh, I beg pardon, but I was so
fascinated at meeting the Countess, I forgot my stick.

RODNEY. Can’t see you now, Ellery. (_He goes over and pulls down two
windows shades on which are painted ads of 13 Soap_)

PEALE. (_Giving him gloves_) No, can’t ever see you again, Ellery. Here’s
your cane. Now, hurry, Ellery. (_He starts to lead him to door_)

ELLERY. The Countess is perfectly delightful—

RODNEY. (_Suddenly goes to ELLERY_) Hold on, hold on, Ellery, can you
wait in there five minutes?

ELLERY. (_Pausing_) But the Countess is downstairs in a taxi.

RODNEY. Oh, she’ll wait for you, and charge the taxi to Mr. Peale. He’ll
be right in and explain everything to you.

PEALE. Oh, yes, I’ll explain.

ELLERY. I don’t want to detain the Countess too long. Hate to keep a lady
waiting—all that sort of thing. You know what women are. (_He exits left_)

PEALE. Now, what is it, what do you want that gink for?

RODNEY. Don’t you see?

PEALE. No, I’m near-sighted.

RODNEY. He’s the son of Ivory Soap. Coach him with some important message
from old John Clark to us about a merger, and when father begins to
wabble, have Ellery come in with the message. That’ll send father kerflop
to the mat.

PEALE. (_Going_) Master! Great, great, I get you. I’ll fix Ellery. This
is your father’s Waterloo. (_At door_) As soon as I’ve taught Ellery his
lesson I’ll be right back. I’ll tell him when we ring the bell twice, to
bust in with his little recitation.

RODNEY. But don’t let him get on to our game.

PEALE. He couldn’t get on to anything but a weighing machine. (_He goes
out left_)

(_RODNEY pushes the buzzer and then takes up the ’phone, keeping his eye
on the door. In a moment CYRUS MARTIN enters._)

RODNEY. No, much obliged, but we can’t consider it. No stock for
sale—it’s quite out of the question. Good-bye. (_Ringing off and then
pretending to be surprised, turns and sees his father_) Why, hello,
father.

MARTIN. Hello, son.

RODNEY. (_RODNEY gets very busy with papers and rubber-stamp_) Sit down,
won’t you? Be with you in just a minute.

MARTIN. (_Drily_) Thanks.

(_RODNEY very busy again with filing papers and opening and closing
drawers. MARTIN looks at him in astonishment._)

RODNEY. Have a cigar? (_He abstractedly passes him a box_)

MARTIN. Thanks—(_He bites off end and lights it, and as he does so,
RODNEY again gets busy with similar business_) Surprised to see me, I
suppose?

RODNEY. Not a bit. (_He starts signing a contract. MARTIN, who has risen,
attempts to glance at it, and as he does so, RODNEY calmly turns it over
and blots it. MARTIN turns away_) There, that’s done! Now, father, what
can I do for you?

MARTIN. Well, my boy—I just dropped in for a social call. The fact is,
I’ve rather missed you.

RODNEY. I’ve missed you too, father.

MARTIN. (_Abruptly_) Thought I’d have a look in and find out how things
were going. (_Sits in arm-chair R._)

RODNEY. Fine—fine—everything’s breezing right along. Of course, I’m
always glad to see you, but right now, father I’m pretty busy, so you’ll
excuse me if—(_He gets busy again with rubber-stamp_)

MARTIN. (_With a certain sarcasm_) Well, if you can spare the time, I’d
like a little business talk with you, Rodney.

RODNEY. Certainly, in just a minute. (_Gets busy with papers. Pushes the
buzzer_)

PEALE. (_Entering_) Oh, excuse me.

RODNEY. That’s all right, come right in. Father, you remember Mr.
Peale—Peale, my father——

PEALE. Indeed yes, I recall very well——

MARTIN. (_Gruffly cutting him off_) How are you?

PEALE. (_Sitting in chair left_) A bit tired—just back from Buffalo where
I’ve been conducting a big campaign.

MARTIN. Then it is to you I should address myself?

RODNEY. Either or both of us.

MARTIN. (_Rises and goes to desk_) Then both of you listen to me. You’ve
got to cut out this nonsense you call advertising.

RODNEY. What nonsense?

PEALE. (_Weakly_) Yes, what?

MARTIN. This morning there was a parade of sandwich-men in front of my
house for two hours. I had to have them arrested. I got to the office to
find another bunch. It annoys me.

RODNEY. I’m sorry, father.

MARTIN. You’re trying to make a fool of me. I open a letter. It’s a
circular for 13 Soap. I open my newspaper—you have a page ad. I look
out of the window—there’s a billboard—I take a train, the damned porter
apologizes because he’s all out of 13 Soap.

RODNEY. Well, of course, all that proves how wonderful our publicity is.

MARTIN. (_Grimly_) You’re a grand young bluff, my son.

RODNEY. Why, father, what do you mean?

MARTIN. I’ll tell you exactly what I mean: I’ve let you ramble on to see
just how far you would go, but you’ve been spending a lot of money on
ridiculous advertising, hoping that by annoying me I’ll buy your business
to get rid of you. Well, I’m not going to. Now what have you got to say
to that? Eh—eh?

PEALE. (_Rises quickly_) Nothing—absolutely nothing. (_Sits_)

RODNEY. (_Quickly_) But I have a lot to say. We may not have a big
business now, but we have got a trade-mark, the catchiest trade-mark ever
invented for soap. We’re a growing concern. Just because our advertising
annoys you, you mustn’t think it’s valueless. Why, it’s so good that
capital is chasing us: our money is practically unlimited. Is that a fair
statement, Peale?

PEALE. (_Dazed at RODNEY’S bluff_) Very fair—very fair indeed——

MARTIN. Bluff, son, bluff!

RODNEY. Not at all. And since you’re so skeptical, father, I don’t mind
letting you see the plans for our new factory. (_Takes plans from desk_)

MARTIN. New factory?

RODNEY. Yes, father—these are the offices, this is Miss Grayson’s office,
this is Mr. Peale’s office, and this is mine.

MARTIN. Well, aren’t you going to make any soap?

RODNEY. Right here, where our capacity will be——

MARTIN. Who’s putting up the money?

RODNEY. (_Reprovingly_) Now, father, you cannot expect me to divulge a
business secret to you, a rival manufacturer.

PEALE. Oh, why not tell him, he is your father?

RODNEY. Well, Peale, if you really think it is wise?

PEALE. Oh, yes, I think it’s quite wise.

RODNEY. It’s the Ivory Soap people.

MARTIN. (_At once impressed and annoyed_) The Ivory Soap people?

PEALE. (_Rises and goes to desk. Rubbing it in_) Yes, the Ivory Soap
people.

MARTIN. You mean John Clark?

RODNEY. Yes.

PEALE. Absolutely. (_MARTIN turns and reflectively walks up-stage. PEALE
very obviously picks up push-button and pushes buzzer twice; it rings off
left. There is a pause, and then in a moment, ELLERY enters_)

ELLERY. Oh, excuse me. I didn’t know your father was here.

RODNEY. (_Very genially_) That’s all right, Ellery.

PEALE. (_The same_) Come right in.

ELLERY. How do you do, Mr. Martin?

MARTIN. (_Gruffly_) How are you, Ellery?

ELLERY. Well, I really can’t wait any longer. The party downstairs in the
taxi—you follow me?

PEALE. Yes, Ellery you told us that——

ELLERY. Well, good-bye, then.

RODNEY. Was that all you came in to say?

ELLERY. (_Remembering_) Oh, yes, of course. If you’ll keep it open until
Monday I’ll get the money for you then.

RODNEY. But we can’t wait till Monday.

ELLERY. But Mr. Peale told me——

PEALE. (_Interrupting quickly_) We’ll see what we can do, but just now,
Ellery, we’re very much occupied. (_He has him by the arm_)

RODNEY. Oh, just a minute: you’d better give your father back the
plans—say they’re quite satisfactory. (_Gives plans to PEALE_)

ELLERY. What plans?

PEALE. Don’t you know?

ELLERY. No.

PEALE. That’s too bad. Well, good-bye, Ellery.

ELLERY. I say, I do find business very confusing. (_He exits_)

PEALE. (_As he comes back_) Ellery talks too much.

RODNEY. He is very indiscreet—if it had been anybody but father he’d have
given our whole plan away.

MARTIN. What’s he doing here—acting for his father?

PEALE. Absolutely.

MARTIN. You’re not going to take him in—that pin-head? Why, he didn’t
even seem to know what he was _trying_ to get at.

PEALE. No, he didn’t, did he?

RODNEY. But after all, he does represent Ivory Soap.

PEALE. Great soap, Ivory! Over 99 per cent pure. (_Sits in arm-chair L._)

MARTIN. (_Grunting_) Ivory Soap? (_He walks up and down while RODNEY
and PEALE exchange gleeful glances. After a considerable pause_) Well,
thinking things over, why should you and I fight?

RODNEY. You began it, father.

MARTIN. Quite true, and therefore I should be the one to call it off.
Now, son, here’s the idea: I’d rather have you with me than against
me—the money doesn’t matter much. In your way, while I don’t endorse that
kind of publicity, I suppose you boys think your sensational ads are good.

PEALE. (_Rising_) Thank you, sir.

MARTIN. Not at all. (_To RODNEY_) And if you’re going to have a backer,
wouldn’t I be better than the Ivory Soap people?

RODNEY. After all, blood is thicker than business. What do you suggest?

MARTIN. Suppose I buy you out—including your trade-mark and goodwill?

PEALE. Oh, you have our goodwill now, sir. (_Rises and bows very
profusely, then sits_)

RODNEY. (_Reflectively_) Buying us out might be expensive for you,
father.

MARTIN. Oh, I guess it won’t take all the money I’ve got. What’s your
proposition?

RODNEY. What’s yours?

MARTIN. Well, I’ll give you $50,000 for your business as it stands.

RODNEY. But we don’t want to give up our business. I like business.

PEALE. (_Grandly_) We wish to continue in our chosen profession.

MARTIN. Well, suppose you take 25% of the profits in addition?

RODNEY. It’s a wonderful autumn, isn’t it? These crisp cold bracing
mornings.

MARTIN. Well, I hardly thought you’d grab at that. What will you take?

RODNEY. (_Rising quickly_) One hundred thousand dollars cash, you assume
all the contracts and obligations of this company, give us 40% of the
profits, a contract for me at $20,000 a year; for Miss Grayson at
$10,000, (_PEALE coughs_)—and another for Mr. Peale at the same figure.

MARTIN. Done. (_Shakes hands with RODNEY_)

(_PEALE and RODNEY exchange looks and shake hands._)

RODNEY. I congratulate you, father.

MARTIN. You needn’t. Your trade-mark might appeal to a lot of
superstitious idiots, but as a business proposition I don’t think much of
it. But now I’ll show old John Clark he can’t butt into my family affairs
or get Ellery mixed up with my boy’s business.

RODNEY. Yes, father, we’d much rather have you than Ellery.

PEALE. Oh, _much rather_.

MISS BURKE. (_Entering_) Oh, Mr. Martin!

RODNEY. Yes?

MARTIN. Yes?

RODNEY. (_Going to her_) That’s for me, father. (_To MISS BURKE_) What is
it?

MISS BURKE. The agent for the landlord says he’s got to see you
immediately.

RODNEY. (_Motioning her to be quiet_) I’ll be right out. (_To MARTIN,
very nervously_) You see, father, we’re thinking of taking larger
offices. Come, Peale. We’ll be right back, father.

PEALE. Yes, father, we’ll be right back. (_They hurriedly exit_)

MARTIN. (_Stands there watching them proudly. MISS GRAYSON enters door
lower R._) Hello, Miss Grayson, it’s mighty good to see you again—I——

MARY. Oh, Mr. Martin, I’m so glad Rodney finally sent for you.

MARTIN. (_Surprised_) Sent for me? (_Goes in front of desk_)

MARY. Have you talked to him?

MARTIN. Oh, yes, he just went out for a minute to see the agent of the
landlord——

MARY. Oh, then he told you about that? (_Goes to him_)

MARTIN. (_Puzzled_) Yes, he told me—why not?

MARY. I am so glad to think he wasn’t ashamed to tell you the truth.

MARTIN. Oh, Rodney always was a truthful lad.

MARY. Oh, I’m so happy you’ve settled with him! You have settled, haven’t
you? (_Goes to arm-chair R._)

MARTIN. Yes, sure.

MARY. Oh, good. Isn’t it wonderful for him? (_Very sweetly_) Just think!
Without you he couldn’t have lasted out the day. (_Crossing down in front
of desk_)

MARTIN. Couldn’t have lasted out the day, ha, ha! Then our little scheme
to put Rodney on his feet didn’t work?

MARY. But everything’s all right now. You’re going to help him——

MARTIN. Everything’s great now—(_Knocked off his feet, then recovering
himself_) Oh, by the way, in our negotiations the one thing that Rodney
didn’t fully go into was the nature of the assets.

MARY. The assets! They must have made even you laugh. Why, we haven’t
any! (_She laughs_)

MARTIN. (_Trying to laugh_) Haven’t any! Ha—ha—by the way, there was a
report on the Street to-day that the Ivory Soap people were going to make
a deal with Rodney—build him a factory—

MARY. (_Innocently_) Oh, there’s nothing in that.

MARTIN. Are you sure? As I got here, I thought I saw Ellery Clark leaving.

MARY. Oh, he didn’t come here on business: Ellery came to borrow some
money from Rodney—isn’t that funny?

MARTIN. Oh, yes, very funny—but the plans?

MARY. Rodney showed you some plans? He must have been joking!

MARTIN. (_Changing his whole manner_) The young scoundrel! (_Starts to go
up-stage_)

MARY. What!

MARTIN. (_Stops_) Thank you, Miss Grayson, for telling me. Do you know
what he tried to do to me? Hold me up for a hundred thousand dollars,
make me think Ivory Soap was backing him, too—and but for you, he’d have
succeeded.

MARY. What have I done?

MARTIN. You saved me a lot of money and kept me from being a fool. Thank
you! Good-morning. (_Starts for door upper R._)

MARY. You mean at last he’d succeeded in getting you to back him?

MARTIN. At last! (_Coming to her, lays hat on desk_) So that was his
scheme all the time, was it? He didn’t go into business on the level,
but just for my benefit? And you were helping him. Well, he can thank you
again for having failed.

MARY. It’s all my fault.

MARTIN. Yes it is, from the start. You got up the plan of my pretending
to put him out of the house——

MARY. Oh, but I tell you, you must help him.

MARTIN. Help him yourself. You’ve got $5,000.

MARY. But I gave it to him.

MARTIN. My son took money from you?

MARY. He didn’t know—I pretended it was from a friend.

MARTIN. Well, you got him in; now you can get him out.

MARY. But your bet—you bet $30,000 with John Clark. You don’t want to
lose that?

MARTIN. Well, if Ellery’s trying to borrow money from Rodney it looks
like an even break—and anyhow I’d lose the bet twice over rather than
have my son think he could make a fool of his father.

MARY. But he is a good business man: he’d make you proud of him. You
don’t know how hard he’s worked, how fine he’s been; he’s simply
wonderful. If he could keep on a little longer, I know he’d succeed. If
you’ll just help him, he’ll make money. You’ll see he will.

MARTIN. Of course, you want him to make money. You’re thinking of that
percentage contract with me.

MARY. I’m not! Oh, I’m not! I can’t see him fail. Listen: I’ll try to
give you back what you’ve given me—I don’t care anything about the
contract. I’ll tear it up now if you’ll just help him.

MARTIN. By George, I believe you really are in love with him!

MARY. (_Proudly_) Yes, I am—now. But that doesn’t matter. We’ve got to
save him—save his business.

MARTIN. I won’t give him a nickel. Good-bye! (_Starts to go_)

MARY. But you can’t go like this: he’ll be disgraced! He’s in debt.

MARTIN. Let him get out of it—it’ll do him good. I’ve been a sentimental
fool. I’ve made it all too easy for him. (_Coming down R._)

MARY. But that’s your fault, too.

MARTIN. Yes it is, and I don’t propose to repeat the error. He’s lied to
me all the way through. We’ll let him face the truth; now we’ll see what
he’s made of.

(_RODNEY and PEALE enter._)

RODNEY. (_Coming in_) Well, we’re going to move. (_Goes to desk and sits_)

PEALE. Yes, nice chap, that fellow. (_Coming down R._)

RODNEY. Well, Mary, have you heard about our deal?

MARTIN. The deal’s off.

MARY. But—(_Sits in arm-chair L._)

RODNEY. (_Back of desk_) Off!

PEALE. Off! (_Goes up-stage to window_)

MARTIN. Yes, off.

RODNEY. But, why—why?

MARTIN. Because you took me for a bigger fool than I am. My own son can’t
do that to me. I’ve found out now that you’re broke.

MARY. Oh, Mr. Martin!

MARTIN. (_Stopping her_) No! (_To RODNEY_) And all the time you were
lying to me about the Ivory Soap people and the factory they were going
to put up. You thought you could make an ass of me—get the best of me,
did you? Well, you can’t. I’m finished with you and your 13 Soap. You’ve
got a swelled head, you’re a smart alec, you’re a complete fake, you’re a
cheat, young man——

RODNEY. (_In utter dejection_) I guess you’re right.

MARTIN. (_With satisfaction_) Ah!

RODNEY. I did try to be smart. I was stuck on myself. I thought business
was a cinch. But you’re right. I have been a fake. This whole thing never
seemed real—it was just fun—like a game; but I’ve waked up, and now
it’s serious. I tried to get the best of you, but I’ll take my licking.
I don’t want any charity: I know what’s coming to me and I’ll take my
medicine.

MARTIN. (_Relenting a little_) Well, maybe I’ve said a little too much——

RODNEY. No, it’s all true.

MARTIN. But, see here, I don’t want you disgraced—I——

RODNEY. You told me never to come back to you for a nickel, and I won’t.
I told you, too, that I wouldn’t snivel—well, I’m not going to. Good-bye,
father——

MARTIN. Now, see here——

RODNEY. Please, father, it’s up to me and nobody else, to get out of
this. Please go. (_He holds out his hand_)

MARTIN. (_Gently_) Good-bye, son. (_He shakes his hand. He exits_)

(_RODNEY sits in chair dejected._)

PEALE. (_Coming down to RODNEY_) Now, see here, little boss——

RODNEY. Peale, I’m sorry, but you’re fired.

PEALE. (_Coming over and putting hand on his shoulder_) Say, little boss,
you can’t fire me. I’m just going to stick around, whatever happens.

(_MARY touches PEALE on the arm and motions him to go out. He nods
understandingly and exits upper R. MARY comes to RODNEY._)

MARY. Oh, Rodney, Rodney, it was all my fault. Your father had no idea of
the truth—I didn’t understand; I thought you sent for him to help you. I
told him about our company. I did it all—betrayed you.

RODNEY. But you didn’t mean to: it’s all right, Mary.

MARY. You forgive me?

RODNEY. Why, of course: I love you.

MARY. Oh, Rodney, I’m so sorry.

RODNEY. (_Changing completely. Rises_) But if father thinks just because
he laced it into me I’m licked, he’s wrong. Maybe I have been a fake but,
by George, I won’t be any longer. (_Goes down R._)

MARY. You’re really going on? (_Goes down L._)

RODNEY. When I’ve got you, you bet I am. Say, do you really think a long
speech from father and no money to work with are enough to stop me? No,
sir; what father said got me for a minute, but I’m not a quitter, and
I’ll prove it. There must be something of father in me: I can’t be such
a pin-head as I look. I’ll get out of this mess the best way I can, and
then I’ll shine shoes or sell peanuts. I’ll start at the bottom instead
of finishing there. I’ll make money—I’ll——

MARY. Oh, Rodney, Rodney, now I am proud of you! (_She kisses him
unexpectedly and heartily_)

RODNEY. (_Overjoyed_) What! That’s the first time you ever really kissed
me—all by yourself—like that. By George, you must love me!

MARY. You bet I do. (_She kisses him again and they clinch as PEALE
enters excitedly, coming down R._)

PEALE. (_Entering_) Say, I didn’t mean to interrupt!

RODNEY. (_Still with MARY in his arms_) Nothing in the world can
interrupt me—What is it?

PEALE. A telegram. It’s the first we ever received, and—I was afraid to
open it.

(_MARY, taking it, looks at it nervously._)

MARY. What awful thing can it be? (_Goes in front of desk_)

RODNEY. Gee, I wonder what it says? (_Crosses to her_)

PEALE. Read it. Read it. (_Crosses to her_)

MARY. (_Having opened it_) “Rodney Martin, President 13 Soap Company, 226
Broadway”——

PEALE. Go on, we know the address——

MARY. “Ship at once, collect, 50,000 cakes 13 Soap. Marshall Field,
Chicago.”

RODNEY. Somebody really wants to buy some soap!

PEALE. I don’t believe it.

MARY. (_Handing RODNEY the telegram_) But here it is.

RODNEY. (_Reading_) Fifty thousand cakes—it’s true.

PEALE. We’ve started—we’ve begun! We’re actually going to sell some soap.

RODNEY. The tide’s turned—didn’t I tell you advertising pays? We’ll sweep
the country—Europe—Asia—Africa! Go in with father? Not for a million
dollars! (_Starts up-stage_)

PEALE. I’ll wire Marshall Field right away. (_Starts for door upper R._)

RODNEY. Go ahead.

MARY. (_Suddenly_) Great Heavens!

PEALE. What is it?

RODNEY. What’s happened?

MARY. That order is no good.

PEALE. What! (_Coming down R._)

RODNEY. Why? (_Coming down L._)

MARY. We can’t fill it: we’ve never made any soap. (_Start stand staring
at each other aghast_)

RODNEY. What’ll we do?

PEALE. Let’s think. (_They sit staring straight ahead_)

(_RODNEY sits in chair L. MARY sits on table. PEALE sits in chair R._)

RODNEY. (_Slowly_) We must get some soap.

PEALE. (_Slowly_) Yes, I thought of that.

MARY. (_Slowly_) Where can we get it?

PEALE. From a soap factory!

MARY. (_Slowly_) But they all belong to father.

RODNEY. (_With dawning hope. Rises_) But he can’t know about this
Marshall Field order—maybe we could buy some soap before he’d have a
chance to stop them selling to us?

(_PEALE and MARY rise._)

PEALE. Great idea—let’s get busy.

MARY. How?

RODNEY. Where’s the ’phone book? (_She grabs red classified directory
from desk_) We’ll call up two or three of his branch offices. (_He has
hurriedly begun turning over pages, as PEALE on one side and MARY on the
other, help him_) Skins, skates, shirts—where’s soap?

MARY. (_Over his shoulder_) Skylights, skates, slides——

PEALE. (_The same_) Smelters, smoke-stacks, snuff.

RODNEY. Ah, here it is! Soap manufacturers—(_Skimming down page_) 276
Broad—here’s one of father’s factories.

PEALE. I’ve got one, too—374 Schuyler.

MARY. So have I: 480 Audubon. (_They drop book and each dashes to a
’phone. As they give the number of ’phone, curtain. During two curtains,
till they finish lines_)

(_Together_)

    RODNEY. 276 Broad.

    MARY. 480 Audubon.

    PEALE. 374 Schuyler—and hurry, sweetie——

RODNEY. (_Holding wire_) It’ll have to be Old Rose.

PEALE. Castile is the cheapest.

MARY. Order small cakes.

(_Together_)

    RODNEY. Hello, this is the Martin Soap Company—we want to get
    some soap—pink castile—small cakes—40 or 50,000 cakes immediate
    delivery—what’s the price?

    MARY. Hello, 480 Audbon. I want to find out if I can buy a lot
    of soap right away—Old Rose—castile—50,000 cakes; we want it
    this afternoon.

    PEALE. Hello, son, I want to buy a lot of soap: 50,000
    cakes—got to have some of it to-day—smallest size castile cakes
    you keep. If you haven’t Old Rose—pink’ll do. Who am I? None of
    your business.

(_And as all three are talking together violently in their separate
’phones,_

_The curtain falls._)




ACT III


    _SCENE: The scene is the same as that of ACT I, except that it
    is five o’clock in the afternoon of a day in late October._

    _MARTIN is discovered behind the desk, right. Before him is
    a pile of evening papers and some unopened letters. As the
    curtain rises he opens one, displaying to the audience on its
    back page a page-advertisement of 13 Soap. In a moment he turns
    over to others, gives an annoyed exclamation and tosses it
    aside. He picks up one of the letters, opens it, gives an angry
    grunt, mutters disgustedly “13 Soap”, and throws it into the
    waste basket._

JOHNSON. (_Entering door upper L._) Miss Grayson is here to see you, sir——

MARTIN. (_A bit surprised_) Miss Grayson? Well, show her in.

JOHNSON. Very good, sir. (_He exits. MARTIN opens another paper, again
sees an advertisement of 13 Soap and with considerable irritation sweeps
the whole pile off the desk as JOHNSON enters, followed by MARY_) Miss
Grayson. (_JOHNSON exits_)

MARY. How do you do, Mr. Martin?

MARTIN. Come to get your job back, I suppose?

MARY. No, sir.

MARTIN. Well, you can have it—at the old salary.

MARY. I don’t want it.

MARTIN. Oh, Rodney sent you to plead for him?

MARY. No, sir.

MARTIN. Then, what are you here for?

MARY. To make you a business proposition.

MARTIN. Why doesn’t Rodney make it himself?

MARY. He doesn’t know I’m here.

MARTIN. That’s something in his favor: can’t see much use in women tying
up in men’s business.

JOHNSON. (_Entering_) Mr. Rodney Martin and Ambrose Peale.

MARTIN. Oh, the whole firm! Send ’em in, Johnson.

JOHNSON. Very good, sir. (_He exits_)

(_RODNEY and PEALE enter._)

RODNEY. Hello, father. (_Crosses to table_)

PEALE. How do you do, sir? (_Coming down L._)

(_MARTIN grunts to them both._)

RODNEY. (_Seeing MARY_) Mary, what on earth are you doing here?

MARY. I came to tell your father about Marshall Field’s order.

RODNEY. That’s why we’re here, too.

PEALE. Absolutely.

MARTIN. Let me tell you right now, I won’t back any fake company.

RODNEY. But we’re not a fake any longer.

PEALE. We’ve actually sold some soap.

MARY. Fifty thousand cakes.

RODNEY. To Marshall Field.

MARTIN. Then why did you send ’em only five thousand cakes?

RODNEY. Because after we’d got that much from one of your branch
factories you shut off our supply.

PEALE. And we couldn’t get any more soap anywhere.

MARY. (_Accusingly_) And you knew it very well. (_Crossing to R. side of
MR. MARTIN_)

RODNEY. We’ve still got 45,000 cakes to deliver, if we can get ’em from
you. Why let all that money get out of the family? It’s a business
proposition.

MARTIN. No, it isn’t. Don’t fool yourself: I sent that telegram.

RODNEY. What telegram?

MARTIN. The telegram from Marshall Field’s ordering the 50,000 cakes.

MARY. You sent it?

MARTIN. That day at the office you were pretty game, son, and to tell the
truth, I felt so sorry for you, I kind of had to do something, so I sent
that wire——

RODNEY. So that success is all a bluff, too? (_Sits on sofa_)

MARY. But what did you do it for?

MARTIN. Well, I figured an order like that would stall off your
creditors, and then I had fixed it with one of our factories to let you
have 5,000 cakes at three cents a cake. I knew it would mean some ready
cash for you from Marshall Field——

PEALE. But how did you square Marshall Field?

MARTIN. Oh, I just wired ’em I’d be responsible, and, say—(_Turning to
RODNEY, who rises_) you had a nerve to charge ’em sixty cents a cake—and
I had to pay the bill! That shipment cost me $3,000 for $150 worth of
soap. (_PEALE laughs_) That isn’t funny, young man.

RODNEY. No, it isn’t: I thought we’d really made good, and all the time
it was you behind us——

MARTIN. You see, my boy, even if you did nearly trim me, I’ve got a sort
of sneaking fondness for you. Look here, son, why not quit? There’s no
market for dollar soap.

RODNEY. But how do you know?

MARTIN. I had a letter from Marshall Field a few days ago asking me what
to do with the soap. They hadn’t sold a cake. I told ’em to dump it in
the Chicago River; it might help to clean it up.

RODNEY. But you didn’t give our advertising a chance.

PEALE. We only finished a great big advertising campaign in Chicago two
days ago.

RODNEY. I know the soap’ll make good—with that trade-mark.

MARTIN. If your trade-mark was so marvelous, somebody besides your poor
old father would have bought your soap.

PEALE. Oh, what’s the use? He doesn’t believe in advertising!

MARTIN. Oh, yes, I do: sound, conservative advertising, but not the
crazy, sensational stuff you go in for.

MARY. Oh, you’re just mad because the soap trust didn’t think of 13 Soap
itself.

MARTIN. Why, we wouldn’t touch a fool thing like that. If you deliver the
goods, your goods will advertise you—that’s always been our policy.

RODNEY. I’m sorry, father, but you are old-fashioned to knock the modern
way of advertising. Why, do you know, the National Biscuit Company was on
the verge of failing until they hit on the title, Uneeda Biscuit?

MARY. And since then, they have had over four hundred lawsuits to protect
it.

RODNEY. Their trade-mark made ’em. They value that trade-mark now at six
million dollars.

PEALE. Great stuff. (_Turning to MARTIN_)—and Spearmint Gum just as a
trade-mark is worth seven millions.

RODNEY. And the Fairbanks people count their trade-mark, The Gold Dust
Twins, at $10,000,000.

MARY. Ever hear of the Gillette Safety Razor?

MARTIN. I use it myself.

MARY. Tell him about it, Rodney.

RODNEY. It costs you five dollars. Don’t you know there’s a mighty good
safety razor for a quarter, and dozens at a dollar, but you use the
Gillette because Gillette was there first; you buy his razor at a high
price simply because of its trade-mark.

MARY. (_With gesture_) Advertising.

RODNEY _and_ PEALE. (_With gesture_) Absolutely.

PEALE. Ivory Soap in the magazines alone used $450,000 worth of space
in 1913—and at three cents a cake wholesale, that represents 15,000,000
cakes for magazine advertising alone.

MARTIN. I don’t believe it.

PEALE. Yes, and a lot of other guys didn’t believe that iron ships would
float or that machines heavier than air would fly, or that you could talk
to ’Frisco on a wire or send a message across the Atlantic without a
wire. Pardon me, sir, but you want to get on to yourself.

RODNEY. Yes, father, you certainly do.

MARY. And you’d better hurry up.

MARTIN. You’ve got a fine lot of theories, but what have they done for
those 5,000 cakes of 13 Soap out at Marshall Field’s?

PEALE. Why, we haven’t really spent enough money advertising.

RODNEY. That’s true. Every time the American Tobacco Company puts out a
new cigarette they start off by appropriating $200,000 to boom it.

PEALE. And I suppose they are a lot of boobs?

RODNEY. And think what other firms spend! I’ve gone into this thing,
father——

MARY. Yes, Rodney, let’s show him our list.

RODNEY. Sure, it’s an absolutely accurate list of what some of the big
advertisers spent in the thirty-one leading magazines last year. Eastman
Kodak, $400,000, Postum Coffee, $125,000, Arrow Collars, $400,000,
Melachrino Cigarettes, $100,000, Welch’s Grape Juice, $100,000.

PEALE. Grape Juice, my friend!

MARY. Uneeda Biscuit, $150,000. Spearmint Gum, $140,000.

MARTIN. That’s enough.

RODNEY. I’ve only just begun. Grape Nuts, $228,000.

MARY. Colgate’s Dental Cream, $230,000.

PEALE. Campbell’s Soups, $186,000.

MARY. Kellogg’s Toasted Cornflakes, $200,000.

RODNEY. Quaker Oats, $367,000, and these are only a few. You can’t see
how it pays, but you do know that it must pay or they wouldn’t do it.

MARY. Does that mean anything to you?

PEALE. Yes. Does it when you realize that those thirty-one magazines have
only about 10,000,000 readers?

RODNEY. And that there are a hundred million people in this country. Why
just to appeal to one-tenth of the population, fifty million dollars was
spent in magazines last year, and each year people are getting better
educated—more people are wanting to read. It won’t be long before there
are 25,000,000 people buying magazines, and you can reach all of them
by advertising—get a new market, a new population to deal with. Think
what national advertising is accomplishing! It sells automobiles, vacuum
cleaners, talking machines, rubber heels, kodaks, washing machines,
foods, clothes, shoes, paints, houses, plumbing, electric irons, fireless
cookers—mostly to a lot of people who’d never even hear of ’em if it
weren’t for advertisements.

PEALE. But nowadays it isn’t only people who have stoves to sell
or tooth-brushes, that are spending money on publicity. Banks are
advertising for money, nations for immigrants, colleges for students,
cities for citizens, and churches for congregations, and you sit there
thinking it doesn’t pay to advertise.

MARY. Six hundred and sixteen million dollars were spent last year in
magazines and newspapers, billboards and electric signs.

RODNEY. Bringing education and comfort and fun and luxury to the
people of the United States. It’s romance, father, the romance of
printing-presses, of steel rails, of the wireless, of trains and
competition, the romance of modern business, and it’s all built on
advertising. Advertising is the biggest thing in this country, and it’s
only just begun.

MARTIN. (_After a pause_) Why didn’t you boys go into the advertising
business? You seem to know something about that?

PEALE. (_Fairly tearing his hair_) Oh, what’s the use! He’s the old
school—we’re new blood. (_Coming to L. of C._)

RODNEY. (_With enthusiasm_) Youth has got it on old age.

MARY. (_Coming down between PEALE and RODNEY_) You bet it has!

MARTIN. When you boys get through talking and you’re flat broke and down
and out, come around and see me: I’ll show you an old business that has a
lot of money that isn’t radical and manages to keep going without wasting
a fortune in fool advertising.

RODNEY. Then you won’t let us get any soap.

MARTIN. Risk my business reputation on a silly scheme like Dollar Soap? I
should say not!

PEALE. Oh, come on. What’s the use of talking to a man whose brain is
deaf? (_Exit door upper L., keeping in step, single-file_)

MARTIN. (_Rises and comes to center_) Say when you get a new line of
patter, come around. I like to hear you. Dollar Soap!

JOHNSON. (_Enters_) I beg pardon, a gentleman to see you, sir. (_JOHNSON
hands MARTIN a card on silver tray_)

MARTIN. “Mr. Charles Bronson.” What does he want?

JOHNSON. He says he’s from Marshall Field.

MARTIN. Oh, a kick, I suppose? Send him in.

JOHNSON. Yes, sir. (_He exits_)

(_Enter BRONSON._)

BRONSON. (_Inquiringly_) Mr. Martin?

MARTIN. Yes.

BRONSON. I just arrived from Chicago. I am here in reference to the 13
Soap.

MARTIN. Be seated. Well, what about it? (_Sits in chair L. of table_)

BRONSON. (_Sits in chair R. of desk_) While, of course, we understand
that the 13 Soap is made by your son, Mr. Rodney Martin, at the same time
as you wired us you would be responsible for that order, Marshall Field
felt that I should first see you in the matter.

MARTIN. Humph!

BRONSON. We realize, of course, that you are backing your son——

MARTIN. (_Gruffly_) Well, why shouldn’t I back him?

BRONSON. Of course, of course. That is why we’d like to place our order
through you.

MARTIN. (_Amazed_) Place your what?

BRONSON. Through some error we received only 5,000 cakes, instead of
50,000 but that’s all gone.

MARTIN. All gone? What happened to it?

BRONSON. We’ve sold it.

MARTIN. Sold it?

BRONSON. Yes, and we want the balance of the original order you were kind
enough to throw our way, and as much more soap as we can get.

MARTIN. But only the other day I had a letter from Marshall Field saying
they hadn’t sold a cake.

BRONSON. (_Laughing_) I know, I know. We felt at first that of course
there could be no popular market for a dollar soap; we weren’t as
far-sighted as you were. (_MARTIN clears his throat_) But of course,
when those extraordinary advertisements appeared, so different from your
usual conservative publicity, the sales began immediately! We sold the
5,000 cakes in two days.

MARTIN. And the advertising did it?

BRONSON. Of course, what else? Now we want to handle your goods
exclusively in the west—with extensive immediate deliveries. Can that be
arranged?

MARTIN. It ought to be. What do you offer?

BRONSON. I dare say we would contract for a quarter of a million cakes of
soap.

MARTIN. (_Amazed_) A quarter of a million!

BRONSON. (_Misunderstanding him_) Of course we might do a little better
if we could settle the matter at once.

MARTIN. I should have to consult my son first.

BRONSON. (_Rising_) Oh, then perhaps I ought to go see him?

MARTIN. (_Rising_) Not at all—not at all. I’ll attend to it.

BRONSON. But we thought that you would have full power.

MARTIN. As a matter of courtesy I should like to talk things over with my
own boy——

BRONSON. But you control the product?

MARTIN. Bronson, you can trust me to handle this thing.

BRONSON. Of course, of course. When can I see you again?

MARTIN. In half an hour.

BRONSON. Very well. I’ve some matters to attend to. I’ll be back in half
an hour. (_Going to door upper L._) It’s a wonderful soap, Mr. Martin.

MARTIN. (_Dryly_) Oh, wonderful.

BRONSON. See you in half an hour. (_BRONSON exits_)

MARTIN. Wonderful soap—plain pink castile, I’ve got to get in on this.
(_He goes to ’phone_) 1313 Bryant. Hello, is this the 13 Soap Company?

JOHNSON. (_Enters_) Oh, beg pardon, sir, but—

MARTIN. Just a minute. Is Mr. Rodney Martin in? No? Never mind who I am.
Good-bye. Johnson, call up my son’s office every ten minutes and let me
know the minute he comes in. Don’t tell ’em who’s calling. (_Crosses to
R._)

JOHNSON. Yes, sir.

MARTIN. And when Mr. Bronson comes back, be sure to have him wait for me.

JOHNSON. Yes, sir. There’s a lady to see you, sir. She speaks English now.

MARTIN. She does, eh? That’s unusual, isn’t it?

JOHNSON. I mean, sir, when she was here two months ago she could only
talk French.

MARTIN. Indeed! Well, I’m not interested in the languages she speaks. Who
is she, and what does she want?

JOHNSON. She wishes to see you about the French rights of the 13 Soap.

MARTIN. The what?

JOHNSON. The French rights.

MARTIN. Great Scott! Send her right in.

JOHNSON. Yes, sir. The Countess de Bowreen. (_He exits_)

COUNTESS. (_Enters_) How do you do?

MARTIN. (_Comes down in front of table_) How do you do?

COUNTESS. I am the Countess de Beaurien. Your son have told you of me!

MARTIN. No.

COUNTESS. I bet he have not. He is a cheat—he trick me.

MARTIN. Now, my dear lady——

COUNTESS. Attendez, you listen to me: two months ago there in that very
room, I buy the French rights for the 13 Soap. I pay him 15,000 dollar
and now I cannot get any soap.

MARTIN. You will have to see my son.

COUNTESS. But I have seen him, and he give me no satisfaction. If I
cannot get any soap, I must have my money, one or the other, or I put him
in the jail. He is a cheat. I have here ze contract. I sue him in the
court.

MARTIN. My dear lady, you mustn’t feel that way.

COUNTESS. Feel! Ah, mon dieu—I trick no one, I play fair, I am an
honest woman. Mais je vous dis que je suis honnête, très honnête dans
mes affaires. Monsieur votre fils m’a donné le contrat, et j’insiste
qu’il est très malhonnête. Je n’ai pas l’habitude d’être si maltraitée,
monsieur, et je répète que je ferai tout mon possible d’obtenir les
quinze mille dollars que me doit Monsieur votre fils, et s’il ne me les
donne pas, je le poursuivrai sans cesse. Comprenez-vous, Monsieur? (_She
takes the contract from him_)

MARTIN. But I don’t understand French.

COUNTESS. Pardon, Monsieur, always I am excited I speak the French. But!
If you love your son, you pay me back, or else he go to jail. What you
say?

MARTIN. But $15,000 is a lot of money.

COUNTESS. Yes. But it is more to me than it is to you. You pay me, or he
go to prison. Now what you say?

(_JOHNSON enters._)

MARTIN. What is it?

JOHNSON. I beg pardon, a gentleman to see you, sir.

MARTIN. (_Comes to JOHNSON_) Is it Bronson?

JOHNSON. No, sir. (_JOHNSON hands him card_)

MARTIN. By George, just the man I want to see! Show him right in. Hold
on, hold on. Now, Duchess, if you don’t mind, just step in this room a
minute. (_Indicating room lower R._)

COUNTESS. No, no, I do not like that room: I have been there before.

MARTIN. Here is a nice room. (_Points to room lower L._) You will find it
very comfortable.

COUNTESS. Very well, I wait. (_Crosses to left_) But in fifteen minutes
if I do not get the 15,000 dollar, I go to my lawyers, and your son—poof!
he is done. (_Talking in French as she exits_)

MARTIN. (_To JOHNSON_) Did you get my son’s office?

JOHNSON. Yes, sir—he hasn’t come in.

MARTIN. If you reach him while Mr. Peale’s here don’t mention Rodney’s
name; just call him “that party.” I’ll understand. (_Crosses R._)

JOHNSON. Yes, sir. (_He exits_)

(_PEALE enters door upper L._)

MARTIN. Now, see here, young man!

PEALE. Now, one moment, Mr. Martin. I just want to say that I am a man of
few words—that this isn’t advertising, it’s personal. I know you don’t
like me.

MARTIN. Why do you say that?

PEALE. Because I’m a pretty wise gink.

MARTIN. Well, you are a bit——

PEALE. Fresh? Well, I guess that’s right, too. But that’s me—I’m not your
style. Here’s the idea: your son has been immense to me. Great kid, and
it struck me the reason you wouldn’t back him was because I was mixed up
in his business. So I just came to say if that’s the situation, why I’m
out, that’s all. You go ahead with him alone.

MARTIN. You’re not a partner?

PEALE. I should say not. I’m just a hired hand. He could can me any
moment, but he’s not the kind of guy who’d do that.

MARTIN. Then you haven’t power to sign, to make a deal?

PEALE. I should say not. Why, he and Miss Grayson do all the signing.
If I could have signed contracts, I’d have spent a million dollars in
advertising. And believe me, you ought to back him, because, honest, Mr.
Martin, it’s a great scheme—the 13 Soap, on the level, if it’s handled
right and the publicity end is——

MARTIN. Now don’t get started on advertising.

PEALE. That’s right, too. Well, I guess that’s all. I wanted to tell
you how I stood about Rodney. That’s off my chest, so good afternoon.
(_Starts to go_)

MARTIN. Wait a minute. What did you boys mean by trimming that poor
Countess on the French rights?

PEALE. Jumping Jupiter; has she been here?

MARTIN. She’s here now.

PEALE. What did she come to see you for?

MARTIN. She said she’d put Rodney in jail for fraud unless I made good
that $15,000. I’ve got to pay her—can’t see the boy disgraced.

PEALE. Say, if you’d like to save that $15,000, I’ll fix it for you.

MARTIN. But she’s got a contract.

PEALE. I’ll get it for you cheap. Pardon me, sir, but I know how to
handle dames like her.

MARTIN. Mr. Peale, I like you. (_Slaps him on shoulder_)

PEALE. Huh!

MARTIN. Have a cigar?

(_PEALE crosses R. He takes it as JOHNSON enters._)

JOHNSON. I just telephoned _that party_, he is at his office now.

MARTIN. Good, good. Peale, I’ve got to go out on an important soap deal.
(_He starts to go, then goes to PEALE_) Oh, by George, I nearly forgot.
There’s another matter I must attend to first. Peale, you’ll find the
Countess in there. Do the best you can—we’ll settle the details when I
get back. Make yourself at home.

PEALE. Sure. This cigar’s great company.

MARTIN. Good cigar, eh?

PEALE. Corker.

MARTIN. Johnson, send over half a dozen boxes of these cigars to Mr.
Peale’s house. He’ll give you the address. (_He exits left_)

PEALE. And, say, Johnson, wrap ’em up now and I’ll take ’em with me.

JOHNSON. Very good, sir. (_He exits. PEALE walks over to the window and
looks out at the 13 Soap signs_)

PEALE. (_The telephone rings. PEALE looks at it, it rings again, he goes
over to desk and raises it_) Yes, Sweetie—this is the garage. How long
does it take to go to Coney Island? How in hell do I know? (_Business of
changing money and watch to different pockets. Goes to door L., and opens
it_) Countess de Bull Run. (_He goes into some fake French_) De juis—de
joie—politesse noblesse oblige.

COUNTESS. You ought to take up French—your accent’s immense. Well, little
sweetheart?

PEALE. Say, what are you doing in these parts?

COUNTESS. Oh, I came to see Mr. Martin.

PEALE. What for?

COUNTESS. What do you think?

PEALE. See here, now, if you’re aiming to trim the old man, I won’t stand
for it.

COUNTESS. Ambrose, do me a favor.

PEALE. What is it?

COUNTESS. Don’t tell old Martin what I tried to do to you boys. He’s the
kind that would put me in jail. I’ll be on the level. I did come here
to try to trim him, but I’ll cut it out. Honest, I will. Oh, Ambrose, I
don’t like being a grafter. I’ve had to do a lot of things I didn’t want
to. You don’t know how hard it is for girls like me. I never had a show.
I ran away from home when I was a kid. I’ve been pretty much up against
it. Is what I’ve done to other guys going to butt in and queer me?

PEALE. Nix, nix——

COUNTESS. Give me a chance to be on the square. It ain’t easy for a girl
to fight it out all by herself when she’s all alone: no money—no friends
and you got to live—live on five a week. You got a lot for a good time,
haven’t you? God, I’ve been lonely sometimes; you’ve got to be pretty
smart to steer straight—but I’ve done it, I’ve done it, I’ve done it.
(_She breaks down and sits on chair R. of desk_)

PEALE. (_Kindly_) Now, see here, Countess—(_He pats her on back_)—don’t
do that—don’t, don’t—(_She is sobbing a little_) Oh, quit it. (_A pause_)
Keep it for some poor boob who’ll fall for it.

COUNTESS. (_Tearfully_) Oh, Ambrose, don’t talk like that——

PEALE. Say, honest, it’s foolish wasting it on me, kid.

COUNTESS. (_Completely changing to a radiant smile. Rises_) Well, it’s
always worth trying once.

PEALE. (_Genially_) Sure it is. Why, you had me winging for a minute,
but when you pulled that wheeze about “I’ve done it,” three times in
succession, I knew it was phoney.

COUNTESS. But, honest, I was on the level about old Martin.

PEALE. Nix, nix, you came here to trim him for the $15,000 on the French
rights.

COUNTESS. Gosh, have you seen him?

PEALE. Yes, he left me here to settle it. Where’s the contract? Come
on—gimme—gimme——

COUNTESS. You mean you’ve been on all the time?

PEALE. Sure.

COUNTESS. And you let me sit there and emote all over the place.

PEALE. Gimme—gimme——

COUNTESS. Oh, I suppose I’ve got to. Oh, I’m sick of soap anyhow. 13 may
be a lucky hunch for you boys, but it has been a hoodoo for me.

PEALE. And now, my little hearts of lettuce, this concludes your portion
of the evening’s entertainment.

COUNTESS. But at that, don’t give me away, will you?

PEALE. I like you, you’ve got brains. Most chickens are just chickens.

COUNTESS. You are 18-karat, kid.

(_MARY, followed by RODNEY, enters hurriedly and sees PEALE._)

RODNEY. Oh, have you seen father? Is he here?

PEALE. I’m waiting for him now.

MARY. It’s most important.

PEALE. You remember the Countess? (_All bow embarrassed. Pause_)

COUNTESS. Well, I guess I’m not wanted, so I’ll trot. I’ll trot. (_Goes
to door upper L._) So long, you 13 Soap suds. (_Exits_)

MARY. Where is father?

PEALE. Yes, what’s the excitement?

MARY. Just after we got to the office there was a letter from Macy’s.

RODNEY. Ordering 10,000 cakes of 13 Soap.

MARY. Now what do you think of that?

PEALE. Pinch me, I’m dreaming! (_Going down R._)

RODNEY. They say our advertising’s wonderful and has created such a
demand they want to handle the soap in town. (_Goes around table down R._)

PEALE. (_Wonderingly_) Then all the things we said to your father are
really true? (_Goes up center_)

MARY. Of course they are.

RODNEY. (_Protesting_) Now, see here, old man—

PEALE. Gosh! (_Coming down in front of table_)

RODNEY. You see, when I show father this letter from Macy’s he’s got to
admit we’ve won out, and supply us with soap.

MARY. Isn’t it a shame that you can’t get soap from anybody but him?

RODNEY. He certainly has got the soap business tied up tight.

PEALE. Yes, if he busted, the whole world would go dirty.

MARY. Suppose he’s still stubborn and won’t help you? What’ll you do?

RODNEY. Oh, I’ll just have to plod along.

PEALE. Don’t plod—gallop, son—gallop—gallop.

RODNEY. You’re a great pal.

MARY. (_Crosses to PEALE_) Do you know, Mr. Peale, I’d like you awfully.

PEALE. Call me Ambrose.

MARY. (_Coyly goes to L._) Ambrose.

RODNEY. If we ever do come out of this, you’re going to be my partner,
50-50.

PEALE. Aw, shut up.

JOHNSON. (_Entering_) Mr. Charles Bronson; shall I show him in?

PEALE. You have my permission—(_Crosses to L. MARY crosses to table R._)
This isn’t my house. (_BRONSON enters. JOHNSON exits_) This way, sir.

BRONSON. Oh, I beg pardon—I expected to find Mr. Martin.

RODNEY. I am Mr. Martin.

BRONSON. (_Eagerly_) Mr. Rodney Martin?

RODNEY. Yes.

BRONSON. Just the very man I wanted to see—on private business.

RODNEY. Oh, these are my partners. You can talk before them. This is Mr.
Peale and Miss Grayson, may I present—Mr.——?

BRONSON. Mr. Charles Bronson, of Marshall Field.

MARY. (_Stunned_) Marshall Field?

PEALE. (_Falls in chair R. of desk_) Marshall Field?

BRONSON. Now, about your soap——?

PEALE. We’re very sorry—(_Rises and goes to BRONSON_)

MARY. We are; but a bargain is a bargain. (_Rises_)

BRONSON. Sorry? Why, your 13 Soap the last few days has had a most
remarkable sale at our store.

(_MARY and PEALE, speechless, look at each other._)

RODNEY. (_Gasping_) You mean it is really selling?

BRONSON. Rather!

MARY. It’s really selling?

BRONSON. Why, you seem surprised——

MARY. Oh, no—not a bit.

RODNEY. Oh, not a bit.

PEALE. You mean people are actually coming into the store and buying it?

BRONSON. At a dollar a cake.

(_MARY and RODNEY take arm-chair from L. of table and place it in center
of stage._)

RODNEY _and_ MARY. Have a chair?

PEALE. Give me your hat! (_Takes hat and fans himself_)

MARY. It was those page advertisements in Chicago that did it.

PEALE. Absolutely.

BRONSON. Extraordinary advertisements they were, too.

RODNEY. Oh, nothing to what we will do.

BRONSON. You’ll keep up your campaign?

RODNEY. Double it.

PEALE. Triple it.

BRONSON. Good, good. We foresee a tremendous sale for your goods. It’s an
amazing soap.

RODNEY. It’s more than that——

PEALE. Absolutely.

BRONSON. Do you control the company yourself?

RODNEY. Oh, entirely.

BRONSON. Then I can deal with you.

RODNEY. With us—all of us.

BRONSON. We would be glad to contract now for 250,000 cakes. (_PEALE just
flops into chair_) With deliveries to begin next week.

MARY. Our capacity just at present is limited.

RODNEY. Yes, we have so many orders on hand.

BRONSON. Naturally, but how much soap can you deliver now?

RODNEY. I don’t quite know. (_To MARY_) Do you?

MARY. Not quite. (_To PEALE_) Do you?

PEALE. Not quite.

BRONSON. Well, under the circumstances, what can we do?

MARY. That’s the question.

PEALE. What’s the answer? (_Rises. A pause_)

RODNEY. Here’s an idea: in view of our pressing orders, would you
consider for the moment paying us merely for the use of our trade-mark
without any soap at all?

BRONSON. Yes, I think we would.

PEALE. You would?

BRONSON. Your trade-mark is of course your biggest asset.

RODNEY. Yes, of course.

BRONSON. You would naturally give us your formula?

PEALE. Yes, if we still have that cook-book.

BRONSON. I beg pardon?

PEALE. Nothing, nothing. Have a cigar?

RODNEY. You can have the formula.

BRONSON. With a license from you to use the title, we could probably
arrange to have the soap manufactured by Cyrus Martin of the soap trust.

RODNEY. Oh, you think you could—?

MARY. How much would you be willing to pay us for the trade-mark?

BRONSON. I should have to call up our Chicago office, but I think I can
safely say we would be prepared to offer you at least two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars.

PEALE. (_Grasping_) Indeed!

BRONSON. Can I have an option at that figure?

(_Together_)

    MARY. No!

    PEALE. Yes!

    RODNEY. Yes——

MARY. (_Loudly_) No!

RODNEY. No!

PEALE. No, but I hate to say it.

BRONSON. But if you control the company, why not settle matters now?

RODNEY. Why not, Mary?

PEALE. Yes, why not, Mary?

MARY. Hadn’t we better discuss the matter a little more fully first among
ourselves?

BRONSON. Perhaps I could wait somewhere for a few minutes while you talk
things over?

MARY. (_Opening door left_) Yes, do, please—in the library.

BRONSON. I am very glad to have met you.

RODNEY. Not half as glad——

PEALE. Not half so glad——

MARY. —not half as glad as we are to have met you.

PEALE. No, not half as much!

(_BRONSON exits L. lower door._)

RODNEY. Why not give him an option at a quarter of a million?

PEALE. Yes, why not? For the love of gee whiz, tell us that!

MARY. Because maybe we can get more money than that out of your father.

(_JOHNSON enters with letter, and crosses to table R._)

RODNEY. Mary, you are a wonder.

PEALE. Gosh, I wish you were going to marry me!

MARY. Johnson, oh, Johnson, you know I’ve always liked you——

JOHNSON. I beg pardon, Miss?

MARY. Will you do me a favor?

JOHNSON. Why, yes, Miss.

MARY. When Mr. Martin comes back, don’t tell him that Rodney and Mr.
Peale are here, or Bronson, either; say I’m alone.

JOHNSON. Yes, Miss, but Mr. Martin just drove up in his car, he’ll be
here directly——

MARY. Hurry up, then, tell him I’m here, waiting for him.

(_JOHNSON exits._)

RODNEY. But I don’t understand?

PEALE. Neither do I.

MARY. I do. I’ve got a great idea. You two boys go into that room,
(_Indicating lower R._) and stay there. When I ring this buzzer twice,
you call me on this ’phone—there’s a switch in there—and never mind what
I say. Hurry now, both of you.

RODNEY. But what’s your plan?

MARY. I’m going to try to make a deal with your father.

PEALE. Well, I’ll slip you something that may help you when you see
father. You tell him that I’ve got that contract. He’ll understand.

RODNEY. But I don’t know what any of this is about?

PEALE. Neither do I. Come on, she’s got more brains than both of us.
(_They exit R._)

(_MARY settles herself in chair L. of desk, as MARTIN enters._)

MARTIN. Hello, Miss Grayson, this is a pleasant surprise. Where is Rodney?

MARY. That doesn’t matter. I’m here.

MARTIN. Where’s that—that Mr.——?

MARY. Mr. Peale—oh, Mr. Peale’s gone back to the office—but he told me to
tell you that he’d got that contract——

MARTIN. Great, great! He’s a smart boy.

MARY. We are all smart—it’s a smart firm. We just got a letter from
Macy’s for 10,000 cakes of 13 Soap, and this time you didn’t send a
telegram——

MARTIN. Macy’s, eh? Well, well. Now, I’ll be frank. I want Rodney to come
in with me—and you’ve got to help. You started this scheme. Now finish it
up.

MARY. What’s changed you all of a sudden?

MARTIN. Well, Macy’s, for one thing. That shows sensational advertising
does pay. Those boys are right. I’ve been too conservative, but anyhow
I’ve got the whip hand: Rodney can’t get his soap for Macy’s except from
me, and if I’m going to furnish three-cent soap that he sells wholesale
for sixty cents, I’m going to be in on the profits. Any young man who can
do that is just bound to have me for a partner whether he wants me or
not. What do you say, Miss Grayson?

MARY. I’ll do all I can for Rodney.

MARTIN. You have authority to close the deal?

MARY. Absolutely.

MARTIN. Good. Now, what’s your proposition? (_Sits_)

MARY. Five hundred thousand dollars cash.

MARTIN. (_Rising_) What!

MARY. (_Calmly_) Sit down. That isn’t all: we get 51% of the stock, you
put up a factory and give Rodney $50,000 a year, Peale, $30,000, and me
$20,000.

MARTIN. As my son once observed, what a lovely autumn we’re having! (_He
leans back and lights a cigar. As he does so, MARY pushes the buzzer
twice. N. B. The audience must hear this buzzer. Almost instantly the
’phone rings. MARY quickly takes ’phone_)

MARY. Shall I answer it?

MARTIN. Go ahead—say I’m out.

MARY. (_In ’phone_) Oh, hello—(_To MARTIN_) It’s for me. Hello,
Rodney—you’ve seen Bronson?

MARTIN. (_Sitting up_) Bronson?

MARY. (_In ’phone_) He did? Why, that’s a splendid offer. I hardly dared
think Marshall Field would be so generous.

MARTIN. (_Promptly. Rises_) I’ll accept your proposition, Miss Grayson.

MARY. Wait. (_In ’phone_) Have you closed with Bronson yet?

MARTIN. What’d he say?

MARY. Oh, you haven’t?

MARTIN. Good.

MARY. No, I think you’d better come right up from the office and see me
before you sign anything.

MARTIN. Here, let me talk to him. (_He reaches for ’phone_)

MARY. (_Quickly_) Oh, hello, hello. (_She jiggles ’phone_) Oh, dear,
we’ve been cut off. Still, it doesn’t matter; it’s all settled now.

MARTIN. That’s splendid, Miss Grayson. I’m mighty grateful to you.

MARY. (_Nervously_) Shall we sign a memorandum now?

MARTIN. Sure—sure—just the rough details.

MARY. Sure, never put off till to-morrow what you can sign to-day.

MARTIN. (_He crosses to table R., sits and makes memoranda. Writing_)
Fifty-one per cent—Rodney—fifty thousand. And what’s that young man’s
name again—Spiel——?

MARY. Peale.

MARTIN. That certainly is one hell of a name—thirty thousand—Grayson
twenty thousand. There. (_To MARY_) You sign here.

MARY. No, you sign first. (_MARTIN grunts and signs_) Now I’ll sign for
Rodney. (_She does so gleefully_)

MARTIN. That’s great. (_Rises and goes L._)

MARY. You don’t know how great it is. (_MARY starts for door_) Now, I’ve
a big surprise for you. Rodney’s not at the office—he’s in there.

MARTIN. What do you mean?

MARY. Only that I thought I’d handle you less sentimentally than he
would. You see, once before I spoiled Rodney’s plan. This time I thought
I ought to fix it up for him. (_Opening door_) Rodney—Ambrose.

MARTIN. Say, what is all this?

(_RODNEY and PEALE enter._)

RODNEY. Hello, father!

MARY. Rodney, it’s all settled. Your father has gone in with us. I’ve the
contract.

RODNEY. Then we can get some soap!

MARTIN. All you want.

RODNEY. Then I don’t care what the arrangement is—now that we can make
good—twenty per cent of the profits, and any old salary.

MARTIN. Twenty per cent! Why, she buncoed me out of fifty-one per cent
and half a million down.

PEALE. (_Gasping_) Half a million!

RODNEY. (_To MARY_) You did? Mary, you are a peach!

PEALE. Absolutely.

MARY. (_To RODNEY_) And by the terms of my contract with you, you now owe
me 10% of what Rodney has made: $50,000.

RODNEY. What contract?

PEALE. I don’t get you.

MARTIN. So that’s why you held me up, eh? Just to get your 10%. Say,
young lady, I’ve got a lot of other money that you are overlooking.

RODNEY. Father, what do you mean?

MARTIN. (_To RODNEY_) I’ll tell you what I mean. She got engaged to you
to make you go to work—she only left me to keep you on the job because
I promised her 10% of what you earned. All the time that she’s been
pretending she would marry you, she’s been making use of you. (_Goes to
R. of table to sign check_)

RODNEY. Mary, you did this to me?

PEALE. I don’t believe it.

MARY. (_To MARTIN_) You owe me fifty thousand dollars—can I have the
check, please?

MARTIN. Yes, if you’ll quit now—get out of here for good.

MARY. Certainly.

MARTIN. I’m disappointed to think you’d treat my boy like this.

MARY. What’s the difference? If I’d really loved him, you’d have objected
to his marrying only a typewriter.

MARTIN. Objected! If you’d been on the level I’d have been proud to have
you for my daughter. (_Handing check to RODNEY_)

RODNEY. (_Gleefully_) Hurrah, Mary, it’s all right!

PEALE. I don’t get you.

MARTIN. What is this—a joke? (_Rises_)

RODNEY. Certainly it is: you two put up a joke on me, and Mary and I
thought we’d put up one for you. Mary told me about that fool contract
weeks ago.

MARTIN. You mean you’re going to marry her?

RODNEY. Certainly not.

PEALE. Now see here——

MARTIN. Why aren’t you going to marry her?

RODNEY. Because we were married this morning, and we thought before we
told you of our marriage we’d get her percentage for a wedding present.
(_Hands check to PEALE. He gives it to MARY_)

MARY. And it’s bigger than we ever hoped for.

MARTIN. By George, you boys were right: I am an old fool. Anyhow, I’ll
win that bet from old John Clark.

MARY. And now for Bronson. (_Goes to door L. lower_) Oh, Mr. Bronson?

MARTIN. You boys know Bronson?

MARY. Oh, yes, we had a long talk, with him, right in this room, about a
proposition from Marshall Field——

(_Enter BRONSON._)

BRONSON. (_Crosses to MARTIN, SR._) Mr. Martin—Mr. Peale.

RODNEY. (_To BRONSON_) Now you talk to father.

MARY. Yes, you talk to him, father.

PEALE. Yes, father, you talk to him.

BRONSON. (_To RODNEY_) But I thought I was dealing with you?

MARTIN. No, sir, with me—now what’s your proposition?

BRONSON. A quarter of a million cash just for the trade-mark.

MARTIN. A quarter of a million? Why, you ought to be ashamed of yourself
to try to trim these poor boys like that. You know that 13 Soap is worth
half a million in Chicago alone, and you try to take advantage of these
kids’ ignorance. Why, it’s outrageous, but you can’t trim me! No, sir, we
wouldn’t take a million. Do you know that the Uneeda trade-mark is valued
at six million, the Gold Dust Twins at ten million and our trade-mark is
better than theirs! We’re going to advertise all over the world. That’s
what advertising means: the power of suggestion—the psychology of print.
All you have to do is to say a thing often enough and hard enough, and
ninety-seven per cent of the public’ll fall. Say, what kind of garters
do you wear? Boston! Why? Because all your life every time you opened a
magazine you saw a picture of a man’s leg with a certain kind of a garter
on it—Boston!

_Curtain._

[Illustration: IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE

ACT I & III]

[Illustration: IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE

ACT II]




PROPERTY LIST


ACT I.

STAGE PROPERTIES

    Typewriter desk
    Typewriter
    Office swivel chair
    Library table
    Couch
    Six large chairs (living room chairs)
    Footstool
    Writing set on large table
    (Pen, ink, etc.)
    Magazines and books
    Check book on large table
    Stenographer’s note book
    Walking stick
    Telephone on desk
    Telephone on table
    Clock (?)
    Carpet or rugs
    Push bell on Right flat near Door R. I E.
    Telephones may be connected.
    Three telephones in Third act may be connected to be ready for second
      Act and may remain through as two are used in Third Act too.

SIDE PROPERTIES

    Walking stick—Martin
    Book of passes—Peale
    Pencil—Peale
    Parasol—Countess
    Suit case—Rodney
    Cook book—Rodney
    Two contracts—Peale
    Money for Rodney
    Letters for Johnson
    Salver for Johnson
    Calling cards—Johnson
    Martin’s foot tied up


ACT II.

STAGE PROPERTIES

    Large flat-top desk
    Typewriter desk (same one as Act I)
    Typewriter paper, etc.
    Small table or desk for telephone stand
    Three telephones and three books (directories)
    Box of cigars in desk
    Plane in drawer of desk
    File cabinet
    Letter file on cabinet
    Letters in file cabinet
    Signs for walls
    Sandwich men signs (6)
    Rubber stamp and pad on big desk C.
    Ledger—or ledger sheets for MSS. case
    Buzzer connected up on Desk C.
    Buzzer connected up on Desk L.
    About six office chairs
    Two swivel office chairs
    Papers, check book, etc. Desk C.
    Papers like contracts for Rodney to sign
    Hat rack

SIDE PROPERTIES

    MSS. case—Mary
    Pencil and pad—Peale
    Peale—telegram
    Letter—Mary
    Draft—Countess
    Cane—Ellery
    Hand bag—Countess
    Handkerchief—Countess


ACT III.

STAGE PROPERTIES

    Same furniture as Act I—Arranged
    Same, except might have small table where desk was in Act I.
    Newspapers on desk C.
    Letters sealed on desk for Martin to open
    Circulars in these letters
      Advertisements on N. Y. papers: 13 soap
    Waste paper basket
    Check book on Table C. with ink, etc.
    Buzzer connected at typewriter desk

SIDE PROPERTIES

    Letter seal on large table
    New York papers with ads of 13 soap
    Cigar—Peale
    Contracts—Countess
    List of Advertisers—Rodney
    Card and Tray—Johnson
    Bronson’s hat
    Cigar for Martin
    Matches—Martin





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IT PAYS TO ADVERTISE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


