The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bird studies with a camera
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Bird studies with a camera
        with introductory chapters on the outfit and methods of the bird photographer

Author: Frank M. Chapman

Release date: February 3, 2025 [eBook #75287]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: D. Appleton and company, 1900

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD STUDIES WITH A CAMERA ***





                       BIRD STUDIES WITH A CAMERA


[Illustration: 1. Gannet (flying over), Murres, Puffins, and Razorbilled
Auks.]




                       BIRD STUDIES WITH A CAMERA
    WITH INTRODUCTORY CHAPTERS ON THE OUTFIT AND METHODS OF THE BIRD
                              PHOTOGRAPHER


                          BY FRANK M. CHAPMAN

   ASSISTANT CURATOR OF VERTEBRATE ZOÖLOGY IN THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF
   NATURAL HISTORY, AND AUTHOR OF HANDBOOK OF BIRDS OF EASTERN NORTH
                        AMERICA, BIRD-LIFE, ETC.

[Illustration: [Logo]]

     _WITH OVER ONE HUNDRED PHOTOGRAPHS FROM NATURE, BY THE AUTHOR_

                                NEW YORK
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                                  1900




                            COPYRIGHT, 1900,
                          BY FRANK M. CHAPMAN.

                         _All rights reserved._




                               THIS BOOK

                            IS DEDICATED TO

                                MY WIFE,

                 WHO, BOTH AT HOME AND AFIELD, IS EVER

                          “MY BEST ASSISTANT.”




         You have learnt from the Birds and continue to learn,
         Your best benefactors and early instructors.
                                       FRERE’S _Aristophanes_.




                                PREFACE


The practice of photographing birds in Nature is of too recent origin in
this country to permit of its being treated authoritatively. The methods
which may be employed are so numerous, the field to be covered so
limitless, that many years must elapse before the bird photographer’s
outfit will meet his wants, while the constantly varying details which
surround his subjects almost prohibit duplication of experience.

But it is these very difficulties which render all the more imperative
the necessity of conference among workers in this fascinating and
important branch of natural history. The causes of both success and
failure should, through the medium of books and journals, be made
accessible to all, thereby shortening this experimental stage of the
study of birds with a camera, and hastening the day when the nature of
the outfit and methods shall have been settled with more or less
definiteness.

It is as a contribution toward this end, and as a means of answering the
queries of numerous correspondents, that the following pages, embodying
the results of my own experiences, are offered. It is sincerely hoped
that they may increase the interest in the study of birds in Nature, and
at the same time furnish a more profitable and delightful outlet for the
hunting instinct than is afforded by the shotgun or rifle.

A large proportion of the Bird Rock pictures and several of those from
Pelican Island have appeared in the Century and St. Nicholas
respectively, and are here reproduced by the courtesy of the editors of
those magazines; others have been previously published in Bird-Lore.

                                                       FRANK M. CHAPMAN.

  AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY,
          NEW YORK CITY, _March, 1900_.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
 INTRODUCTION                                                          1
 What is bird photography?—The scientific value of bird photography—The
                       charm of bird photography.

            _THE OUTFIT AND METHODS OF THE BIRD PHOTOGRAPHER_
 THE BIRD PHOTOGRAPHER’S OUTFIT                                        6
   The camera—The lens—The shutter—The tripod—Plates—Blinds—Sundries.
 THE METHODS OF THE BIRD PHOTOGRAPHER                                 26
         Haunts—Seasons—Nests and eggs—Young birds—Adult birds.

                      _BIRD STUDIES WITH A CAMERA_
 BIRD PHOTOGRAPHY BEGINS AT HOME                                      40
 THE CHICKADEE—A STUDY IN BLACK AND WHITE                             47
 THE LEAST BITTERN AND SOME OTHER REED INHABITANTS                    62
 TWO HERONS                                                           76
 WHERE SWALLOWS ROOST                                                 89
 TWO DAYS WITH THE TERNS                                             106
 PERCÉ AND BONAVENTURE                                               128
 THE MAGDALENS                                                       146
 BIRD ROCK                                                           152
 LIFE ON PELICAN ISLAND, WITH SOME SPECULATIONS ON THE ORIGIN OF
   BIRD MIGRATION                                                    191




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                    PAGE
   1. Gannet, Murres, Puffins, and Razorbilled Auks       _Frontispiece_
      _Tailpiece._ Young Baltimore Oriole                              5
      _Initial._ Long-focus camera and telephoto lens                  6
   2. Lens test No. 1                                                 14
   3. Enlargement of the bird in test No. 1                           15
   4. Lens test No. 2                                                 16
   5. Enlargement of bird in test No. 2                               17
   6. Lens test No. 3                                                 18
   7. Enlargement of bird in test No. 3                               19
      _Initial._ Young Great-crested Flycatcher                       26
   8. Spring                                                          27
   9. Summer                                                          27
  10. Autumn                                                          28
  11. Winter—four pictures (Nos. 8–11) from the same
        point of view                                                 28
  12. Nest locality of five species                                   29
  13. Nesting site, nest, and young of Marsh Hawk                     30
  14. Young Marsh Hawks and nest                                      31
  15. Young Great-crested Flycatcher                                  32
  16. Young Baltimore Orioles and nest                                33
  17. Wood Thrush on nest                                             34
  18. Chestnut-sided Warbler on nest                                  35
  19. Catbird scolding                                                37
      _Initial._ “Fairview”                                           40
  20. House Sparrows and Junco                                        41
  21. Junco                                                           42
  22. Female House Sparrow and nest                                   43
  23. Screech Owl                                                     44
      _Initial._ Chickadee                                            47
  24. Chickadee on ground                                             49
  25. Chickadee taking piece of bread                                 50
  26. A bird in the hand                                              51
  27. Chickadee at nest hole                                          54
  28. Chickadee at nest hole                                          55
  29. A Chickadee family                                              58
  30. A Chickadee family                                              59
      _Initial._ Red-winged Blackbird                                 62
  31. Least Bittern’s nesting site                                    64
  32. Least Bittern’s nest and eggs                                   66
  33. Least Bittern mimicking surroundings                            67
  34. Least Bittern mimicking surroundings                            68
  35. Young Red-winged Blackbirds                                     71
  36. Least Bittern eating her eggs                                   73
  37. Least Bittern on nest                                           74
      _Initial._ Where the Night Herons feed                          76
  38. Five Night Herons’ nests in swamp maple                         79
  39. A view in the Heron rookery                                     80
  40. Night Heron feeding                                             81
  41. Young Night Herons in nest                                      82
  42. Young Night Herons leaving nest                                 83
  43. Young Night Herons on branches                                  84
  44. Great Blue Heron, nests and young                               88
      _Initial._ Tree Swallows on wires                               89
  45. Hackensack marshes in August                                    91
  46. Marsh mallows                                                   93
  47. Wild rice                                                       94
  48. Tree Swallows on wires                                          97
  49. Tree Swallows in tree                                          100
  50. Tree Swallows on wire and at pile                              102
  51. Swallows in the road                                           104
      _Initial._ A corner of Penikese                                106
  52. Nesting site, nest, and three eggs of Common Tern              110
  53. Tern hovering above nest                                       111
  54. Nest and eggs of Tern on upland                                112
  55. Tern’s nest and eggs in drift _débris_                         113
  56. Young Tern hiding on rocky beach                               114
  57. Young Tern hiding in the grass                                 115
  58. Tern alighting on nest                                         116
  59. Tern on hillside nest                                          117
  60. Tern’s nest and hatching eggs in seaweed                       118
  61. Tern about to feed young                                       119
  62. Tern brooding young                                            120
  63. Tern on beach nest                                             121
  64. Tern on beach nest                                             121
  65. Tern on upland nest                                            122
  66. Young Terns about four days old                                123
  67. Young Tern about a week old                                    124
  68. Young Tern, second plumage appearing                           124
  69. Young Tern, further advance of second plumage                  125
  70. Young Tern, stage before flight                                126
      _Initial._ A Percé codfisher                                   128
  71. Percé Rock from the north                                      131
  72. Percé Rock from the southeast                                  134
  73. Splitting cod on Percé beach                                   136
  74. Young Savanna Sparrow                                          137
  75. Gannet cliffs of Bonaventure                                   140
  76. Cornel or bunchberry                                           142
  77. A ledge of nesting Gannets                                     144
      _Initial._ Grosse Isle                                         146
  78. Nest and eggs of Fox Sparrow                                   148
  79. Young Guillemots                                               150
      _Initial._ The Bird Rock light                                 152
  80. Bird Rock from the southwest                                   153
  81. North side of Bird Rock                                        156
  82. A corner of the Rock                                           160
  83. The landing at the base of the Rock                            164
  84. The landing on top of the Rock                                 165
  85. Kittiwakes and young on nests                                  168
  86. The lighthouse, keeper’s dwelling, and other
        buildings                                                    169
  87. Razorbilled Auks and “Ringed” Murre                            170
  88. Puffins                                                        172
  89. Murre’s egg                                                    174
  90. Young Murres and egg                                           175
  91. Kittiwakes and young on nests                                  176
  92. Entrance to Puffin’s burrow                                    177
  93. Puffin’s nest and egg                                          178
  94. Young Puffin on nest                                           179
  95. Leach’s Petrel on nest                                         180
  96. Young Leach’s Petrel with nesting material                     181
  97. Young Gannet                                                   182
  98. Gannets                                                        183
  99. Gannets on nests                                               186
 100. Gannet on nest                                                 188
      _Initial._ Young Pelicans in nest tree                         191
 101. Pelicans on ground nests                                       197
 102. Interviewing a group of young Pelicans                         198
 103. Among the Pelicans                                             199
 104. Head and pouch of Pelican                                      200
 105. Pelican’s pouch from above                                     201
 106. Newly hatched Pelicans and nests                               206
 107. Young Pelican in tree nest                                     208
 108. Young Pelican, downy stage                                     209
 109. Young Pelican, wing quills appearing                           211
 110. Young Pelicans, stage preceding flight                         212




                       BIRD STUDIES WITH A CAMERA

    WITH INTRODUCTORY CHAPTERS ON THE OUTFIT AND METHODS OF THE BIRD
                              PHOTOGRAPHER




                              INTRODUCTION


_What is Bird Photography?_—Bird photography, as I would encourage its
practice, does not mean simply photographing birds; it means the use of
the camera as an aid in depicting the life histories of birds. A picture
of the bird itself is, of course, of the first importance, but any fact
in its biography which the camera can be employed to portray is within
the province of bird photography.

_The Scientific Value of Bird Photography._—There are certain matters,
such as a bird’s song, its time of migration, etc., which must be set
forth with the pen; there are others, such as its haunts, nesting site,
nest, eggs, the appearance and development of its young, where the
camera is so far ahead of the pen in its power of graphic representation
that it is a waste of time to use the former when circumstances permit
the utilization of the latter.

A photograph of a marsh or wood showing the favorite haunts of a species
is worth more than pages of description. A picture of a bird’s nesting
site conveys a better idea of the situation than words can possibly
give, while in place of such vague phrases as “nest of coarse grasses,
weed stalks, rootlets, etc., lined with finer materials,” we have a
faithful delineation of the nest itself. The shape and pattern of
markings of the eggs may also be well shown with the camera, while the
appearance of the young at birth, their development, and often the
manner in which they are fed, may all be portrayed by the camera with a
realism which convinces one of the truthfulness of the result.

By the exercise of much patience and ingenuity we may also photograph
the adult bird, showing it at rest or in motion, brooding its eggs or
caring for its young. Under favorable conditions such pictures may
possess an exactness of detail which makes them perfect representations
of the original, giving not alone position and expression, but the
arrangement of the feathers, and they then have scientific value
unequaled by the best productions of the artist’s brush or pencil.

From the nature of the case, perfection in this branch of bird
photography is not always attained; nevertheless, even pictures which
are failures from a photographic standpoint may be of interest to the
naturalist. They may be lacking in detail and still give pose, thus
furnishing models from which drawings containing all structural
essentials may be made.

The camera may also supply us with graphic records of the few large
colonies of birds yet existing in this country, thereby preserving for
all time definite impressions of conditions which are rapidly becoming
things of the past.

What an invaluable addition to the history of the Great Auk would be a
series of photographs from Funk Island, taken during the period of its
existence there!

Of what surpassing interest would be photographs of the former flights
of Wild Pigeons, which the younger generations of to-day can with
difficulty believe occurred!

_The Charm of Bird Photography._—As a onetime sportsman, who yielded to
none in his enjoyment of the chase, I can affirm that there is a
fascination about the hunting of wild animals with a camera as far ahead
of the pleasure to be derived from their pursuit with shotgun or rifle
as the sport found in shooting Quail is beyond that of breaking clay
“Pigeons”. Continuing the comparison, from a sportsman’s standpoint,
hunting with a camera is the highest development of man’s inherent love
of the chase.

The killing of a bird with a gun seems little short of murder after one
has attempted to capture its image with a lens. The demands on the skill
and patience of the bird photographer are endless, and his pleasure is
intensified in proportion to the nature of the difficulties to be
overcome, and in the event of success it is perpetuated by the
infinitely more satisfactory results obtained. He does not rejoice over
a bag of mutilated flesh and feathers, but in the possession of a
trophy—an eloquent token of his prowess as a hunter, a talisman which
holds the power of revivifying the circumstances attending its
acquisition.

What mental vision of falling birds can be as potent as the actual
picture of living birds in their homes? And how immeasurably one’s
memories are brightened by the fact that this is not a picture of what
has been but of what is!

The camera thus opens the door to a field of sport previously closed to
those who love birds too much to find pleasure in killing them; to whom
Bob-White’s ringing whistle does not give rise to murderous speculations
as to the number in his family, but to an echo of the season’s joy which
his note voices. They therefore have a new incentive to take them out of
doors; for however much we love Nature for Nature’s sake, there are few
of us whose pleasure in an outing is not intensified by securing some
definite, lasting result.

We are not all poets and seers, finding sufficient reward for a hard
day’s tramp in a sunset glow or the song of a bird. Enjoy these things
as we may, who would not like to perpetuate the one or the other in some
tangible form?

And here we have one of the reasons for the collecting of birds and eggs
long after the collector’s needs are satisfied. He goes on duplicating
and reduplicating merely to appease the almost universal desire to
possess any admired although useless object. Once let him appreciate,
however, the pleasure of hunting with a camera, the greater skill
required, and the infinitely greater value of the results to be
obtained, and he will have no further use for gun, climbing irons, and
egg drill.

Furthermore, the camera hunter possesses the advantage over the
so-called true sportsman, in that all is game that falls to his gun;
there is not a bird too small or too tame to be unworthy of his
attention; nor are there seasonal restrictions to be observed, nor
temptations to break game laws, but every day in the year he is free to
go afield, and at all times he may find something to claim his
attention.

Finally, there is to be added to the special charm of bird photography
the general charm attending the use of the camera. Thousands of people
are finding pleasure in the comparatively prosaic employment of
photographing houses, bridges, and other patiently immovable objects
wholly at the camerist’s mercy. Imagine, then, the far greater enjoyment
of successes not only of real value in themselves, but undeniable
tributes to one’s skill both as photographer and hunter.

Nor should this introduction be closed without due acknowledgment to the
educational value of photography, to its power to widen the scope of our
vision, and to increase our appreciation of the beautiful. There is a
magic in the lens, the ground glass, and the dark-cloth which transform
the commonest object into a thing of rarest interest.

[Illustration: [Bird]]




            THE OUTFIT AND METHODS OF THE BIRD PHOTOGRAPHER


                     THE BIRD PHOTOGRAPHER’S OUTFIT

The beginner must not suppose that good bird photographs can be made
only with expensive apparatus. Under favorable conditions there is no
great difference in the results secured with the ordinary camera and
lens of any reputable maker and those of the highest class. My own work
has for the greater part been done with an outfit costing about thirty
dollars; and although the best lens is, of course, to be desired it is
not a necessity, and cost therefore is no more an obstacle to the
hunting of birds with a camera than it is to their pursuit with a gun.

_The Camera._—Individual taste will doubtless govern the size of the
camera chosen, but most naturalists and sportsmen consider the camera
carrying a plate four by five inches as the one best adapted to their
wants, and with this decision I heartily agree. The advantages of size,
weight, and economy, both as regards the camera, its holders, and
plates, are all in favor of the 4 × 5, while as far as the bird
photographer is concerned, it is not often that he has need of anything
larger. The image of a bird will rarely be without adequate setting in a
space four by five inches, which will also be found to be large enough
for the portrayal of nests and eggs.

The 4 × 5 also reduces proportionately in making lantern slides, and if
the picture is made the long way of the plate—that is, higher than
broad—it can be easily adapted for illustrative purposes in duodecimo or
octavo books. When a larger picture is desired it can readily be made by
enlargement, an increase in size of three diameters, or six times the
area, being possible from a sharp negative without undue loss of
definition.

For use from a tripod any one of the several excellent long-focus
cameras now on the market will be found to answer every requirement. If
it is proposed to employ a telephoto lens, care should be taken to
select the camera combining greatest bellows length with rigidity. A
reversible back increases the size somewhat but adds to the length of
bellows, and will be found serviceable in the many awkward situations in
which the bird photographer is often placed by the nature of his
subjects.

The Kearton brothers have an “adjustable miniature” on the top of their
camera, which they state “is used as a sort of view finder when making
studies of flying birds. When fixed in position and its focus has been
set exactly like its working companion beneath it, both are racked out
in the same ratio by the screw dominating the larger apparatus.”[A] The
purposes of this attachment, however, will, it seems probable, be better
served by the reflecting camera described below, while as a finder alone
its place may be taken by the “iconoscope” and other of the prism
finders, the brilliant image cast by which is such a striking and
satisfactory improvement on the hazy outlines given by the average
so-called “finder.”

Footnote A:

  From Wild Life at Home, how to Study and Photograph It, by R. Kearton,
  illustrated by C. Kearton; a work of the utmost interest to the animal
  photographer, who should also read With Nature and a Camera, by the
  same authors (Cassell & Co.).

For use as a hand-box only two kinds of camera are available, for it
must be borne in mind that the set-focus or short-focus, wide angle
“snap-shot” cameras, so popular among the button-pressing fraternity,
are not adapted to the wants of the bird photographer, who must
therefore avail himself of either a twin-lens or a reflecting camera.

Twin-lens cameras are manufactured by several well-known firms, but the
trade size is of too short focus to be desirable. In this type of camera
two lenses of equal foci are employed. They are set one above the other
in bellows, which move as one. The lower lens makes the picture, the
upper projects a duplicate of the image cast by the lower lens to a
mirror set at an angle of forty-five degrees to the plane of the plate,
whence it is reflected upward to a ground glass, which is protected by a
hood, on top of the camera.

To focus perfectly the lenses should be “matched” or “paired”—in short,
interchangeable—thereby greatly increasing the cost of the camera, which
is also rendered objectionable by its large size.

The reflecting camera possesses all the advantages of the twin-lens, but
requires only one lens, and when in use is not materially larger than
the ordinary 4 × 5 long-focus box.

The reflecting camera now in my possession was designed and made by John
Rowley, of the American Museum of Natural History, and was fully
described and illustrated by him in Bird-Lore for April, 1900. It
resembles the upper half of the twin-lens camera in that a mirror, set
at an angle of forty-five degrees to the plate, is interposed between
the latter and the lens, and reflects its image to a ground glass on top
of the camera. This mirror, however, is movable, and the desired object
appearing in focus on the ground glass, a lever is pressed downward
which raises the mirror to the top of the box, where it automatically
releases a focal-plane shutter (see beyond, under The Shutter) directly
in front of the plate, when the image-bearing rays, before intercepted
and reflected by the mirror, are registered on the plate, from which the
slide had previously been drawn.

When the focal-plane or curtain shutter has been set and the slide drawn
from the plate holder, this camera is like a cocked gun, which may be
fired the moment it is sighted; or, in other words, the exposure may be
made the instant focus is secured. With this camera one may take
advantage of any offering opportunity to secure a picture of a bird or
beast when afield, and this fact, by increasing the possibilities of an
outing, adds greatly to its pleasure.

Mr. Rowley has so designed this camera that it may be used from a tripod
as well as in the hands; but when the tripod camera is to be left,
perhaps for hours, hidden near some bird’s nest, I prefer to employ the
long-focus for this purpose, and retain the reflecting camera for
possible use on the birds that so often approach closely when one is in
hiding. The advantages possessed by this camera are so apparent that it
doubtless will soon be placed on the market.

_The Lens._—Professional photographers differ so widely in their
opinions of the relative qualities of the various makes of lenses now on
the market, that I approach this subject with diffidence, and, without
presuming to offer advice, present the results of my experience both as
to lenses and the requirements of the bird photographer. In regard to
the latter phase of the much-discussed question of “What lens shall I
use?” I may speak with more confidence. For nests with eggs or young
birds—subjects which may be approached closely—a six- to
eight-inch-focus lens forms a large enough image, and at the same time
gives depth of focus and sharpness of definition without the use of the
smaller diaphragms. In photographing birds, however, it is generally
difficult to get within “shooting” distance, and at least a fourteen- to
sixteen-inch lens is needed in order to secure an image of sufficient
size. Depth of focus is here, in my opinion, not desirable, and the
focal point—the bird—is brought out more clearly by the fusion of all
the objects back of it into a uniform background.

When a bird, either young or old, is the subject, great speed may be
required, and sometimes under light conditions which severely test the
qualities of the lens. To fully meet these demands of distance and time
two lenses would be needed; but, aside from the increased cost and the
inconvenience of using two lenses, the great size and weight of a
long-focus lens are drawbacks. These objections are largely overcome by
the use of the symmetrical lenses placed in most of the long-focus
boxes, or, if expense be not considered, by a “convertible” lens.

For several years I have used a “Victor” lens, sold with the “Premo”
long-focus camera. The combined focus of the front and back lenses is
seven and a half inches, of either of the lenses alone, fifteen inches.
The single lens therefore, the distance being the same, gives an image
double the size of that cast by the two lenses together.

This lens has been thoroughly tested, and many of the pictures given in
this book were made with it. When the conditions are favorable and the
subject not extremely difficult it yields satisfactory results.

The “convertible” lenses of various makers are also separable, and where
the rear and front lenses are of different foci three focal lengths are
obtainable. These lenses are of the highest grade, and consequently
expensive. In a bright light, or where great speed is not required, they
do not seem to be as superior to the trade lens as the much higher price
would lead one to expect. But in dull days, or in the shadow, or where
extremely rapid exposures are necessary, their superior qualities become
evident. My experience with these convertible lenses has been limited to
the Zeiss Anastigmat, Series VII _a_, of which I am now using a No. 10
with a combined focus of eight inches, the front and rear lenses both
having a focal length of fourteen inches. This combination is preferred
to one in which the component lenses are of different foci, because of
the greater speed of the two when combined, and furthermore, because,
being of the same focus, they could, if occasion arose, be used in a
twin-lens box. The speed of the combination is registered at F. 6.3;
that of the single lenses at 12.5. With the former the most rapid
exposures can be made successfully, while the latter are sufficiently
fast to permit of ordinary instantaneous work. This lens is stated to
cover a 5 × 8½ plate, and when in use on a 4 × 5 camera gives a high
degree of illumination and perfect definition.

The telephoto lens may be employed in certain kinds of bird photography
with not unsatisfactory results. Its disadvantages are lack of speed, an
exposure of at least one half a second to a second being required at F.
8 in bright sunlight, the necessity of extreme care in focusing, and of
absolute rigidity of the camera at the time of making the exposure. In
short, the telephotographer needs more time, both before and after
pressing his bulb, than the bird photographer is often accorded.
However, with such subjects as nests high in trees or on cliffs, Herons
and other shore-inhabiting birds, Ducks on the water or Hawks perched in
leafless trees, the telephoto will be found serviceable.

Negatives are frequently secured in which the figure of the bird, while
small, is sharp, when, by enlargement, a desirable picture can be made
of what in the original was too small to be easily distinguishable. An
increase in size of two diameters is possible from any fairly sharp
negative, but if the object be in perfect focus an increase of four
diameters may be made.

These enlargements may be made with an enlarging camera or with the aid
of a Nehring enlarging lens, which is placed between the front and back
lenses of the view lens, when, with the ordinary long-focus camera, a
magnification of about four diameters may be obtained, the image being
thrown on to a piece of bromide paper in the plate holder.

Through enlargement many apparently worthless negatives become of value,
and in some instances pictures can be made from different parts of the
same negative. From the sportsman-photographer’s standpoint there is,
however, one objection to the use of a magnifying lens. It gives
deceptive results, and those who are not familiar with its powers are
apt to accord the photographer undue praise for his apparent skill in
successfully approaching some bird or beast which may have been far out
of range. A not wholly unrelated kind of enlargement is sometimes
applied to the contents of creels and game bags!

But the animal photographer is so heavily handicapped that in this case
the end assuredly justifies the means. As a matter of information,
however, it seems eminently desirable to accompany all enlarged pictures
by a statement of the extent of their magnification, and throughout this
book this plan is followed. Consequently, when there is no mention of
enlargement, it may be accepted as a fact that the print from which the
reproduction was made was obtained from the negative by contact.

In illustration of these suggestions in regard to the proper lenses for
bird photography, a series of pictures is presented which shows the
results to be obtained under the same conditions with different lenses.

[Illustration: 2. Lens Test No. 1. Mounted Flicker on fence post,
distance fifty feet. Eight-inch focus, Zeiss Convertible, No. 10, Series
VII _a_ lens; diaphragm F. 8, ¹⁄₂₅ second; Cramer “Crown” plate.
Photographed at noon, in sunlight, November 30, 1899.]

[Illustration: 3. The bird in Test No. 1 enlarged about three
diameters.]

Placing a mounted Flicker (_Colaptes auratus_) on a fence post, and
setting up my tripod at a measured distance of fifty feet, a series of
test exposures was made, of which three are presented as follows:
First,^2 eight-inch lens (Zeiss Convertible Series VII _a_, No. 10),
stop F. 8, time ¹⁄₂₅ second; second,^4 fourteen-inch front lens of the
combination, stop F. 16 (equivalent to F. 4 of the eight-inch); third,^6
telephoto attachment with eight-inch lens, twenty-one-inch bellows, stop
F. 8 of the eight-inch, time one second. Commenting on the results of
these tests it may first be mentioned that in the “Unicum” shutter
employed exposures of a so-called “¹⁄₁₀₀” and “¹⁄₂₅” seconds gave
exactly the same results both with the combined eight-inch lens and the
front fourteen-inch lens; the actual time, however, was doubtless not
far from ¹⁄₂₅ of a second. The negatives, therefore, show, in the first
place, that the long-focus lens is capable of doing fairly rapid work.
Continuing our comparison, we observe that the eight-inch gives a fairly
wide field, excellent depth of focus, but a very small image of the
bird, for which alone the picture has been made. With the fourteen-inch
we decrease the extent of the field nearly one half and almost double
the size of the object pictured. This, however, has been done at the
loss of depth of focus, not even the first of the line of posts running
directly into the background being sharply defined, while with the
eight-inch all are in focus.

[Illustration: 4. Lens Test No. 2. Same subject, distance, plate, and
date as Test No. 1. Front lens (fourteen-inch focus) of Zeiss
Convertible, No. 10; diaphragm F. 16; ¹⁄₂₅ second.]

[Illustration: 5. The bird in Test No. 2 enlarged about three
diameters.]

The telephoto gives an enlargement of about six diameters of the image
thrown by eight-inch lens, and three diameters increase of that of the
fourteen-inch lens. It practically restricts the picture to the
immediate surroundings of the bird, and is without focal depth.

[Illustration: 6. Lens Test No. 3. Same subject, distance, plate, and
date as Tests Nos. 2 and 3. Eight-inch Zeiss Convertible, Series VII
_a_, No. 10, with telephoto attachment; diaphragm F. 8; twenty-one-inch
bellows; one second (½ second was later found to be full time).]

Having now made three good negatives in the field, we may, by
enlargement, improve on the image of the bird obtained. The
possibilities in this direction are clearly shown by the three
enlargements accompanying the contact prints from their respective
negatives. In each instance the enlargement is about three diameters,
and the telephoto negative of course furnishes the most satisfactory
picture. When the difficulties of telephotography are considered,
however, and the ¹⁄₂₅-second exposure of the fourteen-inch lens, which
permits of hand work, is compared with the one second of the telephoto,
we believe that for general work in photographing birds a lens having a
focal length of at least fourteen inches will be found the most
satisfactory. It should be added that, in order to make them wholly
comparable, the three contact prints as well as the enlargements were
made on enameled bromide paper.

[Illustration: 7. The bird in Test No. 3 enlarged about three
diameters.]

_The Shutter._—For fairly rapid, slow, and time exposures, a lens
shutter, such as is sold with trade cameras, will be found suitable.
Simplicity and noiselessness are the chief requirements in this kind of
a shutter. The “Iris Diaphragm” shutter is noiseless when used for slow
exposures of two or three seconds, a matter of much importance in making
time pictures of sitting birds, who are apt to turn their head if they
hear the click of the shutter. This shutter, however, does not respond
quickly in slow exposures and is very heavy, a disadvantage in
telephotography.

The “Unicum” shutter is lighter, responds quickly, has a lever to which
a thread may be attached for making exposures from a distance, can be
easily diaphragmed from the rear, but is not wholly noiseless. There are
also other shutters, each possessing good points of its own, and the
selection of any one of them for use in medium rapid, slow, or time work
can be left to the photographer, who should, however, remember that the
time scales on these shutters represent degrees of difference and not
exact measurements of time, and that there is great variation in the
exposures of different shutters of the same make when similarly
adjusted. Thus the “one fifth of a second” of one shutter may be
equivalent to the “one second” of another. The scale on most of these
shutters calls for a speed not exceeding a ¹⁄₁₀₀ part of a second, but
this is far too slow an exposure to successfully photograph a flying
bird at short range where a speed of at least ¹⁄₅₀₀ of a second is
required.

For very rapid work the choice is limited to one kind of shutter—that
is, the focal-plane, which in effect is a curtain with an adjustable
slit which is placed directly in front of the plate. Great speed with
this shutter is in part secured by increasing the tension of the spring,
which acts as its motive power, but more particularly by decreasing the
width of the slit. Assuming, therefore, that it takes one second for the
slit to pass from top to bottom of a plate four inches high, and that
the slit is one inch in width, it follows that each portion of the plate
is exposed to the light for a quarter of a second. Decreasing the width
of the slit one half, proportionally reduces the time of the exposure,
and by this means, in connection with an increase in the speed with
which the curtain is moved, an exposure of ¹⁄₁₀₀₀ of a second is
possible.

In addition to possessing the advantage of great speed, this shutter
also passes a higher percentage of light than a lens shutter even when
the actual time of the so-called exposure is the same. This is due to
the fact that the lens opening is in no way affected, it being the same
throughout the exposure. With a lens shutter, on the contrary, the full
value of the opening is given for only a fractional part of the
exposure, the parts of the shutter more or less filling the opening
during the rest of the time. With a focal-plane shutter, therefore, one
may do rapid work under conditions where a lens shutter could not be
successfully employed; time exposures, however, can not be made with the
focal-plane shutter, and for all-around work the camera should be fitted
with both a lens and a focal-plane shutter.

The reflecting camera, as before stated, is fitted with a focal-plane
shutter, and, as described, it is released by pressing the lever, which
raises the mirror. Lens shutters, however, are released by a pneumatic
bulb, or in some cases by a thread or string. When the exposure is to be
made from a distance as much as one hundred feet of tubing may be
employed. With any length of over twenty-five feet an extra large bulb
is required. The ordinary tubing sold by photographers will not be found
so well adapted to long-distance work as a less elastic kind, which does
not so readily yield to pressure and transmits a larger portion of the
force applied when squeezing the bulb.

_The Tripod._—A stout two-length tripod is to be preferred to one of the
slender multifolding type, in which stability is sacrificed to weight
and size. The legs, except the inner sides of the upper section into
which the lower section slides, and brass work should be painted bark
color in order to make them as inconspicuous as possible. For use in the
water a metal tripod will prove more serviceable than one of wood.

A very useful substitute for a tripod is the “Graphic” ball-and-socket
clamp designed more especially for bicycle camerists. With it a camera
can easily be attached to the limb of a tree, rung of a ladder, or, by
screwing a block on to the head of the tripod, it may be employed in
connection with the tripod—in fact its applicability will be evident to
every one using it.

_Plates._—Among the many excellent brands of plates now offered to
photographers there is really very little difference. However, it is
advisable to select the one you think the most rapid and use it to the
exclusion of all others. Under certain circumstances—in photographing
Robins, for instance—isochromatic plates will be found desirable, and
where a strong head light can not be avoided nonhalation plates may be
employed.

So much industry, skill, and patience are generally required of the bird
photographer before he makes an exposure that he should guard against
all chances of failure from the photographic side. It is therefore
advisable to thoroughly test plates which it is probable may be exposed
on a very difficult subject. Under no circumstances should the plate
holders be needlessly exposed to the light, and when the camera is to be
left for an indefinite period with the slide drawn from the holder and
plate ready to expose, it should be carefully wrapped in the dark-cloth.

_Blinds._—As the sportsman constructs blinds in which he may conceal
himself from his prey, so the bird photographer may employ various means
of hiding from his subjects. The Keartons recommend an artificial tree
trunk for use in wooded places and an artificial rubbish heap for open
fields. The former may be made of light duck, painted to resemble bark,
and placed over a frame.

The frame of the Keartons’ is of bamboo, but I find white pine answers
very well, the main things to be considered being lightness and
portability. The frame should therefore be collapsible in order that it
may be easily packed.

The Keartons’ field blind or “rubbish heap” consists of an umbrella, to
each of the ribs of which strips of bamboo four feet in length are tied.
This is then covered with light brown holland and wisps of straw tied
over it in such a way as to “virtually thatch the whole structure.”
Doubtless cornstalks properly arranged would make an excellent field
blind.

It is difficult to carry one of these blinds in addition to a camera,
etc., without assistance, and I fear that the inconvenience attending
their use will restrict them to the few enthusiasts who count neither
time, labor, nor cost in attaining a desired end.

For my own part, I prefer, when possible, to conceal my camera and make
the exposure from a distance rather than to weight myself with a
portable blind and to endure the discomforts of being confined within
it.

_Sundries._—The bird photographer will find that he requires numerous
articles not usually to be found in the regulation photographic outfit,
as, for example, climbers for ascending trees and stout cords for
hauling the camera up after him; a dark-cloth, green in color, to aid in
disguising the camera, and a mirror. The latter should be of plate
glass, and measure at least twelve by ten inches. A good plan is to buy
a piece of glass of desired size and frame it simply in white pine. It
may then be attached to a limb, a stick driven in the ground, or other
convenient object, by means of the ball-and-socket clamp mentioned under
Tripods, which may be screwed into the back or the outer border of the
frame. Such a mirror will reflect sunlight many yards to shaded nests,
where, in photographing old or young birds, a quick exposure is
necessary. A vest-pocket mirror, for use in reflecting the reading of
the diaphragms or time on the shutter, will permit one to make the
desired changes from the rear, and thus prove helpful when conditions do
not permit one to work in front of the camera.

A device which might be arranged on the principle of a trap, the trigger
to be sprung and exposure made when the bait is taken, would doubtless
capture some interesting pictures. An apparatus connected with an
automatically fired flash-light, has been employed by Mr. G. A. Shiras,
of Pittsburg, in photographing deer at night, with phenomenal success.
The connection with the camera shutter was so made that the deer, in
walking, touched a cord which exploded the flash-light, and, at the same
moment, made the exposure. The light weight of most birds, however,
requires a much more delicate apparatus, while an even greater
difficulty is found in the movement caused by the release of the
trigger, which startles the bird just as the exposure is made.

Thus far in my experiments I have been unable to overcome these
objections, but I trust some other bird photographer will be more
successful.

Those who are ambitious in the direction of cliff photography I would
refer to the Keartons’ admirable treatise on the subject in their Wild
Life at Home, for a description of the paraphernalia needed and the
manner in which it should be used. My own experience in this line is
limited, and I confess to the utter absence of a desire to increase it!




                  THE METHODS OF THE BIRD PHOTOGRAPHER


Claiming no special knowledge of the technique of pure photography, I
would refer the beginner to any of the several excellent books designed
to explain the rudiments of optical and chemical photography, and to
instruct in regard to the matters of exposing, developing, printing,
etc. Only such suggestions are given here, therefore, as relate directly
to the manner in which birds, their nests, eggs, and haunts may be
photographed.

_Haunts._—Photographs of the characteristic haunts of birds should show
not alone general topography, but should also be made with special
reference to the bird’s feeding habits, which, more than anything else,
govern the nature of the locality selected. Thus, a photograph of the
home of the Woodcock would have added value if, in the immediate
foreground, the “borings” made by this bird in probing the earth for
food were evident; or a marsh scene, in which wild rice was conspicuous,
would tell something of both the haunts and the food habits of the
Reedbird and Red-winged Blackbird in August and September. In a similar
way, pictures of wild cherry and dogwood trees, of bayberries and red
cedar, which show both fruit and surroundings, are of interest in
connection with the biographies of many birds.

[Illustration: 8. Spring.]

[Illustration: 9. Summer.]

_Seasons._—The camera permits us to make so exact a record of the rise
and fall of the year, as it is registered by vegetation, that we can
actually compare existing conditions with those which prevailed at any
previous time. Compare, for example, the series of four pictures^{8–11}
here presented, all made from the same point of view, in order to
appreciate how graphically seasonal changes may be shown by the camera.
In this instance, photography is of more service to the botanist than to
the ornithologist; but every student of migration knows how closely
related are the appearance of certain birds and flowers, and will
readily appreciate, therefore, the value of a series of photographs of
several different subjects, taken at short intervals, and showing the
changes in vegetation due to the approach of summer or winter. In
connection with such related phenomena as temperature, rainfall, and
weather, these pictures form as accurate a record of the seasons as it
is possible to make, and if data of this kind could be brought together
from many selected localities, we should have an admirable basis for the
intelligent study of certain phases of bird migration.

[Illustration: 10. Autumn.]

_Nests and Eggs_.—The photographing of nests is one of the simpler forms
of bird photography, but in many instances success is achieved only
through the exercise of much patience and ingenuity.

[Illustration: 11. Winter.]

It should constantly be borne in mind, in photographing nests, that what
is desired is not so much a picture of the nest alone as one which shows
it in relation to its environment—in short, a picture of the nesting
site is of more value than one of the nest only. It is advisable,
however, to make at least three pictures, two^{12, 13} of which shall
show the nature of the locality chosen, the other^{14} the character of
the nest and its immediate surroundings. When the nest is not above five
feet from the ground, little difficulty will be experienced in securing
the desired picture. When on the ground it will sometimes be found
helpful to put what naturally would be the rear leg of the tripod
forward, _between_ the other two, when it will serve as a brace from in
front, and permit the camera to be tilted well downward without danger
of its falling.

Nests at an elevation of seven or eight feet, in saplings, may be
photographed by lengthening the tripod with short legs, each supplied
with two staples or collars into which the ends of the tripod may be
slipped; or a ladder or light scaffolding will sometimes be found
necessary.

[Illustration: 12. To show nest locality of: 1, Tree Swallow; 2,
American Bittern; 3, Song Sparrow; 4, Maryland Yellow-throat; 5, Marsh
Hawk, of which nesting site, nest, and young are shown in the two
following pictures, Nos. 13 and 14. Meridian, N. Y., June 8, 1898.]

For photographing nests in trees the “Graphic” ball-and-socket clamp is
of great assistance. With it the camera may be attached to a limb, or,
if the limb is too large, a block may be nailed to it, thus furnishing a
grip to which the clamp may be fastened.

[Illustration: 13. Nesting site, nest, and young of Marsh Hawk.]

Nests should be photographed from the side, but eggs should be
photographed from above in order to show their position in the nest as
they were arranged by the incubating bird. The nest should therefore
never be tipped, nor should the eggs be touched, lest the value of the
subject be destroyed. The markings of most birds’ eggs are already well
known, but if photographs of them are desired they can be made from the
thousands of eggshells with which ill-directed effort has stocked the
cabinets of misguided oölogists.

[Illustration: 14. Young Marsh Hawks and nest.]

It is not advisable to make photographs of nests in the sunlight, a
diffused light giving greater detail. A screen of some thin white
material should therefore be used as a shade when photographing nests
exposed to the direct rays of the sun. This, however, will not be found
necessary if the picture be made within two or three hours after
sunrise, when the light is soft and the foliage comparatively
motionless, permitting the use of a small diaphragm and a long exposure.

[Illustration: 15. Young Great-crested Flycatcher.]

_Young Birds._—The ease with which photographs of young birds may often
be secured, the fact that with the camera their appearance and
development may be more satisfactorily recorded than in any other way,
makes their study by the photographer of exceeding importance.
Photographs of young birds should of course be accompanied by notes on
food, calls, special actions, etc., which the camera can not well
portray.

The young bird is a worthy subject from the moment it leaves the shell
until, as far as flight is concerned, it deserves to be ranked with its
elders. When possible, series of pictures should be made showing the
rate of growth of the same brood from the period of hatching to the date
when the nest is deserted. Circumstances do not, however, often permit
of the forming of these ideal series, and we must therefore photograph
the young bird as we find him, either before or after^{15} he has made
his initial flight, or as he is preparing for it.^{16}

The suggestions made under the head of Birds’ Nests and Eggs will apply
in a general way to photographing young in the nest; but even when at
rest in other respects, the rapid respiration of nestlings requires a
quick exposure to insure sharpness of outline, and, when in the shadow,
sufficient illumination can be secured only with the aid of a reflector.

[Illustration: 16. Young Baltimore Orioles and nest.]

_Adult Birds._—It is in photographing birds in the full possession of
the powers of maturity that the bird photographer’s skill and patience
are put to the most severe tests. It might be said that, from a strictly
ornithological point of view, the results obtained do not in many
instances justify the time expended. Success, however, in this field, as
in many others, is not to be measured by the attainment of a certain
end, but often by the experience gained in what, to one having only the
ultimate object in view, may seem to have been fruitless effort.

In matching one’s ability as a hunter against the timidity and cunning
of a bird, relations are established between the photographer and his
subject which of necessity result in their becoming intimately
associated.

[Illustration: 17. Wood Thrush on nest.]

Doubtless we shall never know just what birds think of the peculiar
antics in which the camera enthusiast sometimes indulges, but certain it
is that an attempt to photograph some of the most familiar and
presumably best-known birds will open the photographer’s eyes to facts
in their life histories of which he was previously in utter ignorance.

As a known and fixed point to which the bird may be expected to return,
the nest offers the best opportunity to the bird photographer, and
photographs of adult birds on or at their nests are more common than
those taken under other conditions.^{17, 18}

[Illustration: 18. Chestnut-sided Warbler on nest.]

Birds vary greatly in their attitude toward a camera which has been
erected near their homes; some species paying little attention to it,
and, after a short time, coming and going as though it had always been
there, while others are suspicious of any object which changes the
appearance of their surroundings.

With the latter special precautions are necessary, and unusual care
should be taken in working about their nests lest they be made to desert
it. The long-focus lens is here of great service, for it enables one to
secure a sufficiently large image from a distance of ten or twelve feet.
Even then it will often be necessary to conceal or disguise the camera
by covering it with the green dark-cloth, vines, and leaves. A rubber
tube or thread of requisite length is then attached and the exposure is
made from a distance.

A dummy camera, composed of a box or log wrapped in a green cloth and
placed on a tripod made from saplings, may sometimes be erected to
advantage several days before one expects to attempt to photograph the
bird, who in the meantime becomes accustomed to it and quickly returns
to the nest after the real camera has been substituted.

The artificial tree trunk would doubtless be of assistance in some kinds
of bird-at-the-nest photography, especially when one desired to secure
pictures of the old bird feeding its young, and was obliged therefore to
make the exposure at just the proper moment. In most instances, however,
there is sufficient undergrowth in the immediate vicinity to afford
concealment, from which with the aid of a glass one may take note of
events.

With the reflecting camera one may stalk birds on foot or with a boat,
or “squeak” them into range by kissing the back of the hand vigorously,
a sound which, during the nesting season especially, arouses much
curiosity or anxiety in the bird’s mind.

The decoys, blinds, batteries, sneak boxes, etc., of the sportsman are
also at the disposal of the hunter with a camera, though I must admit
that my one outing to photograph bay birds over decoys resulted in an
empty bag. It was in the spring, however, when the bay birds surviving
had experienced two shooting seasons and were exceedingly wild. In the
fall, with birds born the preceding summer, one might be more
successful.

Birds may be sometimes brought within range of the camera by baiting
them with food, and, after they have learned to expect it, placing the
camera in suitable position. This may be most easily done when there is
snow on the ground, at which time hunger makes most birds less
suspicious of danger.

[Illustration: 19. Catbird scolding.]

From a considerable experience which, through poor equipment, has not
yielded adequate return, I am convinced that one may secure excellent
pictures of many birds by decoying them with either a mounted or living
Owl; doubtless the latter would be preferable, though I have never tried
it. With a poorly mounted Screech Owl, however, I have had some
excellent opportunities to photograph. My plan is to select some spot
where birds are numerous, preferably near the home of a Catbird,^{19}
place the Owl in a conspicuous position, and erect near it a “scolding
perch,” from which the protesting bird may conveniently vituperate the
poor unoffending little bunch of feathers with its staring yellow eyes.
The camera is then focused on the scolding perch and the photographer
retires into the undergrowth, and, bulb in hand, waits for some bird to
take the desired stand.

A Catbird’s domain is chosen for the reason that this species is the
alarmist of whatever neighborhood it may inhabit, and once its attention
has been attracted to the Owl by “squeaking” or uttering the alarm notes
of other birds, the photographer may subside and let the Catbird do the
rest.

The bird’s rage is remarkable, its fear painful. Should the Owl be near
to the Catbird’s nest it will utter notes in a tone of voice I have
never heard it use on other occasions. It loses all fear of the camera,
and from the scolding perch screams at the Owl with a vehemence which
threatens to crack its throat. One is glad to remove the offending
cause.

Other birds in the vicinity are of course attracted, and hasten to learn
the meaning of the uproar. Often a bit of undergrowth, of which the
Catbird was apparently the only feathered tenant, will be found to
possess a large bird population. It is interesting to observe the
difference in the actions of various birds as they learn the reason of
the disturbance. On the whole, each species displays its characteristic
disposition in a somewhat accentuated manner. The Blue-winged Warblers
flit to and fro for a few moments and then are gone; the Chestnut-sided
Warbler is quite anxious; the Maryland Yellow-throat somewhat annoyed;
the Ovenbird decidedly concerned; the Towhee bustles about, but seems to
pay no especial attention to the Owl; the Wood Thrush utters its sharp
_pit-pit_, but is content to let well enough alone if its own nest be
not threatened; and the Yellow-throated, Red-eyed, and White-eyed
Vireos, particularly the latter, add their complaining notes to the
chorus of protests. Not one, however, approaches the Catbird in the
force of its remarks, nor does the bird cease to outcry so long as the
Owl is visible.


It is felt that in the foregoing suggestions the methods which may be
employed by the bird photographer are very inadequately described, but,
as was remarked in the preface of this volume, the constantly varying
circumstances attending his work practically prohibit duplication of
experience.

In truth, herein lies the great charm of animal photography. We have not
to follow certain formulæ, but each subject presents its own individual
requirements, making the demands on the naturalist’s skill and patience
limitless and success proportionately valuable.




                       BIRD STUDIES WITH A CAMERA


                    BIRD PHOTOGRAPHY BEGINS AT HOME

The influence exerted by the camera in creating new values for the bird
student is perhaps nowhere more evident than in the immediate vicinity
of one’s home. Even the view from our windows possesses fresh
significance as we speculate on the probability of securing a desirable
picture from this or that point of vantage, while birds to which long
familiarity has partially dimmed our vision now become possible subjects
for our camera, and we find ourselves observing their movements with an
alertness before unknown.

In my own case, I have learned almost to tolerate the House Sparrows,
with which I have been at war as long as memory serves me, for the
pleasure found in attempting to outwit these shrewd, independent,
impudent rats among birds; and, on closer acquaintance, they prove such
interesting subjects for study that, if their vocal ability equaled
their intelligence, they might be as generally liked as they are hated.
So much for the magic of a sweet voice. As it is, they possess a greater
variety of notes than they are generally credited with, and their
conversational powers undoubtedly exceed those of many accomplished
singers. In addition to the insistent, reiterated _chissick, chissick_,
which constitutes the song of the male, one soon learns to recognize
calls of warning, alarm, flight, battle, and the soft whistle which the
bird utters when it approaches its nest—the only musical note in its
vocabulary.

[Illustration: 20. House Sparrows and Junco.]

Quick to notice the slightest deviation from normal conditions, House
Sparrows are difficult birds to photograph. They seem to be constantly
on the watch for some sign of danger, and an unusual arrangement of
blind or shade at once arouses their suspicions. After a heavy fall of
snow, however, hunger dulls the edge of their fears, and by scattering
food near a suitable window the birds may be decoyed within
photographing distance.^{20} It will be found necessary, even then, to
conceal the camera, which they evidently distinguish from familiar
pieces of furniture and regard with alarm.

This, too, is the best time to secure pictures of Juncos,^{21}
Chickadees, Nuthatches, Downy Woodpeckers, Blue Jays, and less common
winter birds. The four last named are rarely or never seen about my home
in winter. Doubtless the abundant and surrounding woodlands afford them
a more congenial haunt, from which they are not to be enticed by suet,
bones, or grain; or, more likely still, the custom of putting out food
for birds is so unusual in the region about New York city that they have
not yet learned to expect it. It is a most pleasing surprise to the
resident of this section to observe the numbers and familiarity of
winter birds in the environs of Boston, where a feast seems spread for
them in nearly every dooryard.

[Illustration: 21. Junco. × 3.]

[Illustration: 22. Female House Sparrow and nest. × 3.]

To return to the Sparrow. The bird’s nest also provides a focal point
for the camera, but, as elsewhere, the greatest precautions must be
taken, and I have succeeded in securing a picture only when some
advantageously situated window afforded a natural blind. One of the
pictures thus obtained shows a nest in the ornamental part of a gutter,
with the female looking from an adjoining opening.^{22} This gutter
seems especially designed to furnish lodgings for Sparrows, and no
argument that I have thus far advanced has convinced them that it was
not erected for their use. During the early part of their occupancy, a
rap on their roof promptly brought them out to perch in the branches of
the neighboring trees, where their chattering protest was soon
interrupted by a gunshot; but the survivors quickly learned the meaning
of the roof tap, and now, without a moment’s pause, they dive downward
from their doorway and fly out of range at topmost speed.

[Illustration: 23. Screech Owl. × 3.]

More welcome tenants than the House Sparrows are a pair of Screech Owls,
who for years have reared their broods in a dovecotelike gable, where
they are beyond the reach of nest robbers of all kinds. During the
winter they apparently are absent, nor indeed are they seen until June,
when, each evening at sundown, one of the pair, probably the male, takes
his post at the entrance to its home and gives utterance to the crooning
refrain which sometimes follows the so-called tremulous “screech.” But
the latter I never hear at this season. In spite of the poor light
prevailing at this hour, the bird’s stillness has tempted repeated
trials to secure its picture, and the most successful, made with a
fourteen-inch lens and an exposure of fifteen seconds, is here
shown.^{23} Telephotos have thus far been underexposed.

As a means of making the exposure as soon as possible after the Owl
appeared, I have on a number of occasions placed my camera in position,
focused and otherwise made ready some minutes before he was expected,
and I recall with amusement the incredulity of a friend whose surprise
at seeing me point my camera skyward without ostensible purpose was in
no way lessened when I told him that I had an appointment with an Owl,
who was to take his stand shortly in the hole toward which the camera
was directed; and fortunately the bird was on time!

From the perch, some forty feet aloft, the grave little creature surveys
the scene below with an expression of combined wisdom and thoughtfulness
which makes a laugh seem wanton foolishness. At the border of dusk and
dark he flies out to feed, often descending to the ground and remaining
there for some moments while catching insects. Occasionally he takes his
prey from the tree trunks, perhaps a cicada struggling from its shell,
and on several occasions I have thought he captured food on the wing.
Sometimes the supper hunt leads him to the edge of the croquet lawn,
where from the earth or the back of a garden bench he becomes an
interested spectator of the last game. When the young appear, later in
the month, the evergreens seem alive with Owls, who flit about and utter
querulous little calls difficult of description. Toward the end of July,
doubtless after the molt is completed, presumably the adults—for never
more than two are heard—begin to sing; and this habit of post-nuptial
singing seems not to be confined to the Screech Owl, for about this time
the deep-toned, resounding notes of the Barred Owl come up from the
woods. Throughout August and September the wailing whistle, which is
ever welcome for its spirit of wildness, is heard nightly, and as the
plaintive notes tremble on the hushed air we invariably say, “Hark,
there’s the Owl!”

My experience as bird photographer about home, I must admit, has
consisted chiefly in a series of encouraging failures which have borne
no tangible results. Let us hope, however, that the few pictures here
presented will prove as suggestive to the reader as they are to their
maker, who, although he offers such inadequate proof in support of his
belief, is far too well convinced of the possibilities of home
photography to go afield without saying at least a word in its behalf.




                             THE CHICKADEE
                      _A Study in Black and White_


Very early in my experience as a hunter I became acquainted with a small
black-and-white bird, who not only announced himself with unmistakable
distinctness, but did so at such close range that one could form a very
clear idea of his appearance; and thus because of his notes and
trustfulness I learned to know the Chickadee by name years before I was
aware that the woods were tenanted by dozens of other more common but
less fearless birds.

With regret for the universality of the instinct, I found that to see
was to desire. I had felt exactly the same longing in regard to other
birds, and had thrown many a stone in a fruitless effort to get
possession of the half-mysterious wild creatures which always eluded me;
but the Chickadee came within range of my bean-shooter and soon paid the
penalty of misplaced confidence. The little ball of flesh and fluffy
feathers was perfectly useless, so after a day or two, the length of
time depending on the temperature, it was thrown away.

My curiosity concerning the Chickadee being satisfied, and the bird’s
tameness making it too easy a mark even for a bean-shooter, I entered on
a new phase of Chickadee relations. Strangely enough, the killing of the
bird seemed, from my point of view, to constitute an introduction to a
creature which before I had known only imperfectly, and my acquaintance
with the Chickadee may be said to have begun when I picked up the first
bird that fell before my aim. However the Chickadee may have regarded my
somewhat questionable manner of gaining his friendship, he has since
given unmistakable evidences of his approval of my treatment of his
kind. He always replies to my greeting, often coming many yards in
answer to my call, and on a number of occasions he has honored me above
most men by alighting on my hand.

When, in more recent years, the gun which succeeded the bean-shooter was
in turn replaced by a camera, I found that the Chickadee’s tameness made
him a mark for my later as he had been for my earlier efforts in bird
hunting. Now, however, I believe I may speak for him as well as for
myself, and say that the results obtained are more satisfactory to us
both. It was in Central Park, New York city, in February, 1899, that I
went on one of my first Chickadee hunts with a camera. Incidentally the
locality gave emphasis to the advantages of the camera over any other
weapon. Imagine the surprise of the park police had I ventured on their
precincts with a gun on my shoulder! But with a camera I could snap away
at pleasure without any one’s being the wiser—many of my “snaps,” I
confess being attended by exactly this result. At this time, through the
efforts of an enthusiastic and patient bird lover, who had improved on
the bird-catching legend by using nuts instead of “salt” and by
substituting bill for “tail,” three Chickadees in the Ramble had become
so remarkably tame that they would often flutter before one’s face and
plainly give expression to their desire for food, which they took from
one’s hand without the slightest evidence of fear. Sometimes they even
remained to pick the nut from a shell while perched on one’s finger,
anon casting questioning glances at their host; but more often they
preferred a perch where they could give their entire attention to the
nut which was held between their feet, and pecked at after the manner of
Blue Jays.

[Illustration: 24. Chickadee on ground.]

In spite of the ease with which one could approach these Chickadees,
they made difficult marks for the camera. I was armed with a “Henry
Clay” 5 × 7 and a twin-lens camera of the same size, but so active were
the little creatures that not one of many exposures proved to be
perfectly focused. Finally I tried decoying the birds to a bone or bit
of bread in the bushes, but somehow they did not succeed in discovering
these baits until they were placed on the ground.^{24, 25} Then they
responded so quickly that often the bread had disappeared while my head
was concealed by the dark-cloth, and frequently, while focusing, the
birds would alight on the tripod of the camera. I was forced, therefore,
to focus on a stone, and, when ready to make the exposure, lay a bit of
bread on or near the focal point, the two pictures given being thus
obtained.

[Illustration: 25. Chickadee taking piece of bread.]

Various experiences with these unusually tame birds finally led to what
at first thought would have been considered the wholly unreasonable
ambition of photographing one of them in my hand. The camera was
therefore erected at a suitable point and focused on the trunk of a
tree, the shutter set, and slide drawn.

[Illustration: 26. A bird in the hand.]

Now to get the bird. None was in the immediate vicinity, but a whistle
soon brought a response from some neighboring tree tops, and going
beneath them I shortly had called the bird down to a nut in my palm, and
with him on my finger started to walk the eighty or more feet to the
camera. This, however, was asking too much, and the bird abandoned his
moving perch for a bordering row of evergreens, from which one or two
more trials brought him within a short distance of the desired spot, and
resting my arm against the tree trunk and with the other hand on the
trigger of the shutter I called again the two plaintive notes. The
bird’s faith was still strong. Almost immediately he took the desired
position, when a _click_ announced the realization of a bird
photographer’s wildest dream.


Fortunate is the bird photographer who discovers an advantageously
situated Chickadee’s nest. Dr. Robert’s charming description in
Bird-Lore of his experience with a family of Chickadees stimulated my
desire to make a camera study of this species. The first nest found,
however, was claimed by a band of roving boys, who in pure wantonness
pushed down the stub from which a few days later the young would have
issued.

A second time I was more fortunate. It was on the morning of May 29,
1899, at Englewood, N. J., that in going through a young second growth I
chanced to see a Chickadee, who in arranging her much-worn plumage gave
unmistakable evidence of having recently left her nest. At once I looked
about for a partly decayed white birch, a tree especially suited to the
Chickadee’s powers and needs. The bark remains tough and leathery long
after the interior is crumbling, and having penetrated the outer shell
the Chickadee finds no difficulty in excavating a chamber within.

A few moments’ search revealed a stub so typical as to match exactly the
image I held in my mind’s eye, with an opening about four feet from the
ground. The interior was too gloomy to enable one to determine its
contents, but, returning in half an hour, I tapped the stub lightly,
when, as though I had released the spring of a Jack-in-a-box, a
Chickadee popped out of the opening and into a neighboring tree. I
wished her good morning, assured her that my intentions were of the
best, and promised to return and secure her portrait at the first
opportunity.

Four days later I set up my camera before the door to the Chickadee’s
dwelling, and, without attempting to conceal it, attached thread to the
shutter and retreated in the undergrowth to a distance of about
twenty-five feet.

After having had most discouraging experiences with several birds, who
had evidently regarded the camera as a monster of destruction, and had
refused to return to their nests as long as the evil eye of the lens was
on them, it was consoling to find a bird who had some degree of
confidence in human nature as represented by photographic apparatus.

It is true that the female—and throughout this description I assume that
the bird with much-worn plumage was of this sex—promptly left the stub
at my approach; but when I retired to the undergrowth there was no
tiresome wait of hours while the bird, flitting from bush to bush,
chirped suspiciously, but almost immediately she returned to her
home.^{27} The camera was examined, but clearly not considered
dangerous, its tripod sometimes serving as a step to the nest entrance.
The click of the shutter, however, when an exposure was made as the bird
was about to enter its dwelling, caused some alarm, and she flew back to
a neighboring tree, and for some time hopped restlessly from limb to
limb.

The male, who had previously kept in the background, now approached,
and, as if to soothe his troubled mate, thoughtfully gave her a
caterpillar. She welcomed him with a gentle, tremulous fluttering of the
wings—a motion similar to that made by young birds when begging for
food. He, however, made what appeared to be precisely the same movements
when she perched beside him.

[Illustration: 27. Chickadee at nest hole.]

It was not long before the female became so accustomed to the snap of
the shutter that in order to prevent her from entering the nest I was
forced to rush out from my hiding place; but at last, apparently
becoming desperate, she succeeded in returning to her eggs in spite of
my best efforts to prevent her.

There now ensued a very interesting change in the bird’s action. It will
be remembered that at first she had left the nest on hearing me
approach, while a light tap brought her through the opening with
startling promptness. But now, evidently realizing that a return to her
duties of incubation could be made only at great risk, she determined
under no conditions to leave her eggs. In vain I rapped at her door and
shook her dwelling to its foundations; no bird appeared, and not
believing it possible that under the circumstances she would remain
within the stub, I felt that she must have left without my knowledge,
and therefore retired to await her reappearance.

[Illustration: 28. Chickadee at nest hole.]

At the end of several minutes the male, with food in his bill, advanced
cautiously, and clinging to the rim of the nest opening, hung there a
moment and departed minus the food. This was surprising. Could there be
young in the nest? or was the bird, in imitation of the Hornbill,
feeding his imprisoned mate? I rapped again, and this time, perhaps
taken unawares, the female answered my question by appearing.

On June 3d a family arrived in the Chickadee villa, and both birds were
found actively engaged in administering to its wants.

As a return for the inconvenience to which they had been subjected, a
perch was erected by way of a step at their door. The female was
appreciative and at once availed herself of this means of entering her
home.^{28} The male, however, as before, was more wary. He had braved
the camera to bring food to his mate, but his offspring had apparently
not so strong a claim upon him. He would fly off in search of food and
shortly return with a caterpillar, then perch quietly for several
minutes a few yards from the nest, when, repelled by the camera and
attracted by the food in his bill, he yielded to temptation, devoured
the caterpillar, vigorously wiped his bill, at once started to forage
for more food, and returned with it only to repeat his previous
performance.

Occasionally he uttered a low whistle, addressed presumably to the
female, and at times a _chickadee-dee-dee_, which I interpreted as a
protest to me, and both notes were also uttered by the female.

The latter took so kindly to the doorstep that it was determined to give
her a door, and to this end a leaf was pinned over the entrance to her
home in such a manner that it swung to and fro, like the latch to a
keyhole. This clearly did not meet with her approval, and at first she
seemed puzzled to account for the apparent disappearance of the nest
opening. But in less than a minute she solved the mystery, pushed the
leaf to one side, and disappeared within.

Returning to the nest on June 12th, nothing was to be seen of either
parent, and I feared that they or their offspring had fallen victims to
the countless dangers which beset nesting birds and their young. Looking
about for some clew to their fate, I found on the ground, near the nest
stub, the worn tail-feathers of the female bird. The molting season had
not yet arrived, nor would she have shed all these feathers at the same
moment. There could therefore be only one interpretation of their
presence. Some foe—probably a Sharp-shinned or Cooper’s Hawk, since the
predaceous mammals for the most part hunt at night, when the Chickadee
would be snugly sleeping in her nest—had made a dash and grasped her by
the tail, which she had sacrificed in escaping. A moment later the
theory was supported by the appearance of a subdued-looking Chickadee,
_sans_ tail, and I congratulated her on her fortunate exchange of life
for a member which of late had not been very decorative, and of which,
in any event, Nature would have soon deprived her.

The young proved to be nearly ready to fly, and, carefully removing the
front of their log cabin, a sight was disclosed such as mortal probably
never beheld before and Chickadee but rarely.

Six black-and-white heads were raised and six yellow-lined mouths opened
in expressive appeal for food. But this was not all; there was another
layer of Chickadees below—how many it was impossible to say without
disentangling a wad of birds so compact that the outlines of no one bird
could be distinguished. A piazza, as it were, was built at the
Chickadees’ threshold in the shape of a perch of proper size, and
beneath, as a life net, was spread a piece of mosquito bar. Then I
proceeded to individualize the ball of feathers; one, two, three, to
seven were counted without undue surprise, but when an eighth and ninth
were added, I marveled at the energy which had supplied so many mouths
with food, and at the same time wondered how many caterpillars had been
devoured by this one family of birds.

Not less remarkable than the number of young—and no book that I have
consulted records so large a brood—was their condition. Not only did
they all appear lusty, but they seemed to be about equally developed,
the slight difference in strength and size which existed being easily
attributable to a difference in age, some interval doubtless having
elapsed between the hatching of the first and last egg.

[Illustration: 29. A Chickadee family.]

This fact would have been of interest had the birds inhabited an open
nest, or a nest large enough for them all to have had an equal
opportunity to receive food; but where only two thirds of their number
could be seen from above at once, and where a very little neglect would
have resulted fatally, it seems remarkable that one or more, failing to
receive his share of food, had not been weakened in consequence and
crushed to death by more fortunate members of the brood. Nor was their
physical condition the only surprising thing about the members of this
Chickadee family: each individual was as clean as though he had been
reared in a nest alone, and an examination of the nest showed that it
would have been passed as perfect by the most scrupulous sanitary
inspector. It was composed of firmly padded rabbit’s fur, and, except
for the sheaths worn off the growing feathers of the young birds, was
absolutely clean. Later, I observed that the excreta of the young were
inclosed in membranous sacs, which enabled the parents to readily remove
them from the nest.

[Illustration: 30. A Chickadee family.]

The last bird having been placed in the net, I attempted to pose them in
a row on the perch before their door. The task reminded me of almost
forgotten efforts at building card houses, which, when nearly completed,
would be brought to ruin by an ill-placed card. How many times each
Chickadee tumbled or fluttered from his perch I can not say. The soft,
elastic net, spread beneath them, preserved them from injury, and bird
after bird was returned to his place so little worse for his fall that
he was quite ready to try it again. Finally, eight birds were induced to
take the positions assigned them; then, in assisting the ninth to his
allotted place, the balance of a bird on either side would be disturbed,
and down into the net they would go.

These difficulties, however, could be overcome, but not so the failure
of the light at the critical time, making it necessary to expose with a
wide open lens at the loss of a depth of focus.

The picture presented, therefore, does not do the subject justice. Nor
can it tell of the pleasure with which each fledgeling for the first
time stretched its wings and legs to their full extent, and preened its
plumage with before unknown freedom.

At the same time they uttered a satisfied little _dee-dee-dee_, in
quaint imitation of their elders. When I whistled their well-known
_phe-be_ note, they were at once on the alert, and evidently expected to
be fed.

The birds were within two or three days of leaving the nest, and, the
sitting over, the problem came of returning the flock to a cavity barely
two inches in diameter, the bottom of which was almost filled by one
bird.

I at once confess a failure to restore anything like the condition in
which they were found, and when the front of their dwelling was
replaced, Chickadees were overflowing at the door. If their
healthfulness had not belied the thought, I should have supposed it
impossible for them to exist in such close quarters.

A few days later their home was deserted, and, as no other Chickadees
were known to nest in the vicinity, I imagine them to compose a troop of
birds which is sometimes found in the neighborhood.




           THE LEAST BITTERN AND SOME OTHER REED INHABITANTS


My experience with the Least Bittern leaves the eerie little creature a
half-solved mystery, and I think of it less as a bird than as a survivor
of a former geological period, when birds still showed traits of their
not distant reptilian ancestors.

The Bittern’s home is in fresh-water, cat-tail marshes, and he wanders
at will through the thickly set forest of reeds without of necessity
putting foot to the water below or flapping wing in the air above. His
peculiar mode of progression constitutes one of his chief
characteristics. The reeds in which he lives generally grow in several
feet of water, far too deep, therefore, to permit of his wading; while
his secretive disposition makes him averse to appearing in the open,
except after nightfall. It is impossible to fly through the cat-tails,
and so the bird walks and even runs through them, stepping from stem to
stem with surprising agility. I had heard of this habit, but the
description conveyed as little idea of the bird’s appearance as it is
feared this one will, and when for the first time a Least Bittern was
seen striding off through the reeds about three feet above the water,
the performance was so entirely unlike anything I had ever seen a bird
do before, I marveled that his acrobatic powers had not made him famous.

The feathered gymnast’s slender body—or perhaps one should say neck, for
the bird is chiefly neck and head—seemed to be mounted on long stilts,
with the aid of which he waded rapidly through the water, his head
shooting in and out at each stride.

The Least Bittern’s notes appear to be less known than his habits.
Nuttall, that exceptionally keen-eared bird student, was familiar with
them, but most writers have restricted themselves to the statement that,
when flushed, the bird utters a low _qua_, while some have even said he
was voiceless.

I should not be in the least surprised to learn that this uncanny
inhabitant of the reeds had a call fully as remarkable as the vocal
performance of his large relative, the American Bittern, but thus far in
my slight acquaintance with him he has been heard to utter only four
notes: A soft, low _coo_, slowly repeated five or six times, and which
is probably the love song of the male; an explosive alarm note, _quoh_;
a hissing _hah_, with which the bird threatens a disturber of its nest;
and a low _tut-tut-tut_, apparently a protest against the same kind of
intrusion.

[Illustration: 31. Least Bittern’s nesting site, showing reeds bent over
nest. One of four eggs can be seen.]

It was the markedly dovelike _coo_ which first introduced me to this
species. With William Brewster I was at the Fresh Pond marshes,
listening for the repetition of some strange calls which had excited the
curiosity of Cambridge ornithologists, and which proved to belong to a
Florida Gallinule,[B] when we heard the soft notes of a Least Bittern,
who soon rose from the marsh near by. A few days later the Bittern was
found in full song—if the _coo_ be its song—in the marshes of Presque
Isle in Erie Bay; but it must be confessed that a desire to secure
specimens of this, to me, strange bird left no opportunity to study its
habits, and the species was not again observed until June, 1898, in the
northern part of Cayuga County, New York. Here, under the guidance of an
observing local ornithologist, Mr. E. G. Tabor, an encounter was had
with a Least Bittern which made a unique page in my experience as a bird
student.

Footnote B:

  See Brewster, Auk, vol. viii, 1891, p. 1.

It was on the border of Otter Lake, where the Least Bitterns nest in
small numbers in low bushes, or a mass of drift, or more often in the
fringe of cat-tails. The trail of a boat through the reeds and empty
nests, which before had held from three to five eggs, marked the
ill-directed work of the boy oölogists whose misspent zeal has resulted
in such a vast accumulation of eggshells and such an absence of
information about the birds that laid them. A visit to a more distant
part of the lake, where even thus early in the year the cat-tails were
five feet above water of over half that depth, saved the day, as far as
Least Bitterns were concerned. Paddling close to the reeds, a practiced
eye could distinguish the site of a Bittern’s nest, when the nest itself
was invisible, by the bowed tips of the reeds which the bird invariably
bends over it.^{31} The object of this habit is perhaps to aid in
concealing the eggs from an enemy passing overhead—a Crow, for
example—an attack by boat evidently not being taken into consideration.

Certainly our appearance was in the nature of a surprise to a pair of
birds who had just completed their platformlike nest and were apparently
discussing future steps in their domestic affairs.

[Illustration: 32. Least Bittern’s nest; reeds parted to show eggs.]

As we approached, the female, who even before the eggs are laid seems to
have the home love more strongly developed than the male, bravely stuck
to her post, while the male marched off through the reeds in the manner
which has been described as so remarkable. When he paused, with either
foot grasping reeds several inches apart or clung to a single stalk with
both feet, he resembled a gigantic, tailless Marsh Wren.

[Illustration: 33. Least Bittern on nest mimicking its surroundings.]

The actions of the female were interesting in the extreme. Her first
move was an attempt at concealment through protective mimicry—a rare
device among birds. Stretching her neck to the utmost, she pointed her
bill to the zenith, the brownish marks on the feathers of the throat
became lines which, separated by the white spaces between them, might
easily have passed for dried reeds, and the bird’s statuelike pose, when
almost within reach, evinced her belief in her own invisibility.^{33,
34}

The pose recalled Hudson’s experience with a wounded Least Bittern
(_Ardetta involucris_, a near relative of our bird) in the marshes of La
Plata, where a bird at his feet, in the same position as the one before
me, was discovered only after careful search, and which, to the
naturalist’s amazement, slowly revolved as he walked around it, with the
presumable object of keeping its protectively colored breast turned
toward him.

[Illustration: 34. Least Bittern on nest mimicking its surroundings.]

My bird, however, was among fresh reeds, and while one can not doubt the
effectiveness of its attitude and color, when seen among dead reeds or
grasses, neither were of value among its green surroundings.

With the light on the wrong side and the reeds swaying violently in the
wind, we essayed to picture the bird, and the best of several attempts
made under these adverse conditions are here given.

Covering my hand with my cap I held it toward her, when, convinced that
her little trick had failed, she adopted new tactics, and struck at me
with force and rapidity, which made me thankful that my hand was
protected. Her bright yellow eyes glared with the intensity of a
snake’s, and her reptilelike appearance was increased by the length and
slenderness of her head and neck. Her courage was admirable; she not
only displayed no fear, but was actually aggressive, and with a hissing
_hah_ struck viciously at my hand each time it was placed near the nest.
As I quickly retreated on each occasion, and at length made no further
move toward her, she decided to withdraw, perhaps to join her cautious
mate, who from the reeds had been uttering a warning _tut-tut-tut_ at
intervals. Very slowly and watchfully she left the nest, and when she
had advanced a few feet through the reeds I again ventured to touch her
platform home, putting my hand, however, under it; but the motion
instantly attracted her attention, and, darting back to her post, she
was on guard in a moment. Then I left her, retiring from the field
fairly vanquished in my first hand-to-bill encounter with a wild bird. I
hope she laid a full complement of five eggs and from them reared five
birds worthy representatives of their mother.


A desire to renew my acquaintance with—or perhaps I should say advances
toward—this unbirdlike feathered biped, and to meet it under conditions
more favorable for the camera hunter, brought me the following year
(June 17, 1899), to the Montezuma marshes at the head of Cayuga Lake.
Here are endless forests of cat-tails in which dwell not only Bitterns,
Long-billed Marsh Wrens, and Red-winged Blackbirds, but also numbers of
Pied-billed Grebes and Florida Gallinules.

There is a mystery about a marsh akin to that which impresses one in a
primeval forest. The possibilities of both seem limitless. One hears so
much and sees so little. Birds calling from a distance of only a few
yards may remain long unidentified. A rustling in the reeds arouses
vague expectations.

The notes of marsh-inhabiting birds are in keeping with the character of
their haunts. They are distinctly wild and strange, and often thrilling.
The Rails, for example, all have singular, loud, startling calls. The
American Bittern is a famous marsh songster, but although several of his
common names are based on his calls, it is only recently that he has
actually been seen uttering them. The Gallinule resembles the hen in the
character, volume, and variety of its notes, and to it and not the
Clapper Rail should be given the name “Marsh Hen.” Indeed, its European
relative, from which it can scarcely be distinguished, is known as the
Moor Hen or Water Hen.

But of all this marsh music none to my ear is more singular than the
call of the Pied-billed Grebe. It is mentioned in few books, and has won
the bird no such fame as the Loon’s maniacal laughter has brought him,
though as a vocalist the Grebe fairly rivals his large cousin. Like most
bird calls it is indescribable, but perhaps sufficient idea of its
character may be given to lead to its identification when heard. It is
very loud and sonorous, with a cuckoolike quality, and may be written
_cow-cow-cow-cow-cow-cow-cow-cow-cow-uh, cow-uh, cow-uh, cow-uh_. These
notes vary in number, and are sometimes followed by prolonged wailing
_cows_ or _ohs_ almost human in their expressiveness of pain, fear, and
anguish.

This is the love song of the male, and when he has won a mate she joins
him in singing, uttering, as he calls, a rapid _cuk-cuk-cuk_, followed
by a slower _ugh, ugh, ugh, ugh_.

The Gallinules were cackling in the reeds, where a nest with three
hatching eggs was found, but not a bird was seen. Red-winged Blackbirds
were chattering with excitement as they guided the first wing strokes of
their young, who perched on the reeds begged eloquently for food rather
than for lessons in flying.^{35}

[Illustration: 35. Young Red-winged Blackbirds.]

In a small island of cat-tails a pair of Grebes was calling, and after
the most careful stalking my companion saw the female respond to the
voice of her mate.

It was in this island—if a patch of cat-tails growing in three feet of
water can be called an island—that we found the first two of numerous
Least Bitterns’ nests, and here our camera studies were made. These
nests were typical in form and site; one contained five and the other
four^{32} eggs, from which the birds had apparently departed as we
pushed our boat toward them.

Less than twenty minutes later we again passed these nests and found, to
our surprise, that in one all four, and in the other two eggs had been
punctured, as if by an awl. Here was a mystery which my companion, who
was examining the second nest while I was studying the first, quickly
solved by seeing a Long-billed Marsh Wren actually make an attack on the
remaining three eggs, and a little later a bird of the same
species—perhaps the same individual, since the Bitterns’ nests were not
more than twenty yards apart—visited the first nest to complete its work
on the five already ruined eggs.

Our attempt to photograph the energetic little marauder failed, nor did
we succeed in learning the real cause of its remarkable destructiveness.
However, the fact that in one nest alone it drove its needlelike bill
into all five eggs without pausing to feast on their contents, would
imply that it was not prompted by hunger, and, much against our will, we
were forced to attribute the bird’s actions to pure viciousness; though,
it is true, there may have been another side to the story, in which the
Bittern was the culprit.

The owners of the four eggs did not return while we were present, and
the following day we found their nest empty—a mute protest against fate.

[Illustration: 36. Least Bittern eating her eggs.]

The female of the second nest discovered, in which only two of the five
eggs had been injured, proved to be a bird of character.

[Illustration: 37. Least Bittern on nest.]

While we waited in our boats at a distance of fifteen feet, and with
cameras erected on tripods at a third of the distance, she came walking
through the reeds uttering occasionally an explosive _quoh!_ After
circling about us several times she climbed to her nest, and at once
proceeded to investigate the condition of its contents. Soon she gave
evidence of the possession of both a philosophic and economic
disposition, not to mention other housewifely qualities, notably
cleanliness. Philosophy she exhibited by making the best of things as
she found them; economy by carefully eating^{36} the two broken eggs,
which a more thoughtless bird would have deserted or quickly discarded;
and cleanliness by carefully dropping over the edge of the nest the
shells remaining from her peculiar feast, and following them by bits of
nest lining which had been soiled by portions of the egg. This task
accomplished to her satisfaction, she gave further evidence of the
possession of a well-ordered mind by descending to the water, washing
her bill, drinking, and then returning to her remaining three eggs, on
which she settled herself^{37} as complacently as though she had met
with no loss, and there we left her in well-deserved privacy.




                               TWO HERONS


In this age of death and destruction to all living creatures, which,
because of their size or edible qualities, the so-called sportsman is
proud to exhibit as evidence of his skill afield, it is remarkable that
there should exist within twenty odd miles of New York’s City Hall a
colony of Herons which would do credit to the most remote swamp of
Florida.

Three factors have combined to render this rookery possible: first, its
isolation; second, the habits of its occupants; and third, the
protection which is afforded it by the owner of the land on which it is
situated. Of these, the first is by far the most important, and I may be
pardoned, therefore, if I do not betray the birds’ secret; for, much as
I desire to encourage American industries, I must on this occasion
withhold information of undoubted value to the feather trade.

The birds’ habits contribute toward their preservation, because they are
largely nocturnal, “Night” being the specific name applied by the
text-books to this particular kind of Heron; but to those who know him
in nature, he is generally spoken of as “Quawk,” this being an excellent
rendering of his common call.

The Night Heron or Quawk belongs among the birds for whom the setting
sun marks the beginning of a new day—a fact which protects him from man
and permits his existence in numbers where others of his family are
rarely seen. Doubtless many of the residents of Heronville know their
feathered neighbors only as a voice from the night, which comes to them
when the birds, in passing over, utter their loud and startling call.

Finally, to the protecting influences of a love for seclusion and
darkness must be added the unusual position assumed by the proprietor of
the land, who will not permit any one to kill the birds, and, stranger
still, does not kill them himself!

Thus it happens that any day in May or June, the months during which the
Herons are at home, one may leave the crowded streets of New York and
within an hour or so enter an equally crowded but quite different kind
of town.

If after leaving the train you secure the same guide it was my good
fortune to have, your way will lead over shaded roads, pleasant fields,
and quiet woodland paths, and, if the sun is well up in the trees, you
may enter the outskirts of the rookery and be wholly unaware, unless you
approach from the leeward, that between two and three thousand Herons
are within a few hundred yards of you.

One may gain a far better idea of Heron life, however, by visiting the
rookery while the foliage is still glistening with dew. Then, from a
distance, a chorus of croaks may be heard from the young birds as they
receive what, in effect, is their supper. Old birds are still returning
from fishing trips, and the froglike monotone of the young is broken by
the sudden _quawks_ of their parents.

The rookery is in a low part of the woods which evidently is flooded
early in the year, a fact which may have influenced the Herons in their
selection of the locality as a nesting site. At the time of our visit
the swamp maples, in which the nests are placed, were densely undergrown
with ferns, and as we approached the whitened vegetation, which clearly
marked the limits of the rookery, a number of Herons with squawks of
alarm left the vicinity of their nests, and soon the rookery was in an
uproar. The common _quawk_ note was often heard, but many of the calls
were distinctly galline in character and conveyed the impression that we
had invaded a henroost.

The trees in which the nests were placed are very tall and slender, mere
poles some of them, with a single nest where the branches fork; while
those more heavily limbed had four, five,^{38} and even six of the
platforms of sticks, which with Herons serve as nests, but in only a
single instance was one nest placed directly below another. A
conservative count yielded a total of five hundred and twenty-five
nests, all within a circle about one hundred yards in diameter, nearly
every suitable tree holding one or more, the lowest being about thirty
feet from the ground, the highest at least eighty feet above it.

While the limy deposits and partially digested fish dropped by the birds
seemed not to affect the growth of the lower vegetation, it had a marked
influence on certain of the swamp maples, the development of the trees
which held a number of nests being so retarded that, although it was
June 13th, they were as yet only in blossom.^{38} The comparative
absence of foliage permitted one to have a far better view of what was
going on above than if the trees had been thickly leaved, and on
entering the rookery our attention was at once attracted by the nearly
grown Herons, who, old enough to leave the nest, had climbed out on the
adjoining limbs. There, silhouetted against the sky, they crouched in
family groups of two, three, and four.^{39}

[Illustration: 38. Five Herons’ nests in swamp maple, at an average
height of seventy feet. The upper right-hand nest with young shown in
Nos. 41 and 42.]

[Illustration: 39. A view in the Heron rookery, looking upward from the
ground to nests and young, about eighty feet above.]

Other broods, inhabitants of more thickly leaved trees, made known their
presence above by disgorging a half-digested eel, which dropped with a
thud at our feet and occasionally nearer, suggesting the advisability of
carrying an umbrella. The vegetation beneath the well-populated trees
was as white as though it had been liberally daubed with whitewash, and
the ground was strewn with blue-green eggshells neatly broken in two
across the middle; fish, principally eels, in various stages of
digestion and decay; and the bodies of young birds who had met with an
untimely death by falling from above. It was not altogether a savory
place!

[Illustration: 40. Black-crowned Night Herons feeding. Telephoto, × 2 at
a distance of about one hundred and fifty feet.]

Seating ourselves at the base of an unoccupied tree, we had not long to
wait before the normal life of the rookery was resumed. The young, who
while we were observed had been silent, now began to utter a singular,
froglike _kik-kik-kik_ in chorus, and the old birds one by one returned.
When food was brought an increased outcry was heard from the expectant
youngsters about to be fed. At intervals a resounding _thump_ announced
the fall of some too eager bird, but, in the cases which we
investigated, the Heron, if fairly well grown, seemed to be little the
worse for his tumble of from fifty to seventy feet, and with lowered
head ran through the undergrowth with surprising quickness. With those
which were younger, however, the mortality had evidently been great,
and, seeing the dozens of dead birds on the ground beneath the nest
trees from which they had fallen, one questioned whether this habit of
nesting high in trees had not, for protective reasons, been recently
acquired by a species the young of which would seem much more at home
nearer the ground.

[Illustration: 41. Young Night Herons in nest. Same as No. 42.]

It was with a delightful sense of companionship with the birds that I
observed them going and coming, feeding their young, or resting after
the night’s labors, wholly undisturbed by my presence. Almost I seemed
to be a guest of the rookery, and I longed for power to interpret the
notes and actions of the birds so abundant about me.

[Illustration: 42. Young Night Herons leaving nest. Nesting tree shown
in No. 38.]

So I should like to have passed the day with them, becoming for the time
being a Heron myself; but the desire to picture the birds was stronger
than the wish to be a Heron, and the situation was considered from the
standpoint of the bird photographer.

The rookery proved to be a difficult subject. No single view would
convey an adequate idea of its appearance, and I therefore selected
representative tree tops and photographed their nests and young birds. A
visit to a neighboring pond resulted in securing, with the aid of a
telephoto, a picture^{40} of two adult birds feeding well out of
gunshot, and with the assistance of climbers I reached the upper
branches of a tree some seventy feet in height containing five nests
whose contents ranged from eggs to nearly grown young. With the
ball-and-socket clamp the camera was fastened to favoring limbs, and
after three hours’ work several satisfactory pictures of young in the
nest and on the adjoining branches were secured.^{41–43} Although well
able to defend themselves, the young assumed no such threatening
attitudes as the American Bittern strikes when alarmed, from which
perhaps we may argue that they are happily ignorant of the dangers which
beset their ground-nesting relative.

[Illustration: 43. Young Night Herons on branches near nest, seventy
feet from the ground.]

As the sun crept upward and the last fishers returned, the calls of both
old and young birds were heard less and less often, and by ten o’clock
night had fallen on the rookery and the birds were all resting quietly.
Four o’clock in the afternoon was evidently early morning, and at this
hour the birds first began to leave the rookery for their fishing
grounds. Some went toward the north, others to the south, east or west;
each bird no doubt having clearly in mind some favorite shore, perhaps a
dozen miles away, where he before had had good luck a-fishing; and of
all the varied phases of rookery life the thought of this regular
nightly expedition of hundreds of winged fishers, is to me the most
attractive.


Our largest Heron as well as our largest bird is the Great Blue. “Crane”
he is popularly called; but, aside from other differences, the bird’s
habit of folding its neck back on its shoulders, when on the wing, will
distinguish it from true Cranes, who fly with neck extended to the
utmost.

The Great Blue Heron is not edible, but its size makes it a desirable
prize to most gunners and it is considered an especially fit mark for a
rifle. The temptation is strong to condemn as an outlaw the man who
kills one of these noble birds for what he terms sport, or perhaps for
the purpose of what he would call having it “set up.” He, however, is
acting according to his light, which is quite as bright as that which
shines for most of his neighbors. The Heron is exceedingly wild, and its
capture is eloquent evidence of the hunter’s prowess, while his desire
to have its stuffed skin adorn his home is, from his point of view,
positively commendable. That the bird is infinitely more valuable alive
than dead, that its presence adds an element to the landscape more
pleasing to some than could be imparted by any work of man, and that in
depriving others of the privilege of observing its singularly stately
grace of pose and motion he is selfish beyond expression, does not even
vaguely occur to this so-called “sportsman,” who belongs in the class to
whom a majestic cliff is a quarry, a noble tree, lumber. Until he has
been educated to properly value the beauties of Nature, or at least
realize the rights of others in them, he must be restrained by law, to
the force of which even he is not blind.

Only the Great Blue Heron’s extreme wariness and habit of frequenting
shores and marshes where it can command an extended view of its
surroundings has preserved it from extinction; but when nesting it is
compelled to visit woodlands where its human enemies have better
opportunities to approach it, and its only chance for safety during the
breeding season is to select a retreat remote from the home of man. For
this reason Great Blue Heron rookeries are exceedingly uncommon in more
settled parts of the bird’s range, and north of Florida I have seen
their nests in only one locality.

It was the week after my visit to the Night Herons that, in northern
Cayuga County, New York, I was led by a local ornithologist through one
of the heaviest pieces of timber I have ever seen north of a primeval
tropical forest, in search of a Great Blue Heron rookery which he knew
to exist, and only my confidence in his woodsmanship gave me courage to
follow him over fallen trees and through the season’s dense undergrowth,
from which our passage raised such a host of mosquitoes that every step
was a battle. If the vicious little insects had lived only to protect
the Herons, they could not have disputed our progress more valiantly,
and on reaching the birds’ stronghold, where the comparative absence of
undergrowth deprived our winged foes of shelter, I congratulated myself
on what, for the moment, seemed to be no insignificant feat.

The eleven nests which my guide had seen on a previous occasion were
found occupying their former positions, at least one hundred feet from
the ground in dead trees, one of which held five of the eleven. During
the many years which the birds have nested in the place their number has
not varied, and one wonders what becomes of the from thirty to forty
young who doubtless each year leave the parental trees. No other Herons
of this species are known to nest in the vicinity, and it is not
probable that the progeny of each year would seek a nesting site in some
far distant rookery; consequently, as an alternative explanation, we can
only suppose that the yearly product of the rookery balances its losses
by death.

The young birds were now nearly half grown, but, unlike the Night
Herons, they did not venture outside their nests, from which they
uttered harsh croaks in evident supplication to their parents for food.
The sight of the trees in which the nests were placed effectually
controlled whatever ambitions I had entertained toward camera studies at
short range, and I contented myself by making telephotos from the
ground, in one of which an adult bird and two nests, each with a young
bird appearing above its edge, may be seen.^{44}

Time was lacking in which to observe these birds, and the value of my
visit to their retreat is not to be expressed in words. The wildness of
their home seemed in perfect accord with their nature, and their
apparent safety from intrusion brought a sense of satisfaction which
colors my memory of the whole experience.

[Illustration: 44. Looking upward from ground to nests and young and
adult bird of Great Blue Heron at a height of over one hundred feet.
Telephoto.]




                          WHERE SWALLOWS ROOST


Contributing little to the material wealth of the nation, the Hackensack
marshes of northern New Jersey are usually regarded as “waste land.” By
the farmer they are termed “salt medders,” and their waving grasses are
of value to him only as “bedding” for cattle. In winter the muskrat
hunter reaps a harvest of pelts there. The down of the “cat-tails” is
gathered for cushion stuffing, and the bladed leaves for chair bottoms.
To the gunner they are the resort of Ducks, Snipe, Rail, and Reedbirds,
which each year visit them in decreasing numbers; while to the thousands
who daily pass them on the encircling railroads they are barren and
uninteresting. But if beauty is a sufficient cause for being, then these
marshes may claim a right to existence.

In preglacial times this region was probably forested, but now the
forest is buried beneath the drift of the glacier which deposited
fragments of Palisade and Orange Mountain trap rock on Staten Island.
During the depression of the land which occurred as the ice gradually
receded, the waters of the sea doubtless passed up here and the meadow
was a larger “Newark Bay.” Then commenced their slow filling up by the
silt brought down by the Hackensack River. The river has preserved a
right of way, but the bay has given place to a sea of reeds and grasses.

[Illustration: 45. Hackensack marshes in August.]

On a bright August morning I mount a spur of trap rock which reaches out
from the western base of the Palisades, and from this elevation have an
uninterrupted view over the meadows. The cool, invigorating air
foretells the approach of autumn; it is brilliantly clear. The Orange
hills stand out with the distinctness of Western mountains. The sun is
at my back, and the light shows the meadows to the best advantage. At
this distance I get the effect of only the masses of color; tracts of
yellowish green meadow grass tinged with copper, and in places thickly
sprinkled with the white flowers of the water hemlock and water parsnip;
streaks of light green wild rice, and sharply defined areas of dark
green cat-tail flags. The grass grows on the drier land, the wild rice
in the small sloughs and creeks which are bordered by the flags. In the
spring the wind blows the pollen from the cat-tail blossoms, and a
shifting greenish vapor floats over the marsh; in the autumn a heavy
westerly wind raises the seed-bearing down high in the air, carries it
over the Palisades, across the Hudson, and it descends like a fall of
fleecy snow on wondering New York.

The marsh is a vast arena inclosed by the Palisades and Passaic hills;
it is a great plain, with blue stretches of the winding river appearing
here and there, and the haystacks are the huts of aborigines. I half
close my eyes, and it is a copper-yellow sea. The grasses roll in
undulating waves, capped by a white crest of parsnip and hemlock
blossoms; the dark irregular patches of flags are the shadows of clouds,
the light streaks of wild rice are shoals, a hovering Marsh Hawk is a
Gull. A stately white-winged schooner^{45} comes up the river; her hull
is hidden by the meadow grasses; she is sailing through the sea of my
fancy.

This is an impressionist’s view of the meadows. Now let us leave our
rocky lookout and examine them more in detail. The meadow we are leaving
is a meadow of all summer; the one we are approaching is a meadow clad
in all the glory of its August flowers. One might think Nature was
holding a flower show here, so gorgeous is the display. The railway
track at the edge of the marsh is apparently an endless aisle bordered
by a rich exhibit of flowers. Clusters of thoroughwort and purple
loose-strife grow so abundantly they give color to the foreground,
through which wild sunflowers make streaks of gold. There are solid beds
of purple asters on the drier land, and delicate snow-white saggitarias
in the sloughs. Jewel flowers sparkle through the flags, and convolvulus
hangs from the reeds, its own foliage scarce showing, or, growing with
the fragrant climbing hempweed, it forms banks of dense vegetation. The
scarlet lobelia darts upward like a tongue of flame, startling in its
intense brilliancy. There are burnet, vervain, gerardia, and running
groundnut. But it is the marsh^{46} mallow which, more than any other
flower, gives beauty to the meadow. It grows here with wasteful
luxuriance, and the dark masses of flags serve as a frame for this
floral picture. Out in the marsh it grows in equal profusion; the meadow
is hung with small pink lanterns, as if for a _fête_. A single flower of
the marsh mallow commands the attention of the most unobservant, and
when growing in abundance it excites enthusiastic admiration.

[Illustration: 46. Marsh mallows.]

Nor is the animal life of the marsh less interesting than its flora.
Meadow mice nest beneath the haycocks. Were it not for the minks and
Hawks which prey on them, they might become a scourge throughout the
surrounding country. Muskrats are living in peaceful security in their
snug summer homes, hollowed from the banks of the streams. They are the
true villagers here, and pass the winter in icy huts, like Eskimos. Out
in the grasses Short-eared Owls are hiding. Their day begins when the
sun disappears behind the Orange hills; then one may hear the “quawk” of
the Night Heron. Red-winged Blackbirds nest here, and in the autumn they
gather in great flocks and feed on the wild rice.

[Illustration: 47. Wild rice.]

Long-billed Marsh Wrens—small, nervous, excitable bits of feathered
life—are abundant in the flags, and to them they attach their large
woven nests. Except for a harsh, scolding note they are silent now, but
earlier in the year the marsh is musical with their rippling songs. The
fervor of the love season overcomes their fondness for the dark recesses
of the flags, and, singing, they rise into the air as if driven upward
by the mine of melody which explodes within them.

Swamp Sparrows are common, and their clear trill is one of the few
August songs. Bobolinks, traveling in disguise and under the assumed
name of “Reedbird,” pause here to feed on the ripening wild rice.^{47}
Some of them have not yet completed their change of costume and appear
in a spotted suit of black and yellow. Occasionally one hears a
suppressed burst of the “mad music” of June, but their common note is a
metallic _chink_. At night this note is heard from high in the air, as
the birds continue their journey to the cultivated rice fields of South
Carolina and Georgia, there to remain until September or October, when
they leave for their winter home south of the Amazon.

The Sora Rails, beloved of sportsmen and epicures, are also attracted to
the marshes by the wild rice. On their arrival in early August they are
indeed “as thin as a rail,” but an abundance of food soon rounds their
bodies into comparative plumpness. The 1st of September is a black day
in their calendar. Then they are outlawed, a price is set on their
bodies, and at high tide each day during this sad month one sees
numerous puffs of smoke arise from the tall grasses and dull reports
come booming over the marsh with fateful frequency.

But the characteristic birds of the marshes at this season are Swallows.
They outnumber many times all the rest of the marsh birds together—in
fact, are present in such myriads that their gatherings are one of the
most interesting and impressive phenomena of the bird life of this
region.

Five species are represented. Named in the order of their abundance they
are the Tree, Bank, Barn, Eave, and Rough-winged Swallows. The last are
comparatively rare, while the Tree Swallows are so in excess of all the
species named that the following remarks relate largely to them alone.

Although Tree or White-breasted Swallows nest locally throughout North
America, from the tableland of Mexico to Labrador and Alaska, there are
but few instances of their breeding in the lower Hudson River valley,
where they appear only as migrants or transient visitants. They arrive
from the south early in April, and their northward migration is not
concluded until about June 1st. During June they are rarely seen, but
between the 1st and the 5th of July they begin their journey to their
winter homes—a movement which inaugurates the fall migration.

This stage of their journey takes them only to certain marshes, which
become stations on their line of travel where countless numbers of their
kind, impelled by the flocking impulse, gather to roost in the reeds.
Their numbers increase steadily through July and August, the maximum of
abundance being reached about September 1st; then they gradually become
less numerous, and by October 10th comparatively few remain, though if
the weather be favorable, they may be observed daily until late in the
month.

Throughout this period—from July to October—the marsh is used only as a
dormitory, the reeds evidently offering suitable perches to these
weak-footed birds, who in the morning radiate throughout the surrounding
country and in the evening return to the marsh to sleep. In the evening
they fly low, and the altitude and time of their flight make them
conspicuous. In the morning they fly high, as though bound to some
distant feeding ground, and at so early an hour that they usually escape
observation. The evening flight, therefore, is generally considered as
truly migratory, when, in fact, the same birds doubtless pass over a
given locality night after night, perhaps for weeks, in returning to
their roosts in the marshes.

[Illustration: 48. “Bird notes”—Tree Swallows.]

These evening flights begin about two hours and a half before sunset,
when the birds, after resting during the late forenoon and early
afternoon, usually on some telegraph wire,^{48} begin to wheel and
circle over the fields in pursuit of their evening meal, when one might
imagine they were resident birds, but observation will show that the
general trend of their movement is toward the roost.

This continues for an hour to an hour and a half, a cloudy evening
hastening their actions, when their flight becomes more direct. Few
birds pause to feed, but hurry on to the roosting places, and as the
light fades the last birds rush through the gloom with arrowy speed and
directness. The birds pass in straggling flocks, and periods of
abundance are succeeded by intervals of scarcity, as though the
individuals which had been associated during the day were journeying
home together.

Thus the Swallow’s evening flight may be observed throughout the region
surrounding the marshes; even in New York city they may be seen feeding
above the houses, and after sunset flocks of swift-flying birds are
often confused by the telegraph wires, which, however, their dexterity
of wing permits them to pass without serious harm.

In the marshes the first birds are seen about two hours before sunset.
Many follow the course of the river, and if one be at its border splash
after splash is heard as the birds dip lightly into the water, followed
by soft fluffs as arising from the stream they shake their plumage. Soon
the air is filled with Swallows, all streaming toward the roost with
increasing swiftness.

Many birds, however, as though waiting for some tardy comrades, rest by
the way, perching on telegraph wires should they cross the marsh, or
when these are wanting, on the tips of the reeds. They invariably face
the wind, and when it is from the west the last rays of the sun striking
their white breasts make them appear like snowy flowers crowning the
reeds. Suddenly, with a rush, they whirl onward to the roost.

Thus far the exact location of this roost has defied my search. I have,
however, roughly defined the bounds of that section of the marsh in
which it is placed by observation stands at which the Swallows flew
north and south respectively, and somewhere between the two I still hope
to discover the Swallows’ sleeping haunts.

The following description of their departure from the marshes in the
morning is abstracted from my journal, under date of August 15, 1886: “A
cool, clear morning, with a light northwesterly wind. I reached the
marshes shortly before five o’clock, when they appeared to be deserted,
not a Swallow being in sight. At two minutes of five the first birds
were observed, then flock after flock they came until at five the air
was filled with hurrying forms, flying at varying altitudes toward the
north.

“Suddenly, from the meadows near me there arose a vast cloud of
Swallows, doubtless birds which had come from farther south in the marsh
before my arrival. Steadily they mounted upward, until having attained a
height where with a strong glass they appeared faint dots against the
sky, they slowly winged their way northward.

“All the time the meadows were alive with birds feeding in every
direction; gradually they passed to the north, when another huge flock
arose from the marsh, and after gaining an immense height disappeared,
this time toward the east.

[Illustration: 49. Tree Swallows in tree.]

“As the sun rose over the Palisades few birds were on the wing, but
great flocks were perched in the reeds on the banks of the creek, and as
in my canoe I drifted slowly up to them, they seemed unmindful of my
presence, when, as though at a signal, they arose as one bird, and after
hovering lightly overhead returned to the reeds.

“The tide was low, and along the shore several Sora Rail were feeding,
and, as carried by the tide I floated noiselessly by, they paused in
their search for food, and with tails upraised regarded me with evident
astonishment. A mink approached the shores of a small inflowing stream,
hesitated, then plunged in, crossed, and disappeared in the tall grasses
on the opposite side. The air was vocal with the calls of Red-winged
Blackbirds, the _chink_ of Bobolinks, and the rattle of Swamp Sparrows.

“On a reed-grown point below was another great army of Swallows. With
surprising regularity a detachment left it every fifteen minutes; thus,
birds left at 6, 6.15, 6.30, and 6.45, when the reeds were deserted. The
departing birds did not arise alone, but the entire flock arose at once,
then divided into two flocks, one of which flew northward while the
other returned to the reeds. Many of the departing birds alighted on the
reeds farther up the creek; their numbers constantly received additions
from the ranks of passing birds, and thus new flocks were formed.

“At eight o’clock the last Swallows had left the reeds in my vicinity,
but birds were constantly passing toward the north, and this straggling
flight continued until nine o’clock, when again the marshes appeared
deserted.”


Subsequent observations have been made largely from a road crossing the
marsh, the telegraph and electric-light wires which border it being the
resting place of vast numbers of Swallows, both at night and in the
morning. Particularly do they throng the wires near the creek, which
flows north and south through the marsh, and which, it is interesting to
observe, forms a natural highway for the Swallows as they go to and from
their roosts.

On the sides of this road are several small maple trees, to which the
Swallows often resort in such numbers that their foliage trembles as
though in a strong breeze, it not being the birds’ object to perch in
the trees, but to flutter among the dew-laden leaves, and apparently
bathe in the moisture they contain, while between the baths they rest on
the smaller terminal twigs, when they are very difficult to
observe.^{49} This habit does not appear to have been previously
recorded, and I am by no means certain that the explanation offered is
the true one.

[Illustration: 50. Tree Swallows on wire and nest hunting about pile.]

Frequently one or more flocks, varying in size from eight or ten to
several hundred birds, may be seen in the road, where I at first
supposed they were “dusting,” but soon noticed that most of the birds
after alighting in the road were motionless. They did not move about as
though searching for food, but occasionally the actions of a pair
enabled one apparently to determine the sex of each individual, and more
often a bird would pick up a bit of dried grass and fly up into the air
with it. Sometimes it was carried fifty yards or more and then dropped;
at others, the birds would carry it to the telegraph wires above, and
drop it after perching a moment. Without exception, all the birds seen
to alight in the road were in the dull, immature plumage of birds of the
year, and in their actions, as Mr. William Brewster has remarked (The
Auk, 1898, p. 194), they evidently gave a premature exhibition of the
procreative and nest-building instincts.^{51}

Additional evidence of the possession of inherited knowledge was
apparently given by many Tree Swallows, who were frequently seen
hovering about a pile standing in the creek.^{50} At first it was
supposed that these birds were feeding on insects which had alighted on
the pile; but the number of birds—often a dozen or more—seen fluttering
about it, and the persistency with which they remained there, forced the
conclusion that in a wholly unreasoning way they were looking for a
nesting site.

Swallows are not known to migrate by night, and, so far as I am aware,
no single Swallow has ever been found among the thousands of
night-flying birds which have perished by striking lighthouses. The
Swallows, therefore, when migrating probably leave the marsh during the
day, but in what manner who can say?

[Illustration: 51. Immature Tree Swallows gathering nesting material.]

Several times when crossing the marshes on the cars I have observed
gatherings of Swallows which made the immense flocks observed daily in
August and September seem little more than a family of birds. They
appeared in the distance like a vast swarm of gnats; it was as though
all the Swallows in the marsh had collected in one great storm of birds.
The significance of this movement I have never had the fortune to
determine, but it seems highly probable that it is connected with the
inauguration of an actual migration toward the birds’ winter quarters.




                        TWO DAYS WITH THE TERNS


Terns are useless for food, and can not therefore be classed as “game
birds.” So far as we know they are of no special economic value.
Consequently, when one protests against their practical annihilation for
millinery purposes, he is not infrequently answered: “Well, what good
are they?” The question exposes so absolute a failure to appreciate the
bird’s exquisite beauty and unexcelled grace—such a discouraging
materialism—that one realizes the hopelessness of replying.

I confess I find it impossible to describe satisfactorily just what the
presence of Terns along our coast means to me. It is not alone their
perfection of color, form, and movement which appeals to one, but also
the sense of companionship they bring; and doubtless this feeling is
emphasized by the impressive loneliness of the sea, which makes anything
alive doubly welcome. And so the coming of a single one of these
beautiful creatures changes the character of the bay or shore. With
unfailing pleasure one watches its marvelously easy flight, its
startling darts for its food of small fish, and when it disappears the
scene loses a grateful element of life.

A milliner’s hunter or fisherman, however, might have made a very
different reply to the unimaginative individual who asked the value of
Terns. The former would have told him that they were worth about ten
cents each for hat trimmings; the latter would have said that their eggs
made excellent omelets; and each has done his best—the one to lay all
Terns on the altar of Fashion, the other to see that none of their eggs
escaped the frying pan.

In the meantime a number of bird lovers have taken up the battle for the
Terns in their few remaining strongholds, and the brief history of Tern
destruction and protection is full of suggestive incidents.

It was about twenty years ago that Terns first found favor in woman’s
eyes, and during the few succeeding years hundreds of thousands of these
birds were killed on the Atlantic coast for milliners. Cobb’s Island, on
the coast of Virginia, is credited with having supplied forty thousand
in a single season, and, as one of the killers recently confessed to me
that he knew of fourteen hundred being killed in a day, the story is
doubtless true. Their delicate white and pearl-gray feathers were, of
course, badly blood-stained; but good and bad, the skins were washed and
then thrown into a barrel of plaster, which was rolled up and down the
beach until the moisture was absorbed from their plumage. A Long Island
taxidermist used a patent churn for this purpose.

The destruction at other favorable points was proportionately great, and
in two or three years one looked in vain for the Terns which had
previously so enlivened our shores.

The protection afforded by an insular existence was now given a
practical and striking illustration. The Terns which nested on the
mainland or nearlying sand bars were soon extirpated, but on certain
less accessible, uninhabited islets, they still survived.

Thus all that were left of countless numbers of these birds which once
inhabited the shores of Long Island were to be found on the Great Gull
Island, while Muskeget and Penikese, off the Massachusetts coast,
contained the only large colonies of Terns from Long Island to Maine.
The existence of the Gull Island colony being threatened by collectors,
the influence of several bird lovers secured the appointment of the
keeper of the lighthouse on the neighboring islet, Little Gull, as a
special game warden to enforce the previously useless laws supposed to
protect the Terns.

The result was both encouraging and instructive. In two years it is
estimated that the colony increased from two thousand to four thousand,
and it was hoped that it might prove a nucleus from which the adjoining
shores would eventually be restocked with Terns. But the Government at
Washington selected Great Gull Island as a desirable point for
fortifications, and before even this suggestion of war the poor Terns
disappeared. For one season the laborers employed by the Government
feasted on Terns’ eggs; then the gradual occupancy of the eighteen acres
composing the islet forced the birds to seek homes elsewhere.

Hence it follows that if one would see Terns in numbers on the middle
Atlantic coast to-day, he must journey to two small islets off
Massachusetts, which thus far have afforded them a refuge. Interesting
it is to recall that on Martha’s Vineyard, lying between the two, are
found the only living representatives of the Heath Hen, or Eastern
Prairie Hen, which was once locally abundant in certain parts of the
Eastern and Middle States.

In 1889 I visited the Terns of Great Gull Island, and a desire to be
again surrounded by these birds, and perhaps secure photographs of them
and their way of living, brought me on July 16, 1899, to Wood’s Holl,
Massachusetts, _en route_ to whichever Tern headquarters it might prove
most convenient to reach.

Quite unexpectedly there proved to be a small colony of Common and
Roseate Terns on three islets, known as the Weepeckets, standing in
Buzzard’s Bay, near the entrance to Wood’s Holl. In all, there were
probably between three and four hundred birds, of which by far the
greater number appeared to be domiciled on the largest of the three
islands. This contains from ten to twelve acres of sand, grown with
beach grass, scrub sumach, bayberries, and a few stunted pines about two
feet in height.

On this apparently uninviting bit of land I passed two delightful days
alone with the Terns. The accompanying photographs tell far more of the
birds than pen can well express, but they convey no suggestion of the
pleasure I experienced in again finding myself among them.

[Illustration: 52. Nesting site, nest, and three eggs of Common Tern. A
nearer view of nest with sitting bird is shown in Nos. 63 and 64.]

The birds were nesting on the upland, on the sloping grass bank, on the
northwest side of the island, and on the rocky beach^{52} at its base.
In the two first-named locations most of the nests were lined with
grasses, but occasionally they consisted of only a slight, bared
depression in the earth; while the eggs along the beach were, as a rule,
deposited on wisps or piles of driftweed. There were perhaps six or
eight Roseate Terns, the others were apparently all Common Terns, but as
I am unfamiliar with the very similar Arctic Tern, it is possible that
this species may have been present.

[Illustration: 53. Tern hovering above nest.]

A Tern colony is in some respects a unit. The alarm of one bird is
shared by all, and before the boat’s keel grated on the sandy beach of
the largest Weepecket, the snowy-breasted birds, which in a group were
resting there, had taken flight, and with their singular call told all
the other Terns on the island of my invasion. At once the birds gathered
and, hanging in a flock overhead, protested most vigorously against my
intrusion with their purring, vibrant _te-a-r-r-r_. This cry never
ceases so long as one remains near their home; it rings in the ears for
days afterward, and one need only to recall it to form a clear mental
picture of a sky full of hovering Terns. Occasionally this monotone was
punctuated by a loud, reedy _cack_ as a Roseate Tern dashed by, or as
some half-distracted bird, whose nest was doubtless near, screaming,
dived close to my head with a sudden, startling swish. It seemed almost
as though the bird would pierce me with its sharply pointed bill; and if
it could have managed to go through the rim of my hat without damage to
either of us, I should have been very glad to have sacrificed that
article of apparel to such an exhibition of bravery.

[Illustration: 54. Nest and eggs of Tern on upland.]

As I advanced I began to discover nests. Some were on the upland, snugly
placed in the grass or near a large stone,^{54} and with pretty
surroundings of yarrow, sumach, or bending grasses; others were on the
little shelves of the steep westerly bank of the islet; and others still
on bits of seaweed among the pebbles and rocks which here formed the
beach.^{55} No attempt was made to take advantage of the concealment
offered by the groups of bowlders scattered along the beach, and beneath
which the birds might have hidden effectively, it being presumably their
object to select a site from which they could readily detect any cause
for alarm. As a rule, their nests contained one or two eggs, only a
single nest being seen with three.

Although by this time birds of the year should have been on the wing,
few young of any age were seen—a condition which was doubtless explained
by the fact that the birds, thus far, had been too much occupied
furnishing the members of boating parties with souvenirs of their day’s
outing, to give attention to their own household affairs.

[Illustration: 55. Tern’s nest and eggs in drift _débris_.]

However, the few young that were seen gave a most interesting exhibition
of their instinctive appreciation of the value of both their protective
colors and the power of their legs. As long as they believed themselves
unobserved they trusted in the former; but the moment they became
convinced that a further attempt at concealment was useless, they
transferred their faith to their pedal extremities, on which they
pattered off as far and as fast as their strength permitted. This
observation was verified later on Penikese,^{57} where young were
numerous, and the habit was well shown by the young bird figured.^{56}
He was discovered squatting among the rocks, where he remained,
practically at my feet, while I set up my tripod and deliberately made
his picture—during which operation so inconspicuous was he that I
invariably had to hunt for him each time I removed my eyes from the
exact spot in which he was crouching. Wishing now to show him to better
advantage, he was picked up and placed on a wisp of driftweed. At once
his manner changed. My touch had broken the spell; what could be felt
could be seen, and, whereas before he had been as motionless as the
pebbles about him,^{57} his one object now was to get out of sight as
speedily as possible. Consequently, time after time, the moment I took
my hand from him he was off, and it was only by squeezing the bulb the
moment he was released that I succeeded finally in securing his picture
on the seaweed.

[Illustration: 56. Young Tern hiding on rocky beach.]

Young Terns, apparently, spend at least two days in the nest, during
which time they are brooded by the parents; then they wander about
within a limited space seeking the shade of a stone or bit of driftwood,
always of course under the parental care. At Penikese, young of the year
were seen on the wing, and the series of pictures shown represents the
stages of growth from the egg to the age at which the bird takes flight.

[Illustration: 57. Young Tern hiding in the grass.]

Both the nature of the bird’s haunts and the manner in which the members
of a colony spread an alarm make it practically impossible to surprise a
Tern upon its nest. But by lying prone upon the ground one attracts far
less attention than when standing. The hovering flock of birds gradually
disperses, and those which are incubating soon return to the vicinity of
their nests, hanging over them and dropping nearer and nearer,^{53}
until at the end of fifteen or twenty minutes they swoop down beside
them, raise their wings high over their backs, then fold them gently and
settle upon their eggs.^{58}

On a second visit to the island a bit of old sail was brought, which I
drew over me when lying on the ground—a plan resulting in my practical
disappearance, as far as the Terns were concerned.

[Illustration: 58. Tern alighting on nest. Same nest as Nos. 60–62.]

Obviously the only manner in which photographs of the Terns on their
nests could be secured was to conceal one’s camera near the nest and
retire, with a tube or thread, to a distance of a hundred feet or more.
A nest was therefore selected about halfway up the bank on the westerly
side of the island, the camera staked to the ground with long iron pins,
and completely covered with the dried seaweed abundant on the beach
below. I then attached a black linen thread to the shutter and retired
about one hundred feet to the top of the bank. Almost as soon as I lay
down the tumult overhead ceased, the birds scattered, and the rasping
_te-a-r-r-r_ note of alarm was replaced by a variety of calls, showing
these birds to be possessed of an unexpectedly extended vocabulary. One
call was a chirp not unlike the White-throated Sparrow’s, a second might
be written _tue, tue, tue_, and was uttered when one bird was in pursuit
of another.

[Illustration: 59. Tern on hillside nest.]

The seaweed not only concealed the camera perfectly, but was so abundant
near the bird’s nest that the appearance of a fresh mound apparently did
not even excite the bird’s curiosity, and within twenty minutes it had
returned to its eggs. It happened, however, that the nature of the site
chosen induced the bird to face the water, and as the camera was above,
and consequently behind it, the view presented did not show it to
advantage, but after several unsuccessful trials the attempt to secure a
more flattering view was abandoned.^{59}

A bird was now chosen who was incubating two eggs placed in a depression
in a little mound of seaweed on the beach. On this occasion the camera
was placed on a driftwood box, weighted with stones, and completely
covered with seaweed. These eggs were hatching, and the bird soon
returned to them; but before it had come back, another bird in darting
by had flown into the thread, springing the shutter, and making the
picture^{60} of the nest and eggs here given quite as effectively as
many a similarly inexperienced photographer could have done.

[Illustration: 60. Tern’s nest and hatching eggs in seaweed.]

The day but one following—July 20th—these eggshells had disappeared, and
the nest was occupied by two young birds with just enough strength to
crawl toward the parent bird when it appeared with food.^{61} And when
their appetites were appeased the parent bird took her place on the nest
and brooded them with the care of an anxious hen.^{62}

A few yards from this new family were two young who could not have been
over four days old, but who had left the nest for the shade of a piece
of driftwood. Here they were fed by two birds—doubtless both
parents—whom they seemed to recognize among the other Terns hovering
above them. They were apparently fed on small fish, which the parent
bird placed in their open mouths while standing just within reaching
distance. None of the several pictures of these birds were wholly
successful, but in all of them the old birds seem to be much more
graceful in form than the parent of the newly hatched young in the
seaweed.

[Illustration: 61. Tern about to feed young. Same nest as No. 60.]

A less experienced Tern had placed its nest of a few bits of seaweed
among the pebbles, almost within reach of the waves. This bird was
singularly restless, turning its head from side to side so constantly
that its picture was secured only by pulling the long thread the moment
after the bird moved.^{63, 64} Like all the birds photographed on the
nest, it showed no alarm at the click of the shutter as the exposure was
made. This surprised me not a little. The camera was usually about three
feet from the bird, the exposure was necessarily rapid (¹⁄₂₅ second and
stop 8), the snap of the old-style “Henry Clay,” used on the first day,
or even of the less loud Iris diaphragm, could be plainly heard at a
distance of several yards, and its failure to startle these nervous,
easily frightened birds makes one suspect that their hearing is
deficient.

[Illustration: 62. Tern brooding young. Same nest as No. 60.]

The nests of the Terns that chose the upland for a home were often
picturesquely surrounded by stunted sumach or blooming yarrow, but the
birds here were far less easy to photograph because of the difficulty of
thoroughly concealing one’s camera. The owner of an especially pleasing
nesting site kept me beneath my bit of sail for somewhat over two hours,
while she—if it was she—hung in the air just over her eggs, on which I
momentarily expected to see her settle.^{65}

[Illustration: 63. Tern on nest. Site shown in No. 52.]

[Illustration: 64. Tern on nest. Site shown in No. 52.]

In the meantime the tide had arisen and floated my boat, which was
carried by the wind across to Naushon, and I might have passed the night
with the Terns, had not the Fish Commissioner’s launch taken me off in
the afternoon.

It would not have been an unwelcome experience. There was an abundance
of dry seaweed for a couch—a nest, I had almost said—and some cavernlike
openings beneath the piles of great bowlders had a very snug and cozy
look, which probably would have disappeared shortly after sunset.

[Illustration: 65. Tern on upland nest.]

Two days later I went to Penikese, and my dominant thought on recalling
the experience is an intense desire to repeat it. Penikese, or at least
its northern part, is an island of Terns. On the rocky beach, from which
the sides of the bank lead to the rolling upland above, whichever way I
looked was a Tern’s nest with its two, or, rarely, three eggs. Less
frequently young Terns were seen, varying in age from those just
emerging from the shell to others almost ready to fly, while overhead
was a countless multitude of hovering, darting Terns, whose voices
united in one continuous, grating _te-a-r-r-r_ made the air tremble.
There was an occasional vibrant cack from a Roseate, but not more than a
dozen birds of this species were heard. Asked to estimate the number of
birds present I should have said ten thousand, though I should not have
been surprised to learn that there were twenty thousand. However, Mr.
George H. Mackay, of Nantucket, who may be regarded as a Tern
specialist, placed the number of Terns on Penikese, in 1896, at “six or
seven thousand,” and with the assistance of Mr. R. H. Howe, Jr., counted
1,416 nests containing 2,055 eggs (Auk, xiv, 1897, p. 283).

[Illustration: 66. Young Terns; first stage, about four days old.]

A small flock of sheep shared this part of the island with the Terns,
and their presence accounted for the short grass which made the upland
resemble a closely cut lawn, and permitted one readily to see the Tern’s
eggs when several yards distant. For the same reason the birds could be
seen even more plainly, and my most pleasing memory of Penikese is the
greensward dotted with the white forms of breeding birds, who had
returned to their nests after I had partially concealed myself behind a
bowlder.

[Illustration: 67. Young Tern, about a week old.]

[Illustration: 68. Young Tern; third stage, second plumage appearing.]

In or near the nests many dead young birds were seen. The cause of their
death was not evident, unless it may be attributed to the unguarded
footsteps of the grazing sheep. If this be true, the parent birds seemed
in no way to resent the sheep’s carelessness, but accepted their
presence without protest; one bird even exhibited a sign of good
fellowship by perching on a sheep’s back, and the length of time it
remained there showed that it was by no means an unwelcome visitor.

[Illustration: 69. Young Tern, fourth stage.]

My time on Penikese was too short to more than show what an admirable
opportunity is here offered the ornithologist who desires to make a
close study of the home life and social relations of Terns. The present
owners of the island, the Messrs. Homer, of New Bedford, take a greatly
to be commended interest in the welfare of their feathered tenants, and,
through posters and the agency of their representative on the island,
aim to afford the birds a much-needed protection.

What an enviable possession! What a privilege to be able to give a
refuge to so large a proportion of the remaining survivors of these
persecuted birds!

[Illustration: 70. Young Tern, stage before flight.]

With no desire to underrate the services to the Commonwealth of these
gentlemen, I still could wish the Terns more stable protectors. Not the
State, whose record as a Tern protector does not invite our confidence,
but a society of bird lovers—the Nuttall Club of Cambridge, or the
Audubon Society of Massachusetts. Would it not be a fitting act for one
of these organizations to ask from woman, the Tern’s chief enemy,
contributions to a fund for the purchase of an asylum for her victims.
Can no one so plead the Terns’ cause that many a feather-bedecked woman
will be glad to send her conscience money to aid in securing their
protection?

But in addition to being a home of the birds, Penikese has other claims
upon Nature lovers. Here Agassiz, through the medium of his summer
school, brought his pupils into direct contact with Nature, and the
scene of his labors is fraught with associations to every one familiar
with the inspiring history of his life. Let us keep this island sacred
to his memory and the Terns.




               THE BIRD ROCKS OF THE GULF OF ST. LAWRENCE


                         PERCÉ AND BONAVENTURE

The naturalist realizes with the utmost sadness that the encroachments
of civilization are rapidly changing the conditions of animal life on
this small sphere of ours, and that soon he may find Nature primeval
only in its more remote or inaccessible parts.

Forest life vanishes with the demand for timber, which sends the axeman
in advance of the agriculturist. The tillable plains, prairies, and
bottom lands are transformed by the plow. The sandy beaches suffer with
an eruption of summer hotels and cottages, and within the confines of
civilization only such useless portions of the earth’s surface as the
arid deserts and barren mountain tops, marshy wastes and rocky or
far-distant islets, have been unaltered by man.

It is especially to the preserving influences of island life that we owe
the continued survival of many animals which have greatly decreased or
become exterminated on the mainland, as has been remarked of the Terns
and Heath Hen—two illustrations among hundreds that might be given.
Certain animals, therefore, are not only more abundant on islands, but,
if their home be not shared by man, they exhibit a tameness surprising
to one who has known only the timid, man-fearing creatures of the
mainland.

On several uninhabited West Indian islets the sailors of Columbus killed
Pigeons and other birds with sticks, or caught them in their hands.
Darwin writes of the “extreme tameness” of the birds of the Galapagos,
and tells of pushing a Hawk off its perch with the muzzle of his gun.
Moseley, on Inaccessible and Kerguelen Islands, had similar experiences.

The Albatrosses of the Laysan Islands show far less fear of man than do
barnyard fowls—in short, if it were necessary, hundreds of instances
might be cited to show that distrust of man is an acquired and not a
natural trait of animals.

Having these facts in mind, therefore, I bethought me of some island or
islands which were neither at the antipodes nor either pole, and where
birds were not only abundant, but in such happy ignorance of man that no
difficulty would be experienced in securing their photographs. These
would not only have a present interest and value, but would also form
permanent records of conditions already threatened by the destructive
tendencies of the age.

After carefully considering all the more easily reached islets of the
Atlantic and Pacific coasts, my choice fell on certain of the bird rocks
of the Gulf of St. Lawrence. The name bird rock is used in both a
general and a special sense. In the former it may be applied to many of
the rocky islets of the gulf, in the latter it relates exclusively to
_the_ Bird Rocks at the northeastern end of the Magdalen group.

Percé Rock, Bonaventure Island, the Magdalens, and the Bird Rocks
themselves seemed to offer the best opportunities to the bird
photographer, and, accompanied by my best assistant, I departed for the
first named on July 2, 1898.

Percé Rock^{71} (so named because its base has been pierced by the
action of the waves) lies about three hundred feet off the land at the
town of Percé, on the west side of the Gulf of St. Lawrence.

A semiweekly steamer from Dalhousie, near the head of Bay of Chaleur,
furnishes the regular means of communication with Percé, and the town at
once possesses a distinction over any place on the line of a railway.
For, aside from every other reason, there is a pervasiveness about the
smoke of a railway locomotive which contaminates the atmosphere and robs
local influences of half their potency. Doubtless there are persons who
would be glad to change the aroma of Percé’s fishyards for the stifling
air of a railway tunnel, but give me the pungent odor of Percé’s drying
cod unadulterated.

Even the steamer does not touch Percé, and we were landed by a boat in a
sea just rough enough to make the experience interesting. At the pier no
hotel agent greeted us, for Percé possesses neither hotel nor boarding
house, and summer resorters are almost unknown. This was a delightful
discovery. We had come in search of an isolated colony of birds, and we
found also an isolated colony of man—quaint fisher folk whose _patois_
French had a gratefully foreign sound.

[Illustration: 71. Percé Rock from the north.]

Lodgings were secured at the home of a retired fisherman, and
immediately we sallied forth to pay tribute to the Rock from the nearest
point on the mainland. Its size and precipitousness were both surprising
and impressive. Seen from the land it seemed like the hull of some great
ship which had gone ashore here in the age of the Titans. Nearly three
hundred feet high at the bow, with a beam of about one hundred, and a
length over all of twelve hundred feet, it was not likely to be boarded
by the most nimble seaman.

Doubtless an expert climber, properly equipped with ropes and
assistants, might reach the summit; but as the last man to make the
attempt, some fifty years ago, lost his life, the town authorities have
imposed a fine of five pounds on any one who shall be found guilty of
scaling or trying to scale the Rock, and the law, incidentally, protects
the birds as well as man.

The top of the Rock is occupied by a colony of probably between two and
three thousand Herring Gulls and Double-crested Cormorants. The
guidebooks array these birds in picturesque cohorts which make the
Cormorants’ part of the Rock black, the Gulls’ white; and they further
state that should a black bird chance to trespass on the Gulls’
territory, he is immediately surrounded by a consuming white cloud, and
_vice versa_. But be it said to the disgrace of man and the credit of
birds, that the Cormorants and Gulls nest side by side apparently on
terms of the greatest amity.

At this point it should be stated that my photographic outfit consisted
of an ancient but useful 4 × 5 “Waterbury Detective,” containing a wide
angle, short-focus lens, and designed for general handwork; a 4 × 5
long-focus “Premo” with a 6½-inch trade lens and Unicum shutter, for use
from a tripod or in photographing nests, landscapes, etc., and a 5 × 7
twin lens with a 10-inch lens and Prosch shutter, a camera made
especially for animal photography, but which was undesirably bulky.

None of these was of service in photographing the inhabitants of Percé
Rock from the land, nor could a telephoto be used to advantage, the Rock
being so much higher than the adjoining mainland. From a boat near the
base of the southeast side of the Rock a better opportunity is afforded
for photographing its summit, and the best of several attempts made at
this point is here presented.^{72} Examined under a glass it conveys
some idea of the number of birds occupying the top of the Rock; and
while one regrets that the camera does so little justice to the subject,
one can not but rejoice that here, at least, is one place to which
probably for all time birds may return each year and rear their young in
perfect security.

In crevices in the face of the Rock numbers of Guillemots nest, and
directly above the pierced opening dwell a colony of about thirty
Kittiwakes, who have apparently taken up their residence in the Rock
within comparatively recent years, since none were here in 1881 when Mr.
William Brewster visited Percé.

[Illustration: 72. Percé Rock from southeast end. The Cormorants and
Gulls may be dimly seen on the summit of the Rock.]

Wherever one be about Percé, in the town or out, the Rock is the
prominent feature of the coast line. It dominates its surroundings as a
snowcapped mountain rules its dependent ranges. To the bird lover it
possesses a double fascination, and one is constantly attracted by the
ceaseless cries of the throng of hovering birds, who in some
indescribable way seem to invest their home with a sense of the charm,
the freedom, the wildness of a sea-bird’s life. It is a true _bird_
rock; man has no part in it.

At sunset this bond between the Rock and its inhabitants seemed
especially strong and real. Through a notch in the western hills the
last rays of the sun fell squarely upon the Rock, illuminating it and
the ever-present soaring Gulls after the land and the sea were in
shadow. Slowly the light left the Rock, until it, too, was of the same
gray-blue as its surroundings; then, like the beams from a searchlight,
it struck the circling mass of Gulls, making them seem a flurry of
snowflakes descending into the gloom below.

The pilgrim to Percé Rock will find that the object of his journey not
only exceeds in grandeur his brightest imagination of it, but he will be
further rewarded by discovering Percé itself and the country round about
to be of exceptional interest and beauty. It was the season of
codfishing, and every morning a fleet of a hundred or more stanch little
boats, each with two men, put out into the bay for a day’s fishing.
Their return, late in the afternoon, was an eventful part of the day.
Then the beach was the center of attraction as boat after boat came in,
the men depositing their catch on the sands, then setting up their
tables and “splitting” the cod with surprising dexterity.^{73}

[Illustration: 73. Splitting cod on Percé beach. Percé Rock in the
distance.]

This industry resulted in a singular habit among the Herring Gulls,
which, when first seen, I was at a loss to explain. In a cultivated
hillside bordering the town a flock of about fifty Gulls was observed
eagerly devouring some food, which was apparently abundant.
“Grasshoppers,” I thought, but on investigation the grasshoppers proved
to be entrails, heads, vertebræ, etc., of codfish, which had been strewn
over the fields as fertilizer. The Gulls took wing at my approach, and
perched in long rows on the fences; a curious sight, of which I tried,
but failed, to secure a picture.

It was through these fields, and along the crests of the red sandstone
cliffs northwest of the town, that my walks oftenest led me. A few
Herring Gulls nested on the ledges, and Mr. Kearton might have succeeded
in securing the photographs of them. But I freely confess to an absence
of both taste and talent as a cliffman, and was quite content, under the
circumstances, to view the birds from above. They, however, had no
scruples about approaching me, and uttering a threatening _ka-ka-ka_,
which suggested the voice of a gigantic katydid, circled about my head
or, with an alarming _swish_, swooped down so near me that I invariably
was surprised into “ducking.” Here also were croaking Ravens, who seemed
by no means shy, and on nearly every fence post was a Savanna Sparrow,
by all odds the most abundant land bird observed.

[Illustration: 74. Young Savanna Sparrow.]

Turning from the cliffs, one soon reached the spruce and balsam forests,
with their twittering Juncos, sweet-voiced White-throated Sparrows, Pine
Finches, and numerous Warblers, and following the gently ascending lanes
and pathways leading through the fragrant woods, arrived at the
shrine-crowned summit of Mount St. Anne, twelve hundred feet above the
gulf.

It is a superb view of boundless sea and forest which greets one from
this vantage point—a striking combination of the charms of land and
water. To the south, the Bay Chaleur with its broken coast line; to the
west, a grand panorama of mountain and valley, all densely wooded—the
home of bear, and deer, and caribou; to the north, a foreground of red
cliffs and blue water, and, in the distance, Gaspé; to the east, the
apparently limitless gulf and, seemingly beneath one, Bonaventure
Island, Percé, and the Rock.

It was a view to remember; one, I trust, I may be privileged to behold
again. I longed for time to explore the surrounding woods, but
Bonaventure with its Gannets wielded a stronger fascination, and two
days after our arrival we chartered a cod boat, with its crew, for the
voyage to the Gannet rookeries on the eastern side of Bonaventure,
distant about four miles.

The evident great strength of our craft in proportion to its size made
it seem like a stunted vessel, and her captain and the crew, of one man,
seemed built on the same lines. During the winter they were lumbermen in
the region north of Ottawa, in the summer codfishers. It is doubtful if
they could have selected occupations requiring greater endurance. They
seemed as tough as rawhide, and as rough as pirates.

My good assistant they invariably spoke of as “the woman,” but both
proved true men at heart, and as solicitous for our welfare as though
their own lives of exposure had not trained them to laugh at hardship.

I may seem to give undue attention to the boatmen of a day; but there
are days and days in our lives, and with neither my companion nor myself
will time dim the memory of the day off Bonaventure.

There had been a heavy blow from the east the night before, the tide was
ebbing, and ere we had passed the Rock, and while still under the lee of
Bonaventure, our boat began to toss in a very disquieting manner. As we
rounded the southwest end of Bonaventure we were more exposed to the
action of the waves, but my physical balance was sustained by the
anticipation of seeing “two, tree million of bird,” which the men
declared would soon be visible on the cliffs.

The farther we advanced the less shelter had we from the land, and
finally, passing the northwest end of the island, we were at the mercy
of the full force of a long rolling sea, which made it impossible to
stand, or even sit, without clinging to one’s surroundings. At this
point, I believe, the promise of the most wonderful sight in the bird
world would not have induced me to continue on our course another
minute; but fortunately no promise was required, the sight itself
existed, and under its inspiration I battled with weak nature for the
next half hour with a courage born of enthusiasm and a desire to picture
the wonders of the scene before me.

[Illustration: 75. The Gannet cliffs of Bonaventure.]

On the ledges of the red sandstone cliffs, which rose sheer three
hundred feet above the waves at their base, was row after row of
snow-white Gannets on their nests.^{75} Their number was incredible, and
as we coasted slowly onward, the red walls above us were streaked with
white as far as one could see in either direction, and the hoarse cries
of the birds rose in chorus above the sound of the beating waves. It was
a wild picture, which the majesty of the cliffs and the grandeur of the
sea rendered exceedingly impressive.

How I longed for the internal composure of my boatmen! One moment I
bowed to the waves, the next propped myself against the mast and, held
by the captain, attempted to use the twin-lens camera. Water, cliff, and
sky danced across the ground glass in bewildering succession, as, like a
wing-shot, I squeezed my pneumatic bulb and snapped at the jumping sky
line.

One or two exposures were followed by collapse, and in time by partial
recuperation, which permitted fresh efforts. In the picture presented
the cliff is well shown, but the birds are not so numerous as in others
less successful photographically. And during this time how fared my
assistant? Charity forbids a reply. I will only say that, in response to
a hail from a passing fisherman, our captain shouted, “_Son malade!_”

The supply of 5 × 7 plates exhausted, we came about, and sailing before
the wind quickly reached the leeward side of the island, where, under
the reviving influence of calmer water, we determined to revisit the
Gannets, this time, however, by land.

Disembarking at the fishing village, which is situated on the west side
of Bonaventure, we were soon in the spruce and balsam forests, which
occupy all but the borders of the island, here about a mile and a half
in width. The change from the turmoil and vastness of the sea to the
quiet and seclusion of the forest made the previous hour’s experience
seem distant and unreal. The wind which had roared through our rigging
now breathed peacefully through the tree tops; the heaving, frothy sea
was replaced by stable earth, wondrously carpeted with snow-white cornel
and dainty twin-flowers;^{76} instead of the harsh cries of the Gannets,
we heard the Ave Maria of the White-throated Sparrow. Rarely have the
woods seemed so beautiful. Approaching the eastern cliffs, the trees
became dwarfed and singularly malformed by the winds. Finally they
disappeared altogether, and were succeeded by fields blue with iris.
Never have I seen this plant so abundant. There were acres of flowers
reaching to the very edge of the cliffs, where, with only a change in
the tint, the blue of the iris faded into the blue of the sea.

[Illustration: 76. Cornel or bunchberry.]

We were now nearing the Gannets; desiring to secure a picture of a fully
occupied ledge, I urged due caution, and advanced quietly to the edge of
the cliff. The point was well chosen—almost directly beneath us, and
about halfway down to the sea, there being a broad, rocky shelf so
thickly dotted with nesting Gannets that every bird in the group was
within reach of his immediately surrounding fellows.^{77} It was an
astonishing picture of bird life, but only a fragment of what we had
beheld from the sea. Under the circumstances, however, this fragment
brought more satisfaction than had been before received from the entire
Gannet colony.

The 4 × 5 “Premo” was now erected, care being taken to make no move
which would alarm the birds, and several exposures were made at leisure.
Then changing the lens to an old “Henry Clay,” and attaching several
elastics to the shutter, I prepared to make a flight picture of the
birds as, at the report of my gun, they left their nests. All ready, I
took firm hold of the bulb and gave the word to the captain to fire.

The result may fairly be called a failure. As far as we could determine,
the birds gave no evidence of hearing the shot or the others which
followed, and our best efforts did not succeed in making a single Gannet
leave its nest. Like Darwin’s Hawk and Moseley’s Penguins, these birds
seemed happily ignorant of man and his ways. One could doubtless descend
to their ledge without causing them to leave it.

[Illustration: 77. A ledge of nesting Gannets. About four hundred birds
are shown in this picture.]

It is conceivable that the wearing of Gannets’ heads, or feet, or wings
may some day become fashionable, but unless the demand be urgent and the
price sufficient to tempt men to risk their lives, the Gannets will long
continue to nest on the cliffs of Bonaventure.




                             THE MAGDALENS


From Percé to the Magdalens by sea is about a hundred and twenty miles,
but lacking a proper vessel we were forced to return to Dalhousie and
there take the International Railroad to Pictou, where a weekly steamer
leaves for Prince Edward Island and the “Madalenes,” as the natives call
them.

The journey is possessed of both present and historic interest, and the
hospitality for which the residents of Pictou are noted assures one of a
pleasant stay in their picturesque little town. Here I met a veteran
ornithologist—James McKinlay—who, although over threescore and ten and
isolated from others of kindred tastes, still possesses the enthusiasm
of the genuine naturalist. His collection, the greater part of which he
has presented to the Pictou Academy, contains, among other birds, a
Brown Pelican, a Corncrake, and a Chuck-will’s-widow—all shot in the
vicinity.

The Magdalen steamer is neither a yacht nor an ocean greyhound, but
answers very well for the short voyage of a hundred and fifty miles
across the gulf. Pictou was left at noon, and the following morning we
awakened to find the steamer at anchor off an island with red sandstone
cliffs, and green fields rising gently into hills clad with stunted
spruce forests. This was at the southern end of the long sand bar which
joins these so-called islands; and our destination, Grand Entry, near
the northern end of the chain, was reached late in the afternoon.

At this point we embarked in a small sailboat, and in a driving
rainstorm flew before the wind across a bay two miles in width, and up
an arm a mile or so in length, to the settlement of Grosse Isle, on the
island of the same name. The tide was out; Black-backed Gulls were
feeding on the flats, and Gannets fishing in the deeper water;
Guillemots rose before the boat; a seal showed itself for a moment and
disappeared—moving figures in a picture which impressed itself very
vividly on my memory. A landing was made with difficulty, and a walk of
nearly a mile through the scrubby spruces brought us to the home of the
fisher folk, who had agreed to take us in.

If Percé is isolated, Grosse Isle is in another sphere. Even the weekly
steamer which plies between Pictou and the Magdalens from May to
November comes no nearer than Grand Entry, and its arrival seemed a
rather vague incident, made real only by the appearance of mail.

The lobster season had just closed, the “pots” were piled in heaps on
the beaches, and mackerel fishing was now the presumable industry of the
male population of Grosse Isle. But few fish were running, and each day
boat after boat of glum-looking men came in from the sea with often only
a few cod to show for their labor. This, however, was midsummer, and the
Grosse Isle “season” was in full swing. There was a school picnic one
day; on another, service was held in the little white church on the
hillside; but, as I considered the deathlike quiet which, as a rule,
reigned in the village, I wondered what life must be there in winter.
Then the entire Magdalen group is frozen in a sea of ice, which renders
communication with the mainland (except by cable, generally out of
repair) impossible. When the ice breaks in the spring, seals appear and
furnish a hazardous occupation to those who are venturesome enough to go
in pursuit of them—a form of sport which I imagine is eagerly welcomed
after the lethargy of winter. With us the Magdalens were only a
stepping-stone to Bird Rock, but while preparing for the continuation of
our journey to that point we took some note of our surroundings.

[Illustration: 78. Nest and eggs of Fox Sparrow.]

The Magdalens have an interesting avifauna, but it was now the latter
half of July and the song season of most species was over. Fox Sparrows,
however, were still singing, and their clear, ringing whistle came from
the spruces all about. The fogs, so characteristic of the region, seemed
in no way to dampen their spirits, and when the gray mists closed in
thick about us their notes rang out as cheerily as though the sun shone
from a blue sky.

My short excursions, however, were largely made along the beaches in
search of some sea waif, and for the shore birds that would soon migrate
through these islands in large numbers, or to the cliffs where the
Guillemots were nesting. The latter were comparative strangers to me,
and I had not become accustomed to the plump, black, white-winged,
little birds that sat so lightly on the water. They nest in scattered
pairs, in crevices, in the face of the cliffs, where my guide, Mr.
Shelbourne, a resident collector, was particularly apt at discovering
them.

Grosse Isle is not beyond the range of the nestrobbing small boy, and
only the few Guillemots that had contrived to escape him now had young.
They were feeding them on sand eels, and with bills full of their
shining prey made frequent visits to their nests. The young varied in
development from those as yet covered only with the scanty natal down to
others half grown and with the black and white second plumage appearing
beneath. They were active enough to test the temper of the most patient
bird photographer, and the accompanying picture was secured only after
many trials.^{79}

[Illustration: 79. Young Guillemots.]

In the meantime we were endeavoring to make some arrangements for our
voyage to the Rock, which on clear days could be seen from the tops of
the higher hills—a hazy dot in the sea. Imagination peopled the view
with Cartier, Audubon, and his successors, and I could scarcely believe
that the scene of the wonders they had described was actually on my
horizon. But, although only twenty miles away, Bird Rock now seemed more
distant than before we had taken the first step of our journey. This in
a measure is due to the uncertainty of gulf weather, the strong tides,
the sudden and severe squalls, the prevalence of fogs, and the
surprising rapidity with which the latter change a sunlit horizon to
closely crowding gray walls—all of which make navigation in these waters
more than usually dangerous. Furthermore, it is to be remembered that
Bird Rock is not a port in which one could seek safety from a storm, but
a spot to be approached only in the calmest weather. One might therefore
start for the Rock under the most favorable conditions, be caught in a
squall and, as a result, find one’s self at sea with the recently
desired haven changed to an element of danger.

With the Rock glimmering in the sunlight and apparently almost within
reach, it was not easy to believe tales of disaster which had befallen
those who in small boats had attempted to reach it, and I was more
impressed with its inaccessibility by the fact that only one of the many
fishermen with whom I talked, had ever landed on this inhospitable
resort of sea birds.

This man proved a friend in need—one Captain Hubbard Taker, of the
thirty-ton schooner Sea Gem. I commend him to every visitor to the
Magdalens as a man and a sailor. It was when the difficulties of
reaching the Rock by small boat appeared insurmountable that Captain
Taker returned from a fishing trip to the Labrador coast. He proved to
be one of those rare but exceedingly satisfactory individuals with whom
anything is possible, or at least who believes it is until the contrary
is shown. Could he take us to Bird Rock? “Why, of course; and whenever
you are ready.” So without delay we boarded the Sea Gem.




                               BIRD ROCK


If as a result of a conference between the birds and the Audubon Society
a home were to be selected which should prove a secure retreat for
certain of the feathered kind, I imagine that Bird Rock, in its primal
condition, would have admirably filled the requirements set forth by
both conferees.

With precipitous, rocky walls weathered into innumerable ledges,
shelves, and crevices—all fit nesting sites—one might think of it as a
colossal lodging house for the countless sea-bird tenants who find here
not only a suitable place for the reproduction of their young, but in
the surrounding waters an abundant and unfailing supply of food. Add to
these conditions the Rock’s isolation and inaccessibility, its shoreless
outline, and the difficulty with which it may be ascended, and we have
indeed an ideal refuge for sea fowl, one in which, unless they were
subjected to special persecution, they might have continued to exist for
centuries, had not the transforming influences of civilization reached
even to this isle of the sea.

Bird Rock is about fifty miles northwest of Cape Breton, the nearest
mainland, and twelve east of Bryon Island, its next neighbor in the
Magdalen group, to which it belongs. It is three hundred and fifty yards
long, from fifty to one hundred and forty yards wide, and rises abruptly
from the sea to a height of from eighty to one hundred and forty feet.
Its outline, the nature of its base, sides, and summit are well
indicated by the accompanying pictures.

[Illustration: 80. Bird Rock from the southwest; distant about one half
a mile.]

Three quarters of a mile northeast of Bird Rock, or Great Bird, as it is
more specifically called, lies Little Bird, a red sandstone rock which
at high tide, or from a distance, appears as two. The shallow water
between Great and Little Birds suggests the possibility of a past
connection and the probability that in some future geological age the
waves will have completed their work of destruction, when both islands
will have disappeared.

The history of these bird-inhabited islands is interesting, and gives us
some information of the changes which man has wrought in their bird
life. It begins with the account given by Jacques Cartier of his voyage
to Canada in 1534. Of the Bird Rocks he wrote: “We came to three
islands, two of which are as steep and upright as any wall, so that it
was not possible to climb them, and between them is a little rock. These
islands were as full of birds as any meadow is of grass, which there do
make their nests, and in the greatest of them there was a great and
infinite number of those that we called Margaulx, that are white and
bigger than any geese, which were severed in one part. In the other were
only Godetz, but toward the shore there were of those Godetz and great
Apponatz, like to those of that island that we above have mentioned. We
went down to the lowest part of the least island, where we killed above
a thousand of those Godetz and Apponatz. We put into our boats as many
as we pleased, for in less than one hour we might have filled thirty
such boats of them. We named them the islands of the Margaulx.”

Concerning this quotation Mr. F. A. Lucas remarks (The Auk, v, 1888,
page 129): “While this description, as well as the sentences which
immediately precede it, contains some statements that apparently are at
variance with existing facts, there is nevertheless good reason to
believe that Cartier here refers to the Bird Rocks in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence. The birds called Margaulx, which bite even as dogs, were
Gannets, whose descendants, in spite of centuries of persecution, are to
be found to-day nesting where their ancestors did before them.

“That Cartier’s description does not accord with their present
appearance is not to be wondered at. The material of which they are
composed is of a soft, decomposing, red sandstone that succumbs so
easily to the incessant attacks of the sea that Dr. Bryant’s description
of them in 1860 does not hold good to-day. If, then, the Bird Rocks have
undergone visible changes in twenty-five years, it is easy to imagine
how great alterations the islets may have undergone during three and a
quarter centuries.”

Examination of the narratives left by other early voyagers in this
region would yield further information concerning the Rocks and the
destruction of its inhabitants; but passing to records of greater
ornithological value, we find that Audubon, whose energy in exploration
no ornithologist has ever surpassed, was the first naturalist beholding
Bird Rock to leave us a description of its wonders. It was during his
cruise to Labrador in the schooner Ripley that he wrote in his journal,
under date of June 14, 1833, the following graphic account of the day’s
experiences:

[Illustration: 81. North side of the Rock, west of the crane.]

“About ten a speck rose on the horizon, which I was told was the Rock.
We sailed well, the breeze increased fast, and we neared this object
apace. At eleven I could distinguish its top plainly from the deck, and
thought it covered with snow to the depth of several feet; this
appearance existed on every portion of the flat, projecting shelves.
Godwin said, with the coolness of a man who had visited this Rock for
ten successive seasons, that what we saw was not snow, but Gannets. I
rubbed my eyes, took my spyglass, and in an instant the strangest
picture stood before me. They were birds we saw—a mass of birds of such
a size as I never before cast my eyes on. The whole of my party stood
astounded and amazed, and all came to the conclusion that such a sight
was of itself sufficient to invite any one to come across the gulf to
view it at this season. The nearer we approached the greater our
surprise at the enormous number of these birds, all calmly seated on
their eggs or newly hatched brood, their heads all turned to windward
and toward us. The air above for a hundred yards, and for some distance
around the whole Rock, was filled with Gannets on the wing, which, from
our position, made it appear as if a heavy fall of snow was directly
above us.” (Audubon and his Journals, i, p. 360.)

From his pilot, Godwin, Audubon secured some information concerning the
Gannets that then nested on the top of the Rock. He writes: “The whole
surface is perfectly covered with nests, placed about two feet apart, in
such regular order that you may look through the lines as you would look
through those of a planted patch of sweet potatoes or cabbages. The
fishermen who kill these birds to get their flesh for codfish bait
ascend in parties of six or eight, armed with clubs; sometimes, indeed,
the party comprises the crews of several vessels. As they reach the top,
the birds, alarmed, rise with a noise like thunder, and fly off in such
a hurried, fearful confusion as to throw each other down, often falling
on each other until there is a bank of them many feet high. The men
strike them down and kill them until fatigued or satisfied. Five hundred
and forty have been thus murdered in one hour by six men. The birds are
skinned with little care, and the flesh cut off in chunks; it will keep
fresh about a fortnight. So great is the destruction of these birds
annually that their flesh supplies the bait for upward of forty fishing
boats which lie close to Bryon Island, each summer.”

This slaughter was evidently attended by some danger, for not only did
the sitting birds bite viciously, but old fishermen in the Magdalens
state that if the invader of the Gannets’ domain on the summit of the
Rock should have happened to be caught in a rush of stampeded birds, he
could with difficulty have avoided being carried off the edge of the
cliff.

In concluding his description of the Rock, Audubon says: “No man who has
not seen what we have this day can form the least idea of the impression
the sight made on our minds.” One need not be a naturalist, therefore,
to realize the depth of his disappointment when the pilot told him that
the wind was too high to permit them to land on the Rock. However, they
did not leave without at least making an attempt. A boat was launched,
manned by the pilot, two sailors, Audubon’s son John, and Tom Lincoln,
for whom Lincoln’s Finch, discovered subsequently in Labrador, was
named; but after an hour’s absence they returned without having made a
landing, and the increasing force of the wind compelled them to continue
their voyage to the northward.

Apparently the first naturalist to set foot on Bird Rock was Dr. Henry
Bryant, of Boston, who landed there June 23, 1860. This was before the
days of the lighthouse, and Dr. Bryant reached the top of the Rock only
after a climb which he characterizes as both “difficult and dangerous.”
In addition to the Gannets, which he found resting on the ledges on the
face of the Rock, he found these birds nesting over the entire northerly
half of the summit, and after measuring the surface occupied by them, he
estimated that this one colony alone contained no less than one hundred
thousand birds, while the number living on the sides of the Rock and
Little Bird he placed at fifty thousand.

The position of the Rock, at the gateway to Canadian ports, makes it
particularly dangerous to vessels plying in these waters, and in 1869 a
lighthouse was erected on its summit. While constructing the light
keeper’s dwelling and storehouses, the Government built two cranes—one
on the northerly, the other on the southerly side of the Rock—for use in
hoisting supplies. There are also now three other places where by means
of ladders and ropes one may ascend. The top of the Rock was thus made
more accessible, and the birds were consequently less protected from the
attacks of fishermen. It is said, also, that the light keepers did not
appreciate the companionship of the Gannets, and made special efforts to
drive the birds from the nesting site which they so long had held
undisturbed.

[Illustration: 82. A corner of the Rock.]

Hence, when Mr. C. J. Maynard visited the Rock in 1872, he found that
the colony of Gannets on its summit contained only five thousand birds,
which, nine years later, Mr. William Brewster reports had decreased to
fifty pairs. Mr. Brewster also noted a fresh cause for the destruction
of the eggs of the birds nesting on the sides of the Rock, in the shape
of a cannon which had been introduced shortly before his visit. He
writes: “At each discharge the frightened Murres fly from the Rock in
clouds, nearly every sitting bird taking its egg into the air between
its thighs and dropping it after flying a few yards. This was repeatedly
observed during our visit, and more than once a perfect shower of eggs
fell into the water about our boat.” While the birds have become
comparatively accustomed to the report of the guncotton bomb, which has
succeeded the cannon, large numbers still leave the Rock each time a
bomb is exploded, so that it continues to be a means of destroying not
only eggs but young birds, which are carried off the narrow ledges by
the precipitous flight of their parents.

Since that date (1881) Cory, Lucas, Palmer, Bishop, and doubtless
others, have visited Bird Rock, but with the entire disappearance of the
Gannets from its summit no attempt has been made to estimate the further
decrease in the number of its feathered inhabitants.

In spite of the great diminution which this outline of its history shows
to have occurred in Bird Rock’s population, the casual observer of
to-day will believe with difficulty that it could ever have been more
densely inhabited. It is still one of the ornithological wonders of our
Atlantic coast, and, comparatively speaking, as well worth visiting as
in the time of Audubon.

Writing now in the light of experience, I anticipate a return to Bird
Rock with even more enthusiasm than I felt when after the discouraging
uncertainties of delay we boarded the Sea Gem on the afternoon of July
23d, and with a fair wind set sail for Bryon, where we were to anchor
for the night.

What a stanch, powerful vessel the little schooner seemed when compared
with the fishing boats in which we had at first prepared to make the
voyage! Investigation below, however, did not seem to offer prospects of
undisturbed repose, and reaching Bryon late in the afternoon we decided
to go ashore and apply to the island’s owner for a night’s lodging.
Bryon Island, with its several thousand acres of stunted spruce and
balsam forests, its rolling pasture lands and grazing cows and sheep,
its precipitous red sandstone cliffs rising to a height of two hundred
feet from the sea and furnishing a home for a few Murres and Puffins, is
the property of one man, who purchased it from the Government for a
nominal sum. A lobster cannery furnishes employment for twoscore or more
itinerant fishermen and laborers, who after the lobstering season ends
in July remain for the mackerel fishing. When they have departed the
population of Bryon is reduced to about half a dozen families, over whom
the owner reigns supreme.

We landed at the cannery and wended our way over a path through the
stunted forests, which at the end of a mile or more led us to the
monarch’s home—a small frame house adjoining large barns.

The ruler of Bryon proved to be absent in the Magdalens, but his wife
made us both welcome and comfortable. We recall with pleasure the night
passed beneath her roof, and the magnificent view of the setting sun
from Bryon’s red cliffs.

We awoke in the clouds, gulf clouds, which so often in swift-spreading
banks envelop both sea and land in this region. It was ten o’clock
before the sun could force its way through them, and when we returned to
the Sea Gem we found the captain impatient at our tardiness. We
explained that of course we did not suppose that he would care to start
in so dense a fog, but he laughed at us. “Fog!” What had fog to do with
sailing when the wind was favorable? Later he gave us an exhibition of
seamanship in a fog which deeply engraved the name of Captain Taker on
our memories.

However, the wind still held from the right quarter not only for the run
to the Rock, but for a landing on its one bit of beach, and we quickly
hoisted sail for this last stage of a long journey.

For two hours we watched the Rock grow slowly larger, then its outlines
more rapidly assumed individuality, the lighthouse and other buildings
on its summit took definite form, its rocky ledges were seen to be lined
with rows of white Gannets, and Bird Rock became for us a reality. The
storm of circling birds which Audubon described is not to be seen
to-day, but enough are left to quickly exhaust our stock of adjectives.

A British flag was displayed from the tall staff near the lighthouse. If
it had been marked with stars and bars it would have looked less like a
signal set as a greeting from the island’s keeper to his unknown guests.

A figure on the rock now vigorously motioned us toward its only landing
place, and heaving to the schooner we dropped a dory overboard and sent
Captain Taker ashore as our emissary to treat with the representative of
the Canadian Government, and explain to him that through the courtesy of
his chief, the Hon. J. U. Gregory, we were empowered to invade the
territory under his control. At the end of half an hour a large dory,
manned by two oarsmen, appeared from behind the Rock and headed for the
schooner. In the stern was Captain Taker, in the bow a stranger whose
face was eloquent with an unspoken welcome. This was Keeper Captain
Peter Bourque. If we had been at the head of the Lighthouse Board
itself, he could not have received us more cordially. What a hunger he
had for news! Nearly two months had elapsed since he had heard from the
world—months rich with the history of the defeat of Cervera and
surrender of Santiago.

[Illustration: 83. The landing at the base of the Rock, showing crate.]

[Illustration: 84. The landing on top of the Rock, showing crane. The
Kittiwakes at the bottom of the picture are shown in No. 85.]

Our outfit was speedily placed in the dory, and with the Rock and its
birds now looming high above us, we pulled for the bit of rock-fringed
beach which constitutes the only available landing place. It was already
evident that the island offered endless opportunities to the bird
photographer, and as each stroke of the oars brought us nearer I felt a
sense of exultation, such perhaps as a miner experiences when he
discovers that his claim promises an assured fortune. The boat was
beached with a rush, and landing at the base of the cliff,^{83} which
rose like a wall somewhat over one hundred feet above us one could
realize the danger attending an attempt to land here in anything but the
calmest weather. We were now introduced to the car or basket in which we
were to make actually the final stage of our journey. It seemed a frail,
cratelike affair of light strips of wood, and measured about two and a
half feet square and three feet high. After our cameras, plates, gun,
ammunition, etc., had been snugly stowed, we obeyed the direction to
enter the crate and take seats on bits of board placed across opposite
corners. The end of the long, dangling rope was attached, in response to
Captain Bourque’s roaring “Hoist away!” a faint reply came from the tiny
figure which in a sickening way had been leaning over the edge of the
rock above, watching our proceedings, and a moment later the rope
tightened, strained, and we were clear of the ground and slowly rising.
A long experience in elevators had made me anticipate this part of the
Bird Rock journey without concern, but the instant after the ascent
began I discovered that we were not only going up but around as well,
and the twisting motion was so novel, so unlike anything to which I had
previously been accustomed, that I confess to a feeling of surprise, to
say the least. The sudden jars, as the rope in winding slipped off the
preceding coil and dropped suddenly, perhaps an inch, gave us a
sufficiently clear idea of the feelings which would attend the beginning
of a fall, and it was with a decided sense of having had a narrow escape
that, on being hoisted slightly above the level of the summit of the
Rock, we saw the arm of the crane^{84} pulled inward, bringing the crate
over the land, to which we were gently lowered.

The twenty years which have elapsed since Cory visited the Rock have
reduced the time required for the ascent from twenty-seven to six
minutes. The world moves, therefore, even at Bird Rock.

To a naturalist this slow passage through the air, about six feet from
ledge after ledge, crevice above crevice, filled with Kittiwakes,^{85}
Murres, and Razorbills, with great white banks of snowy Gannets on
either side, possesses an almost stupefying fascination. The birds were
so abundant and showed such entire lack of fear, I seemed to have
reached, if not the heart, at least one of the most important centers of
the bird world.

Alighting from the crate, we were greeted by Mr. Bourque’s two
assistants and his daughter, a girl of sixteen, who, with a third
assistant, now absent on leave, completed the population of the island.
There should be added, however, one cow—an important member of the Rock
colony, who had reached her elevated position in life by means of the
same apparatus with which we had just gratefully parted company.
Numerous buildings,^{86} which we had barely noticed from the sea, were
found to form a miniature village on the grassy, nearly level summit of
the Rock, giving to the scene an atmosphere of comfort and homeliness
which strongly emphasized one’s sense of isolation.

[Illustration: 85. Kittiwakes and young on nests. From the crate.]

[Illustration: 86. The lighthouse, keeper’s dwelling, and other
buildings.]

The favorable light prevailing at the time of our arrival was far too
valuable to be used for anything but photography. No sooner, therefore,
was our luggage removed from the crate than, without waiting to inspect
our quarters, I made ready the cameras and plate-holders. The latter,
numbering twenty-one, furnished forty-two glass plates. I wished for
twice that number before the day ended. Going to the western end of the
Rock, now brightly illumined by the afternoon sun, I found that the
jutting, shaly ledges permitted one to descend easily, and in a moment I
was in the midst of groups^1 of Puffins, Razorbills, Brünnich’s and
Common Murres, who apparently regarded me with as much surprise and
interest as I did them, and exhibited an astonishing confidence in
mankind. In fact, I was at times vigorously scolded by some Murre
parent, who waddled toward me, bobbing her head, and uttering a series
of protesting _murres_ in a tone so like that of a bass-voiced man, I
half expected a larger biped to appear.

[Illustration: 87. Razorbilled Auks and “Ringed” Murre. × 3.]

The Razorbills were fully as tame, sometimes leaving their crevices in
the cliff and, with a hoarse croak, almost flying in my face, while the
Puffins exhibited a spirit of combined indifference and independence,
which plainly said, “This Rock is ours.”

I sat down on a convenient ledge, and as the birds gathered about me in
rows and groups on the border of the cliff, its ledges and projections,
I seemed almost to be on speaking terms with them. So unusual and
pleasing was this experience of having birds admit me at once to the
inner circles of their society that I felt as though I had indeed been
initiated into their ranks; and my enjoyment of the strange scene was
heightened tenfold by the knowledge that I could satisfactorily record
it. So I prepared the twin-lens—a camera exactly adapted to my present
needs—and at a distance of twenty feet or thereabouts loaded and fired
as many times as I pleased, with the birds none the wiser, and offering
me each moment some new picture differing in composition from the last.
Here was a triumph for the bird photographer. Who so nearly could have
done justice to the subject? The taxidermist? One shot would have broken
the spell? The artist? Whose pencil could compete with the lens in the
convincing realism of its impression?

But as yet I had seen only a fragment of the Rock. Climbing, therefore,
from ledge to ledge, I reached a corner where an abrupt turn exposed a
great expanse of perpendicular wall so inaccessible to man that it had
become a favorite nesting site for the birds.^{82} Here were gathered
Gannets, Murres, Razorbills, and Kittiwakes, distributed singly or in
rows, according to the nature of the shelves or ledges on which they
were nesting, the Gannets taking the widest, the Murres and Kittiwakes
the narrowest ledges, while the Razorbills sought the more sheltered
crevices.

What noise and seeming confusion were here! A never-ceasing chorus in
which the loud, grating _gor-r-r-rok, gor-r-rrok_ of the Gannets
predominated, while the singularly human call of the Murres and the
hoarse note of the Razorbills formed an accompaniment. Occasionally the
Kittiwakes found cause for excitement, and hundreds of birds swooped
downward from their nests and circled about, calling their rapidly
uttered, distinctly enunciated _kít-ti-wake, kít-ti-wake_.

[Illustration: 88. Puffins. × 2.]

In addition to the great number of birds resting or nesting on the Rock,
an endless procession of Gannets, Puffins, and Razorbills were flying
around, but never over it. Unconsciously one expected a pause in this
whirling throng, but although its numbers fluctuated, birds were always
passing. The exposure of my last plate recalled me to a sense of other
duties, and when I had returned to the little group of buildings with
their inhabitants, I seemed to have been in another sphere.

My object in visiting Bird Rock was not only to secure pictures of its
bird life, but a certain number of birds for the American Museum of
Natural History, where it is proposed to represent a portion of the Rock
with its tenants. During my absence in the world of birds my good
assistant had turned one of the supply houses into a laboratory, and was
already at work preparing specimens with which the active Shelbourne and
attentive keepers had plentifully supplied her.

A gun was necessary only in securing Gannets and Kittiwakes, the Murres
and Razorbills being caught in a dip-net by the keepers; one of whom,
having a rope about his waist which was held by his associate, advanced
to the edge of the cliff or “cape,” as it is termed locally, and looked
cautiously over in quest of the birds resting on the ledges immediately
below. Having learned their position the net was thrust quickly
downward, and the birds, in attempting to escape, often flew directly
into it and became entangled in its meshes. Puffins were captured on
their nests in crevices in the face of the Rock or in the holes they had
burrowed in the earth on the top. The latter were sometimes shared with
Leach’s Petrel, who also occupied small burrows of their own.

The schooner had dropped anchor near the Rock, but the wind increasing
in strength, Captain Taker set sail for the lee of Bryon, and at
midnight, when we concluded our day’s work, there was a promise of a
stormy morrow, which daylight fulfilled. The wind drove the waves to the
rock-set base of our islet with terrific force, making landing or
departure out of the question. We had come just in time. The light
prohibited successful photography, and the day was devoted to collecting
and preserving specimens and exploring the Rock.

[Illustration: 89. Murre’s egg.]

We had arrived in the height of the nesting season, all of the seven
species breeding on the Rock having eggs and young in various stages of
development. It was evident, however, that the number of eggs and young
was small as compared with the number of adults, a condition which was
explained by Captain Bourque’s statement, that he thought about five
thousand eggs had been taken from the Rock by fishermen that year. These
were the eggs of Murres and Razorbills, the former being the most
abundant birds on the Rock. Both the Common and Brünnich’s Murre were
present, but I am unable to say which was the more numerous. There were
also a few of the singular, so-called “Ringed” Murres,^{87} a bird whose
standing is in doubt, some ornithologists regarding it as a distinct
species, others as an individual variety.

Both species of Murre laid their single peculiarly marked eggs on the
bare shelves or ledges in the most exposed situations;^{89} and seeing
them now for the first time in Nature, I was quite willing to accept the
theory which has been advanced to account for their markedly toplike or
pearlike shape. A round or elliptical egg, laid in the situations often
chosen by the Murres, would, when moved by the wind or incubating bird,
readily roll from its precarious position, but the pointed egg of the
Murre when disturbed describes a circle about its own end. Thus, like a
diplomat, it seemingly yields to superior force while retaining its
original position. The eggs vary in color from greenish blue to buff,
and are strikingly scrawled and blotched with shades of chocolate. No
two are alike, a fact which it is supposed may aid the parent Murre in
distinguishing her own egg among the dozens with which it may be placed.

[Illustration: 90. Young Murres and egg.]

The few eggs seen were doubtless laid by birds which had been robbed
earlier in the season, but young were found in every stage, from the
newly hatched downy chick,^{90} who sat on his narrow ledge vigorously
screeching for food, to others half grown and with the natal down almost
entirely replaced by the first winter plumage. The parents were still in
attendance on the oldest birds, and no young were seen in the water.

[Illustration: 91. Kittiwakes and young on nest. From the crate. × 2. An
enlarged detail of No. 85.]

Razorbills, perhaps because the Rock contained comparatively few of the
sheltered nooks they require for nesting sites, were less abundant than
Murres. Their downy young were much lighter in color than the young of
the Murres, and their high squealing whistle could easily be
distinguished from the screech of the young Murres. Of two specimens
which had nearly completed the acquisition of their winter plumage, one
had the white line from the eye to the bill so characteristic of the
adult fully developed, while in the other it was wholly wanting—a
variability in marking which suggests that the white stripe of the
Ringed Murre is a similar individual peculiarity.

Next to the Murres the Kittiwakes are probably the most numerous birds
on the Rock. Doubtless for the reason that they select the less
accessible ledges where their eggs can not be so readily taken, their
young were more advanced than those of any other of the birds breeding
here. Their nests, rather bulky structures of seaweed, which often
projected well over the edge of the ledge on which they were built,
contained only young with their parents, one or two birds constituting a
brood.^{91}

[Illustration: 92. Entrance to Puffin’s burrow.]

Kittiwakes were never observed perching on the upper ledges or rim of
the Rock in the situations commonly selected by Murres, Razorbills, and
Puffins. The last-named species, in fact, was never seen resting far
from the top of the Rock, and its nests were placed in burrows excavated
on the summit of the Rock, at the west end. Occasionally advantage was
taken of an opening beneath a ledge, but generally the bird excavated a
hole,^{92} about four inches in diameter and three or four feet in
length, at the end of which we found the nest of grasses and feathers,
with its single elliptical white egg^{93} and sitting bird, or a sooty,
down-covered nestling.^{94}

[Illustration: 93. Puffin’s nest and egg at the end of excavated
burrow.]

Woe to the unsuspecting person who thrusts his hand into the jaw, one
might say, of an incubating Puffin. Nature has not only provided the
bird with an uncommonly powerful and efficient pair of mandibles, but
also with a disposition which prompts it to use them to the best
advantage. Never have I seen anything in the shape of a bird so
diabolically vicious as a Puffin. An individual which we captured alive
and attempted to study in our workroom, proved altogether too fierce a
creature to have about, and its hoarse voice—half grunt, half
groan—added to its unattractiveness.

[Illustration: 94. Young Puffin on nest at the end of burrow.]

In Nature, however, their trim appearance was very pleasing;
_Paroquets_, the French-Canadians call them, and one has only to see the
bird in life to appreciate the applicability of the name. It is not
alone their looks but also their actions which suggest the Parrot.
Unlike the Murres and Razorbills, they do not rest on the whole foot,
but stand quite erect on the toes alone, and run about with the
characteristic pattering steps of Parrots. When the wind blew fresh from
the sea they often faced it, hovering a foot or two above the rocks on
outstretched, motionless wings, and retaining for several seconds this
perfect balance between gravity and air pressure.

It is quite possible that I may have wholly misjudged the Puffin’s
character, and that when unmolested their nature is peaceable in
extreme. At any rate, they seem to be not only on excellent terms with
their own kind, but with the very distantly related Leach’s Petrels,
with which they sometimes shared their underground homes, one bird’s
nest being at the end of the burrow, the other about half way to the
entrance. The Petrels also occupied burrows of their own, which, judging
from the actions of the birds found in them, they had excavated by the
aid of their toes.^{95}

[Illustration: 95. Leach’s Petrel on nest at end of excavated burrow.]

The Petrel’s nests were composed of fine grasses and a few feathers, and
one nest contained two bits of white birch bark, the presence of which
raised the question as to whether these gleaners of the sea do not
gather suitable nesting material when they find it floating on the
surface of the water. Two of the eight or ten Petrels’ nests examined
contained a single white egg; one egg constituting a full set with this
species, as with all the other rock-nesting birds, except the Kittiwake.
The remaining nests were each occupied by a newly hatched young bird—a
gray ball of down, so unlike anything in feathers I had ever seen that,
if it had not been for their tiny, young chickenlike _peep_, I should
have been inclined to pass it by as a wad of gray cotton.^{96} Never
more than one of the parent birds, either the male or female, was found
on the nest, nor was a single Petrel seen about the Rock during the day.

[Illustration: 96. Young Leach’s Petrel removed from burrow with nesting
material.]

The Puffins and Petrels are now the only birds nesting on the summit of
the Rock, not a single descendant of the one hundred thousand Gannets
which, according to Bryant, occupied the top of the Rock in 1860 now
being found there. To-day this species nests only on the less accessible
border ledges on the face of the Rock, where they are grouped in
colonies. Most of them were incubating, but several were brooding their
young, which ranged in size from the naked, black-skinned, newly hatched
chick to those that had acquired the white, swan’s-downlike first
plumage.^{97}

With the exception of two white, black-spotted birds, all the Gannets
seen, both on Bird Rock and Bonaventure, were in the adult white
plumage, and if, as has been stated, this plumage is not gained until
the bird is two years old, the question arises, What becomes of the
immature birds during the nesting season?

[Illustration: 97. Young Gannet.]

An estimate of the number of individuals representing the seven species
just mentioned as nesting on the Rock, is perhaps not warranted by my
brief experience, nor should I attempt to give one, did not my
photographs permit me to count with a fair degree of accuracy the number
of birds in view on that part of the Rock shown in these pictures. Time
was lacking to make, from a boat, a series of photographs of the Rock
which would include all its bird-inhabited portions, and the appended
estimates are based on the results of a count of the birds in
photographs of about one half the occupied area. Murres, Razorbills, and
Puffins can not be distinguished in these pictures and are therefore
grouped under one head, it being calculated that about from fifteen
hundred to two thousand individuals of these species make the Rock their
home. Of this number probably not more than one hundred are Puffins,
while the Common and Brünnich’s Murres (_Uria troile et U. lomvia_)
outnumber the Razorbills at least four to one.

[Illustration: 98. Gannets. × 3. An enlarged detail of No. 99.]

The Kittiwake population of the Rock probably numbers between six
hundred and eight hundred birds; of Gannets, there are perhaps left only
fifteen hundred of the more than one hundred thousand birds which Dr.
Bryant writes of as living on the top of the Rock alone; and of Petrels,
not more than fifty.

When on the Rock I should have said that it was tenanted by at least ten
thousand birds, and I was not a little surprised to find that the
evidence furnished by my photographic records gave a total of about four
thousand birds. However, the sight of four thousand birds domiciled in
one small islet is sufficiently impressive to increase the pulse beat of
the most phlegmatic traveler; and even if this estimate be too large,
the Rock’s merits as a bird resort are too substantial to be affected by
any decrease in it which truth demands.

To return to an account of the day’s doings, the light, as has been
said, was unfavorable for photography, and the time was devoted to
collecting and preparing specimens and making a hurried survey of the
bird rookeries on the Rock, with results briefly set forth above; but
late in the afternoon the sun gave indications of its whereabouts behind
the clouds, and I immediately substituted the camera for the scalpel,
and had Keeper Bourque lower me in the crate in order that I might
secure photographs of the birds observed on our ascent.

Neither the stability of the crate nor its constant turning were
conditions which a photographer would choose, and, without the twin-lens
it would have been impossible to secure pictures of the Kittiwakes^{85}
and Murres, who in a surprised but unalarmed manner regarded me from
their nests on the Rock, in some instances at a distance of not more
than six feet.

At ten o’clock at night I visited the west end of the Rock to see and
hear the Petrels that nest there. The casual visitor to Bird Rock would
be quite unaware of the presence of these birds; indeed, one might live
there for years without knowing that Petrels made it their home. As far
as the Rock is concerned, the birds are strictly nocturnal; but as
usually only one bird—either male or female—is found on the nest, it is
supposed that its mate is at sea feeding. If this supposition be true, I
am at a loss to account for the entire absence of the birds during the
daytime. Why should they not return to their nests before nightfall? And
if, as stated, the sea bird takes the place of the nest bird, does the
latter always feed at night and the former by day, or do they sometimes
change about, thus making the same individual both nocturnal and diurnal
in habit?

However this may be, I had no sooner reached the part of the Rock
tenanted by the Petrels than I was given the most surprising evidence of
their activity during the night. From the ground at my feet and on every
side there issued the uncanny little song—if I may so call it—of birds
doubtless sitting at the mouths of their burrows. It was not like the
cry of a sea bird, but a distinctly enunciated call of eight notes,
possessing a character wholly its own, and not to be compared to the
notes of any bird I have ever heard, though at the time it impressed me
as having a certain crowing quality. Such a call might be uttered by
elves or brownies. Occasionally I saw a blur of wings as a bird passed
between me and the lighthouse.

[Illustration: 99. Gannets on nests.]

Later, the fog, which had been scudding over us in wisps and ribbons,
closed in, and through the medium of a guncotton bomb the Rock gave
notice of its presence to the mariners who might be in the surrounding
waters. Captain Taker heard the dull, booming voice as with
disappointing promptness he came to take us from the Rock, and early in
the morning we heard his fog horn from the gray bank below telling where
the Sea Gem, as yet unseen, was anchored.

In the hope of better weather I deferred photographing the Gannets, the
only accessible colony of which was on the north side of the Rock; but
forced now to make the best of the existing conditions, I took the
twin-lens, fastened one end of a rope about my waist, and gave the other
end to Captain Bourque, in order that, unhampered by thought of fall, I
might creep along the slippery ledges where the birds nested.^{99}

The fog had lifted, but the day was gloomy, and only the white plumage
of the birds and a wide-open lens yielded successful photographs.

It was my first visit to the big white birds, who, in spite of
persecution, have as yet acquired but little fear of man, and as with
hoarse croaks and a dashing of wings they pitched onto the narrow ledges
near me, their size and boldness, in connection with my somewhat
insecure footing, aroused in me a feeling which I had not experienced
when surrounded by the smaller Murres, Auks, and Puffins. The main
nesting ledge was out of reach below, but small groups of birds were
nearer, and these I photographed at a distance of about ten feet.^{100}

These Gannets are magnificent birds, and when on the wing exhibit a
combination of power and grace excelled by no other bird I have seen.
They are most impressive when diving, as with half-closed wings, like
great spearheads, they descend from a height of about forty feet with a
force and speed that takes them wholly out of sight, and splashes the
water ten feet or more into the air. Cory graphically compares the sight
of a distant flock of Gannets diving at a school of fish, to a
continuous stream of beans poured from a pail.

[Illustration: 100. Gannet on nest. Two nests in foreground.]

Captain Bourque tells me that Gannets are no longer used for bait by the
codfishers; but when one realizes that only two colonies of these grand
birds, comprising a few thousand individuals, are all that are left of
the species in this hemisphere, one could wish for these survivors
something more than negative protection.

In the afternoon the weather gave promise of clearing, and entering the
crate we were swung out over the edge of the Rock on the first stage of
our homeward journey. The collections and outfit were placed aboard the
schooner, while in a dory we attempted to visit Little Bird; but before
we had rowed a quarter of a mile the fog crept back, Great Bird slowly
disappeared from view and became only a periodic boom in the gray wall,
and we returned to the schooner without delay.

The sail to Bryon, where we passed the night, apparently demonstrated
Captain Taker’s possession of the sense of direction. In spite of a head
wind, violent squalls, and a strong tide, he made his way through the
fog with perfect assurance and dropped anchor at a particular lobster
buoy, visible less than fifty yards from the schooner, but which in
effect he appeared to have seen before we left the Rock. It was a
remarkable bit of seamanship.

In Bird Rock the Canadian Government possesses an object of surpassing
interest, one which, south of Greenland, is unique in eastern North
America. It is the obvious duty of the proper authorities to preserve
it, and the ease with which this can be done makes further neglect
inexcusable. The appointment of the light keeper as a game warden is the
only step required to make Bird Rock a safe retreat for sea fowl, until,
in some future geologic age, it shall have yielded to the relentless
attack of the waters.




  LIFE ON PELICAN ISLAND, WITH SOME SPECULATIONS ON THE ORIGIN OF BIRD
                               MIGRATION


The study of isolated colonies of birds, particularly of those situated
on islands, throws much light on several as yet little-understood
problems of bird migration.

With mainland birds of general distribution—the Robin, for example—the
individual is, except when nesting, lost in the species, and unless the
bird be peculiarly marked who can say whether the Robins which nest with
us one year are the same as those of the preceding season—where our
summer Robins winter, or our winter Robins summer? and who can tell
whether the first Robins to come in the spring are our summer resident
birds, or early migrants _en route_ to more northern nesting grounds?

In the case of certain island-inhabiting birds, however, some of these
questions may be answered with a fair degree of certainty. Thus Ipswich
Sparrows are known to nest only on Sable Island, off the Nova Scotia
coast, and we are warranted in believing that the same birds, fate
permitting, return to their sandy home year after year. Gannets (_Sula
bassana_) nest in the western hemisphere only on three islets in the
Gulf of St. Lawrence, and it is probable that the surviving individuals
return each year to their former breeding grounds. The Terns of Muskeget
and Penikese, forming the only two large colonies of these birds
remaining on the Atlantic coast, return to their island retreats every
spring; and actuated by this same love of home, the Brown Pelicans of
the Indian River region of eastern Florida annually repair to a certain
small island for the purpose of rearing their young. Many similar cases
might be cited in confirmation of the belief—supported also by isolated
observations on the mainland—that birds nest in the same locality
throughout their lives, and, on occasion, may even occupy their previous
season’s nest.

As regards the manner in which these island-inhabiting birds arrive at
the nesting grounds, as far as our recorded information goes, it seems
that without relation to latitude they appear each spring with
remarkable regularity, not straggling back a few at a time, but sending
on an advance guard, which usually remains only a short time and is
followed, a few days later, by apparently the entire colony.

Thus, Mackay writes of the Terns of Penikese: “In 1893 the Terns arrived
on May 10th, in the night, an advance guard of several hundred being
noted early the following morning at daylight; these all left before
noon of the 11th, and on the morning of the 12th, before daylight,
immense numbers had again arrived.... In 1896 the Terns commenced to
arrive during the night of May 9th; they were in evidence at daylight on
the 10th, and continued to arrive all day, and on the morning of the
11th the usual colony had taken possession of the island.” (Auk, xiv,
1897, p. 284.)

The migration of the island-nesting Terns in the tropics is apparently
no less regular. Scott states that the Noddy arrived in the Tortugas “on
April 20th in large numbers, but remained only two days; after
inspecting their breeding grounds, all departed to return about a week
later in greatly increased numbers, when breeding was almost at once
commenced.” (Auk, vii, 1890, p. 306.)

These insular colonies, however, not only throw much light on certain
existing phases of bird migration, but they also furnish us with a clew
to the origin of migration itself. This is especially true of those
species whose lives are passed in the tropics or subtropics, and which
we are accustomed to class as nonmigratory or as “permanent residents,”
but which are as regularly migratory, in the real meaning of the word,
as if they summered within the arctic circle and wintered south of the
equator.

Their movements are apparently in no way influenced by climate nor, at
this season, are they governed by the food supply, but prompted solely
by the annually recurring physiological change which fits both sexes for
reproduction, they repair to a certain islet, perhaps in the heart of
their range, with the one object of finding a suitable nesting site in
which their eggs may be laid and young reared in safety; and this object
accomplished, they desert the locality, where they may be unknown until
the following spring.

Divested, therefore, of the complications which ensue when in studying
the migration of birds the questions of food and climate must be
considered, we have here the problem reduced to its simplest terms; and
in the desire for seclusion during the breeding season which induces
birds to conceal their nests, if possible perhaps near by, but if
necessary after a journey of varying length undertaken especially for
the purpose, we have a good and sufficient cause for the origin of bird
migration.

An attempt to explain the present manifestation of the migratory
movement involves a study of the climatic changes to which our globe has
been subjected. No doubt many birds controlled by “heredity of habit”
make semiannual journeys which at one time were necessary, but under
existing circumstances are no longer required. Why, for example, should
the Bobolink winter south of the Amazon, while its ally, the Red-winged
Blackbird (_Agelaius phœniceus_), does not leave the eastern United
States? I have, however, no intention of writing an essay on bird
migration, and these thoughts are presented merely as preliminary to a
study of the life of Pelican Island, of a visit to which they are in
part the outcome.

Pelican Island is situated midway between the northern and southern
extremities of Indian River, near the eastern shore of a key which here
makes the river about three miles wide. It is triangular in shape and
contains about three acres of ground, on which grow a few black
mangroves, a cabbage palm or two, and great patches of grass; but at
least one fourth of its surface is bare ground.

On one of the islands of the near-by Narrows a few pairs of Brown
Pelicans are said to have nested, but, with this exception, Pelican
Island doubtless forms the nesting ground of all the Pelicans of Indian
River.

The question why the birds should select this particular island in
preference to the scores of others which, to the human eye, appear to be
equally well suited to their needs, is a difficult one to answer.
Perhaps no true selection is shown by the existing birds, which, as with
many other island-inhabiting species, may be the survivors of a once
more widely distributed species, who have been preserved by the
protection afforded by their island home. Such a colony might owe its
beginning to a pair of birds who were the true selectors of the site of
the future colony. The preserving influences of the situation were
potent from the beginning. The first brood reached maturity without
mishap, and in response to the instinct which prompts a bird to return
to the region of its birth, they, with successive generations, came back
and eventually established the prevailing conditions.

The attachment of these Pelicans for their home affords a remarkable
illustration of the power of habit. Ever since the Indian River region
has been subject to annual invasion by tourists, among whom the man with
the gun is conspicuous both by numbers and actions, the inhabitants of
Pelican Island have been wantonly and, on occasions, brutally
persecuted. Scarcely a day passes during February and March that one or
more boat loads of tourists, perhaps from the mainland or a passing
yacht, do not land on Pelican Island and thoughtlessly cause the death
of many young birds by driving them from the vicinity of their nests;
or, by frightening the brooding birds, they expose the newly hatched and
naked nestlings to the roasting rays of the sun. The harm caused by
these visitors, however, is not to be compared to that wrought by
so-called “sportsmen,” who, in defiance of every law of manhood, have
gone to Pelican Island and killed thousands of the birds simply because
they afforded a ready mark for their guns. They had not even the excuse
of a demand upon their skill, and must indeed have been very near the
level of the brute to have found pleasure in killing birds which the
merest novice with a gun would find it difficult to miss.

Perhaps even worse than this exhibition of pure savagery are the raids
of the self-styled “oölogists,” who, in the name of science—save the
mark!—have journeyed to Pelican Island with the express purpose of
taking every egg they could lay their insatiable fingers upon, afterward
to boast, in some journal devoted to reporting similar crimes, of the
hundreds they had collected in so many hours.

So persistently have the Pelicans been molested that at times they have
been foiled to desert their beloved island; but they have exhibited
their attachment for it by establishing themselves on the nearest
available islet, and on the first opportunity have returned to their
native land.

It was in March, 1898, that my best assistant and I boarded the little
sloop which was to take us to Pelican Island. Fortunately the birds were
now in possession of their ancestral domain, and, as we approached,
files of Pelicans were seen returning from fishing expeditions, platoons
were resting on the sandy points, some were bathing, others sailing in
broad circles high overhead. Soon we could hear the sound of many
voices—a medley of strange cries in an unknown tongue. Arriving and
departing on wings, the inhabitants of Pelican Island have little need
of deep water harbors, and we were obliged to anchor our sloop about a
hundred yards from the island and go ashore in a small boat.

[Illustration: 101. Pelicans on ground nests.]

No traveler ever entered the gates of a foreign city with greater
expectancy than I felt as I stepped from my boat on the muddy edge of
this City of the Pelicans. The old birds, without a word of protest,
deserted their homes, leaving their eggs and young at my mercy. But the
young were as abusive and threatening as their parents were silent and
unresisting. Some were on the ground, others in the bushy mangroves,
some were coming from the egg, others were learning to fly; but one and
all—in a chorus of croaks, barks, and screams, which rings in my ears
whenever I think of the experience—united in demanding that I leave the
town. If I approached too near, their cries were doubled in violence and
accompanied by vicious lunges with their bills, which were snapped
together with a pistol-like report.^{102} As I walked from tree to tree,
examining the noisy young birds that were climbing about the branches, I
seemed to be passing from cage to cage in a zoölogical garden; and as I
entered that part of the island where the nests were on the
ground,^{101} every bird that could walk left its home, and soon I was
driving a great flock of young Pelicans, all screaming at the tops of
their voices.

[Illustration: 102. Interviewing a group of young Pelicans.]

[Illustration: 103. Among the Pelicans.]

The old birds, in the meantime, were resting on the water. They might
have been unpleasant foes, but in their stately, dignified way they
accepted the situation, and waited in silence for us to retire. Then
they at once returned to their nests, and in a short time comparative
quiet was restored on the island.

This is a sketch of life in the Pelicans’ metropolis as one sees it
during a brief visit, and all the accounts of the island I have seen
were based on just such an experience. Consequently, I shall relate here
what was learned of the Pelicans and their home during four days passed
with them.

[Illustration: 104. Head and pouch of Brown Pelican. From a fresh
specimen.]

During no hour of the twenty-four did silence reign on Pelican Island;
if I went on deck at midnight, the notes of some complaining or
pugnacious young Pelicans, who in their sleep had come into too close
quarters, were sure to be heard. But the Pelicans’ day began at early
dawn, when I could distinguish the diagonal files of from two to a dozen
birds solemnly and silently starting out for the fishing grounds. One
might think that, like a boat’s crew, their strokes were controlled by a
coxswain, as in perfect unison they all flapped their broad wings for
about ten beats, and then spread them and sailed for as many seconds.

[Illustration: 105. Same as No. 104, seen from above, to show extent to
which sides of the lower bill are spread.]

Generally they headed for the ocean, there to follow the line of the
beach, sometimes high in the air, at others low over the curling surf,
as their progress was aided or retarded by the wind. How far they went I
can not say, but at a point ten miles north of Pelican Island many have
been seen still winging their way to the northward, doubtless to some
point where fish were abundant. Not once during the four days passed off
Pelican Island did I see a Pelican fishing over the surrounding waters.
It was not because they were lacking in fish, for they contained a
plentiful supply of food; and I could explain the unexpected abstinence
of the birds only on the supposition that the fish in the immediate
vicinity of the nesting ground were left for the early efforts of the
young birds before they were strong enough of wing to accompany their
parents to distant fishing grounds.

Brown Pelicans fish at a height of from twenty to thirty feet above the
water, not hovering, but flying slowly about, and without a moment’s
pause plunging on their prey with a force which would produce serious
results if the bird’s breast were not well padded with cellular tissue
between the skin and the flesh.

I observed that when the young birds struck at me the movement was
accompanied by a widening or bowing out of the sides of the lower
mandible, and it is doubtless the same muscular effort which turns the
pouch of the diving Pelican into a scoop net, as it were, with an
elliptical ring.^{105}

By sunrise most of the fishers appeared to have departed, and at this
time, whether because of the absence of so many of the adults or because
it was their breakfast hour, a swarm of Fish Crows came from the
mainland, apparently from both sides of the river, seeking what they
might devour in the way of eggs or young Pelicans, and departing after
several hours’ feasting.

About eight o’clock the fishers began to appear, coming, as they went,
in dignified lines, which broke up as they reached the island, each bird
going to its young. Then the outcry began, and the ensuing two hours
were the noisiest of the day.

Pelicans are so well able to supply the wants of their families that,
unlike smaller birds who bring to their ever-hungry broods only a
mouthful at a time, they are not forced to feed their young at short
intervals throughout the day, but the morning meal concluded, they do
not again have to provide for their nestlings until afternoon.
Immediately after breakfast, therefore, the parent birds went out into
the bay to bathe, and the flapping of their wings as they dashed the
water over themselves could be heard at a great distance. The bath
concluded, the birds gathered in rows on the sand bars jutting out from
the island, to vigorously preen their feathers, and doze in the sun; and
then, at irregular intervals, bird after bird, prompted apparently
purely by a love of exercise, or tempted by a possible resulting
exhilaration, mounted slowly into the air until they had attained a
great height, when, spreading their wings, they sailed majestically
about on broad circles for hours at a time. I was at first inclined to
connect this habit with the season of courtship, but observing several
birds of the year, who had but recently learned to fly, join their
elders, I came to the conclusion that the habit had no sexual
significance, and was indulged in solely because the birds enjoyed it.

In the afternoon the fishing parties again started out, and after the
resulting catch had been delivered to the clamoring young, the Pelican’s
day’s work was concluded, and he betook himself to his favorite roost
for the night. At dark a few Cormorants returned to the branches of a
dead tree, a single Frigate, after carefully and repeatedly
reconnoitering the situation, decided to take lodgings on a neighboring
stub, and a Pelican Island day was ended.

Whether, as in the case of the Terns and Gannets previously mentioned,
the Pelicans all return to their island on a certain day I can not say.
Probably, however, the short duration of their migratory journey, and
the fact that they come from both the north and the south, prevents them
from joining many other birds _en route_. However, apparently most of
the birds are warned at nearly the same time by a physiological change
that the season has come for them to return to their nesting grounds.
This is evidently in January, since in March a large number of the young
on the island were found almost ready to fly, while some, as has been
said, were already on the wing. There was, it is true, a great variation
in the development of the young found, and indeed the birds were still
laying, but I believe that the parents of these later broods had been
robbed of their eggs by tourists.

A careful count yielded a total of 845 nests, which had evidently been
built during the season, but only 251 of them were occupied. Most of the
vacant nests were on the ground, and had been deserted by their tenants,
who were now running about the island.

The 251 occupied nests contained eggs or young, as follows:

                      55 nests with 1  egg  each;
                      63   „    „   2 eggs    „
                      23   „    „   3   „     „
                      63   „    „   1 young each;
                      46   „    „   2   „     „
                       1 nest   „   3   „     „

Incubation was found to be well advanced in eggs which were alone in
their nest, showing either that one egg sometimes composes the set, or
that the other eggs of the set had been destroyed. The fact that one
nest was found with three young while twenty-three were found each
containing three eggs, would indicate a high mortality among the young
birds; and, indeed, no less than 94 dead young were counted. Most of
these, however, were birds which were old enough to leave the nest, and
death was doubtless due to the thoughtlessness of tourist visitors, who
chase the young about until they fall from exhaustion, or are driven too
far to find their way home.

Estimating the number of young birds which had left the 594 deserted
nests at 891—which would be an average of one and a half birds to the
nest—and adding two parent birds to each nest, we have 2,581 birds on
wing and on foot. But this number is to be increased by the 152 young
that were still in their nests, making the probable total population of
Pelican Island 2,736. This calculation, however, does not take into
account the eggs, from which almost hourly came new inhabitants of the
island; and it is with these eggs, or rather with the nest in which they
are placed, that we may begin a brief outline of the young Pelican’s
development.

The Pelican, although a low type of bird, is altricial, the young,
unlike the offspring of Gulls, Ducks, or Snipe, being hatched in a
helpless condition. The nest, therefore, is not only an incubator where
with heat from the parent bird the eggs are hatched, but it is a cradle
for the young. Consequently, Pelicans’ nests are unusually complicated
structures as compared with the dwellings of other birds equally low in
the evolutionary scale.

There was a very interesting and constant relation between the character
of the nest and its site, ground nests being composed largely or
entirely of long grasses, while those nests which were placed in the
trees were made of sticks and were lined with grasses, the nest proper
being erected on a platform of larger sticks laid from crotch to crotch
in the bushes in such a manner as to form a broad, firm foundation,
though, structurally, it was not a part of the nest, which could be
lifted without removing the platform.

[Illustration: 106. Newly hatched Pelicans. Ground nest.]

The difference between the nests of straw^{106} and those of
sticks^{107} were so marked that it seems probable their makers
regularly selected sites on the ground or in the trees respectively. Or,
assuming that the same individuals might build a stick nest in the
bushes one year and a straw nest on the ground the next, we have an
unusual variation in the character of the nest of the same species. In
the case of the Fish Hawks of Plumb Island the birds evinced an
appreciation of the protection afforded them by the owner of the island
by often placing their nests on the ground. Photographs of these nests,
however, made by Dr. C. S. Allen, show that the birds employed as much
material when nesting on the ground as when nesting in trees, the eggs
on the ground being surrounded by a useless mass of large sticks.
Certain of the birds, therefore, in response to new conditions, had
chosen new nesting sites, but had not as yet made corresponding changes
in the character of their nests.

When the nest is completed, as we have seen, from one to three eggs are
laid. The period of incubation is probably about four weeks, and a
careful listener may detect the presence of a hatching egg by the
choking bark which the young Pelican begins to utter as soon as he has
made an opening in the shell which holds him. When he has finally freed
himself and appears in the world, he is about as unattractive a bit of
bird life as can well be conceived.^{106} His dark, purple skin is
perfectly naked, he is blind, and when he is deprived of shade provided
by the brooding parent, he twists restlessly about in the nest, uttering
the same choking bark with which he first greeted the light.

Even at this early age he displays one of the strong characteristics of
the immature Pelican—a pugnacious disposition. Almost before his eyes
are open he bites at his nest mates for apparently no other reason than
that they come within reach of his bill. Soon his eyes open and within a
few days a wonderful change begins to take place in his
appearance.^{107} Little bunches of white down sprout all over his body,
and, growing rapidly, transform the ugly, purple-black nestling into a
snowy creature clad in softest down.

[Illustration: 107. Young Pelican in tree nest, showing first appearance
of white down.]

At the same time he has been growing much stronger; he is able to sit
up,^{108} his fighting abilities have greatly increased, and his voice,
after passing through a rasping _k-r-r-r-ing_ stage, has become a high,
piercing cry very closely resembling the scream of a child in extreme
pain. Young Pelicans uttering this call chiefly made up the chorus one
could hear all day and at intervals during the night on Pelican Island.

Pelicans of the same nest never seem to recover from the mutual enmity
with which they begin life. Quarreling is the normal condition of
affairs among the children of a Pelican family, and as they always
scream loudest when fighting, one cause for the continuous uproar is
evident. Another is the question of food, and just at this point I may
pause a moment to describe the manner in which the young Pelicans are
fed.

[Illustration: 108. Young Pelican, downy stage.]

So far as I know, Pelicans live wholly on fish, and the difference
between the fare of a young Pelican and that of its parent is in the
size of its finny food. I have seen fish twelve inches long in the
throat of an old Pelican, while the pouch of a very young bird contained
several fishes less than an inch in length.

It is plain to be seen, therefore, that when an old Pelican goes fishing
for his family he must keep constantly in mind the size of his offspring
and bring home little fish for little birds, larger fish for larger
ones.

Immediately after the parent returns from its fishing expedition, the
young cluster about it and the outcry begins. But the old one takes it
very patiently, sitting quite still until ready to open its creel, as it
were. Then he takes a stand if possible a little above the young, drops
his lower bill with its pouch, when at once the young thrust in their
heads to secure their morning’s catch. On one occasion I saw three
half-grown Pelicans with their heads and necks entirely out of sight in
the parent’s pouch, and all were prodding about so vigorously that one
would have thought it would be damaged past mending.

Having been fed, one might suppose that for a time peace would reign in
the Pelican household; but, after emptying their parent’s pouch, the
young immediately begin to squabble over the contents of their own. Here
is real cause for war, and they grasp each other by the bill and twist
and turn like athletes in a test of strength, seldom, however, with
serious results.

[Illustration: 109. Young Pelican, wing quills appearing.]

Returning to our sketch of the young Pelican’s growth: shortly after the
acquisition of the white down, the wing feathers begin to grow. As yet
the sprouting feathers are useless, but with them come strength and
courage to leave the nest and to clamber about in search of the foes who
perhaps have been mocking him for days, from their nest on an adjoining
limb. In spite of his broadly webbed toes, he manages to climb about in
the bushes with more or less ease;^{109} but in this climbing he is
greatly aided by his bill. Indeed, if it were not for the safety hook
made by the bill, head, and neck, many a young Pelican would have a
premature tumble. As it is, this hook is often the only thing that saves
him if he chances to lose his footing; catching by the bill and neck he
hangs for a moment, and then, like a gymnast, hauls himself up by the
aid of his toes.

[Illustration: 110. Young Pelicans, stage preceding flight.]

If the young Pelican’s home is on the ground, at this age he waddles
about playing by himself or fighting all comers. He dabbles in the
shallow water, filling his pouch with mud and water, bits of sticks,
shells, and weeds; then dropping the point of his bill downward so that
the mud and water ooze out, he carefully examines the remainder, piece
by piece, as if to see whether it is palatable. Even when alone he
sometimes loses his temper. I saw one evidently much annoyed by the
appearance of a displaced feather in his wing, and in a vain effort to
catch it he whirled about like a kitten chasing its own tail.

But the fast-growing wing plumes soon seem to be a source of
inspiration, rather than of annoyance. The young Pelicans feel a new and
strange power coming to them, and they stand in the nest and aimlessly
wave their now nearly grown wings, until some day an impulse prompts
them to spring into the air.^{110} The immediate result is a humiliating
tumble, for Pelicans, unlike smaller birds, must learn to fly. Once on
the ground he has a safer place to practice, and with a hop, skip, and a
flap, he makes brave efforts to mount skyward. Finally he succeeds, and
the awkward nestling becomes a creature of power and grace, sailing away
on broad pinions to join its elders.

With this wonderful gift of flight comes a complete change in the
Pelican’s character and behavior. From a noisy, quarrelsome fledgeling,
whose days were passed in screaming and squabbling, he is transformed
into a dignified, patriarchal-like bird so absolutely voiceless that I
have never heard a wild Pelican utter a sound, nor do I know of any one
who has; while in disposition he has become so peaceful that under the
strongest provocation he shows no desire to protest.

Just what has influenced him—who can say? It is one of Nature’s
mysteries. But let us hope that the same charm may be exerted on every
noisy, quarrelsome creature.




                                 INDEX


 Audubon, J. J., 155.

 Auk, Razorbilled, on Bird Rock, 167, 169;
     tameness of, 170;
     nesting of, 176;
     young of, 176.
   The, 154.


 Bayberries, 26.

 Bird-Lore, 9.

 Bird photography, definition of, 1;
   scientific value of, 1, 34;
   charm of, 3, 39;
   outfit for, 6;
   methods of, 26.

 Bird Rock, 130, 150, 152.

 Birds, adult, photographing, 33.
   Young, photographing, 32;
     return of, to nesting ground, 192.

 Bittern, American, 29, 70.
   Least, haunts of, 62;
     mode of progression of, 62;
     notes of, 63, 72;
     nest of, 65;
     protective mimicry of, 67;
     courage of, 68;
     eggs of, destroyed by Marsh Wren, 72;
     intelligence of, 75;
     eating eggs, 75.

 Blackbird, Red-winged, 26, 69, 70, 94, 194.

 Blinds, 23.

 Bobolink, 95, 100, 194.

 Bonaventure Island, 130, 138, 139, 141.

 Bourque, Captain Peter, 164.

 Brewster, William, 63, 103, 133, 160.

 Bryant, Dr. Henry, 159.

 Bryon Island, 152, 162.

 Bulb, 21, 22.


 Canadian Government, 189.

 Cartier, Jacques, 154.

 Cape Breton, 152.

 Catbird, 37.

 Cat-tails, 90.

 Camera, uses of, 1–4;
     kinds of, 6.
   Hand, 8;
     Kearton’s, 7;
     long-focus, 7;
     reflecting, 8;
     twin-lens, 8;
     snap-shot, 8;
     dummy, 35;
     triumph of, 171.

 Cameras used in Gulf of St. Lawrence, 133.

 Cannon, 160.

 Chickadee, tameness of, 47;
   in Central Park, 48;
   photographing, 49;
   alighting on hand, 51;
   nesting of, 52;
   habits of, when nesting, 53–55;
   young of, 57–61.

 Chuck-will’s-widow, 146.

 Civilization, effects of, on wild life, 128.

 Clamp, ball-and-socket, 22, 24, 29.

 Cliff photography, 25.

 Climbers, 24.

 Codfishing, 136.

 Cormorants, Double-crested, 132.

 Corncrake, 146.

 Cornel, 142.

 Crane, 85.

 Crow, 65.


 Dalhousie, 146.

 Dark-cloth, 24.

 Deer, 25.

 Dogwood, 26.


 Enlargements, photographic, 7, 12, 13.


 Finch, Pine, 137.

 Finders, 8.

 Flash-light, 25.

 Flicker, 14.

 Food, photographing, 26.


 Galapagos, 129.

 Gallinule, Florida, 63, 69–71.

 Gannets, on Bonaventure, 139, 143–145;
   destruction of, by Cartier, 154;
   described by Audubon, 157;
   killed for bait, 158;
   number of, 159;
   decrease of, 160;
   on Bird Bock, 171, 181–183;
   photographing, 187;
   fearlessness of, 187;
   manner of feeding, 187.

 Grand Entry, 147.

 Grebe, Pied-billed, 69, 70.

 Gregory, J. U., 163.

 Grosse Isle, 147.

 Guillemots, 149.

 Gulf of St. Lawrence, Bird Rocks of, 128, 129.

 Gull, Black-backed, 147.
   Herring, on Percé Rock, 134;
     feeding in fields, 136;
     nesting on cliffs, 137;
     note of, 137.


 Hackensack marshes, value of, 89;
   beauty of, 89;
   geological history of, 89;
   flowers of, 90, 92;
   animal life of, 93.

 Haunts, photographing, 26.

 Hawk, Marsh, 29–31, 92.

 Hen, Heath, 109.
   Moor, 70.
   Water, 70.

 Heron, Great Blue, killing of, 85;
     wildness of, 86;
     rookeries of, 86;
     nests of, 87.
   Night, rookery of, 76;
     call of, 77;
     protection of, 77;
     nests of, 78;
     food of, 78;
     limy deposits of, killing vegetation, 78;
     young of, 79;
     death of young of, 81;
     feeding by parents, 81;
     fall from nest, 81.

 Home photography, 40.

 Howe, R. II, Jr., 123.


 Iconoscope, 8.

 Inaccessible Island, 129.

 Iris, 142.

 Islands, preserving influences of, 108, 128.


 Jay, Blue, 42.

 Junco, 42, 137.


 Kearton brothers, 7, 23, 25.

 Kerguelen Island, 129.

 Kittiwake, on Percé Rock, 133;
   calling, 172;
   on Bird Rock, 177;
   nests and young of, 177;
   number of, on Bird Rock, 183.


 Lantern slides, 7.

 Laysan Island, 129.

 Lens, the, 10.
   Tests, 14–19.

 Little Bird Rock, 153.

 Loon, 70.

 Lucas, F. A., 154.


 Mackay, George II, 123, 192.

 Magdalen Islands, 130, 146.

 Marsh Birds, notes of, 70.
   Mallow, 92, 93.
   Mystery of, 70.

 Maryland Yellow-throat, 29, 38.

 Massachusetts:
   Boston, 42;
   Cambridge, 63;
   Martha’s Vineyard, 109;
   Muskeget, 109;
   Penikese, 108, 122–127;
   Weepeckets, 109;
   Wood’s Holl, 109.

 Maynard, C. J., 160.

 McKinlay, James, 146.

 Migration, 27;
   speculations on origin of, 191–195.

 Mirror, 24.

 Mount St. Anne, 137.

 Murre, Brünnich’s, 169;
     number of, on Bird Rock, 183.
   Common, 169;
     number of, on Bird Rock, 183.
   Ringed, 174.
   Eggs and young of, destroyed, 160, 161;
     on Bryon, 162;
     on Bird Rock, 167;
     tameness of, 170;
     eggs of, 174, 175;
     young of, 175;
     number of, on Bird Rock, 182.


 Nests and Eggs, photographing, 28.

 New Jersey:
   Englewood, 52;
   Hackensack Marshes, 89.

 New York:
   Central Park, 48;
   Cayuga County, 65, 69, 86;
   Great Gull Island, 108;
   Long Island, 107.

 Nuthatch, 42.


 Oölogists, 65.

 Owl, use of, in photographing birds, 37.
   Barred, 46.
   Screech, photographing, 44;
     calls of, 44, 45;
     food of, 45;
     manner of feeding of, 45;
     young of, 45.
   Short-eared, 49.


 Pelican, Brown, 146;
     returning to Pelican Island, 192, 195;
     persecution of, 195, 196;
     daily habits of, 197–199, 202;
     pugnacity and calls of young of, 198, 190;
     flight of, 200;
     manner of fishing of, 201;
     pouch of, 201;
     number of, on Pelican Island, 204, 205;
     nesting of, 205–207;
     development and habits of young of, 207–213;
     feeding of, 210;
     voicelessness of adult of, 213.
   Island, 191–214.

 Pennsylvania: Presque Isle, 64.

 Percé, isolation of, 130;
     charm of, 135.
   Rock, 130;
     size of, 132;
     birds of, 132, 133, 135.

 Petrel, Leach’s, on Bird Rock, 179;
   nesting of, 180;
   young of, 181;
   call of, 185;
   habits of, at night, 185.

 Pictou, 146.

 Plates, photographic, 22.

 Puffins, on Bryon, 162;
   on Bird Rock, 169, 170;
   nesting, 177;
   ferocity of, 178;
   appearance of, 179;
   number of, on Bird Rock, 182.


 Raven, 137.

 Rail, Clapper, 70.
   Sora, 95, 100.

 Razorbills, on Bird Rock, 167, 169;
   tameness of, 170;
   nesting of, 176;
   young of, 176;
   number of, on Bird Rock, 183.

 Red Cedar, 26.

 Reedbird, 26, 95.

 Robin, 22, 191.

 Rowley, John, 9.


 Sable Island, 191.

 Screen for nest photography, 31.

 Seasons, photographing, 27.

 Shelbourne, W. E., 149, 173.

 Shiras, G. A., 25.

 Shutter, curtain, 9;
   focal-plane, 9, 20;
   iris, 19;
   unicum, 15, 20.

 Snow, photographing after, 41.

 Sparrow, Fox, 149.
   House, photographing, 40, 43;
     notes of, 41;
     intelligence of, 40, 43.
   Ipswich, 191.
   Savanna, 137.
   Swamp, 95, 100.
   White-throated, 137, 142.

 Swallow, Bank, 96.
   Barn, 96.
   Eave, 96.
   Rough-winged, 96.
   Tree, nesting site of, 29;
     range of, 96;
     in Hackensack marshes, 96;
     roosting habits of, 96;
     evening and morning flights of, 97–101;
     bathing in trees, 101;
     exhibiting procreative and nesting habits prematurely, 103;
     migration of, 104.


 Tabor, E. G., 65.

 Taker, Captain Hubbard, 151, 163, 186, 189.

 Telephoto, 12, 17.

 Tern, Arctic, 111.
   Common, 109;
     nesting of, 110, 112;
     action of colony of, 111;
     notes of, 111, 117;
     bravery of, 111;
     young of, 112–114, 118, 122, 125;
     returning to nest, 115;
     photographing, 116, 117;
     hearing of, 120;
     on sheep, 123.
   Roseate, on Weepeckets, 109, 110;
     note of, 111;
     on Penikese, 123.

 Terns, uses of, 106;
   grace and beauty of, 106;
   destruction of, 107;
   on islands, 108;
   protection of, 108, 127.

 Thrush, Wood, 39.

 Towhee, 38.

 Tree trunk, artificial, 23, 36.

 Tripod, 22, 28.

 Tubing, 22.

 Twin-flower, 142.


 Vireo, Red-eyed, 39.
   White-eyed, 39.
   Yellow-throated, 39.

 Virginia: Cobb’s Island, 107.


 Warbler, Blue-winged, 38.
   Chestnut-sided, 38.

 Wild cherry, 26.

 Wild rice, 92, 94.

 Winter, feeding birds in, 42.

 Woodcock, 26.

 Woodpecker, Downy, 42.

 Wren, Long-billed Marsh, 69, 72, 94.


                                THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          By FRANK M. CHAPMAN.


  =Bird Studies with a Camera. With Introductory Chapters on the Outfit
      and Methods of the Bird Photographer.= By FRANK M. CHAPMAN,
      Assistant Curator of Vertebrate Zoölogy in the American Museum of
      Natural History; Author of “Handbook of Birds of Eastern North
      America” and “Bird-Life.” Illustrated with over 100 Photographs
      from Nature by the Author. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

Bird students and photographers will find that this book possesses for
them a unique interest and value. It contains fascinating accounts of
the habits of some of our common birds and descriptions of the largest
bird colonies existing in eastern North America; while its author’s
phenomenal success in photographing birds in Nature not only lends to
the illustrations the charm of realism, but makes the book a record of
surprising achievements with the camera. The book is practical as well
as descriptive, and in the opening chapters the questions of camera,
lens, plates, blinds, decoys, and other pertinent matters are fully
discussed, making the work an admirable guide for the camera hunter.

  =Bird-Life. A Guide to the Study of our Common Birds.= With 75
      full-page Plates and numerous Text Drawings by Ernest
      Seton-Thompson. LIBRARY EDITION, 12mo, cloth, $1.75; TEACHERS’
      EDITION, same as Library Edition, but containing an Appendix, with
      new matter designed for the use of teachers, and including lists
      of birds for each month of the year, 12mo, cloth, $2.00. Edition
      with 75 Colored Lithographic Plates, 8vo, cloth, $5.00.

TEACHERS’ MANUAL. To accompany Portfolios of COLORED PLATES of
“Bird-Life.” Contains the same text as the Teachers’ Edition of
“Bird-Life,” but is without the 75 uncolored plates. Sold only with the
Portfolios, as follows: _Portfolio No. I._ Permanent Residents and
Winter Visitants. 32 plates. _Portfolio No. II._ March and April
Migrants. 24 plates. _Portfolio No. III._ May Migrants, Types of Birds’
Eggs, and 9 half-tone plates showing Types of Birds’ Nests. 34 Plates.
Price of Portfolios, each, $1.25; with the MANUAL, $2.00; the three
Portfolios, with the MANUAL, $4.00.

  =Handbook of Birds of Eastern North America.= With Keys to the
      Species, Descriptions of their Plumages, Nests, etc., and their
      Distribution and Migrations. With over 200 Illustrations. 12mo.
      LIBRARY EDITION, $3.00; POCKET EDITION, flexible covers, $3.50.




                D. APPLETON AND COMPANY’S PUBLICATIONS.


  _FAMILIAR LIFE IN FIELD AND FOREST._ By F. SCHUYLER MATHEWS. Uniform
      with “Familiar Flowers,” “Familiar Trees,” and “Familiar Features
      of the Roadside.” With many Illustrations. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

The great popularity of Mr. F. Schuyler Mathews’s charmingly illustrated
books upon flowers, trees, and roadside life insures a cordial reception
for his forthcoming book, which describes the animals, reptiles,
insects, and birds commonly met with in the country. His book will be
found a most convenient and interesting guide to an acquaintance with
common wild creatures.

  _FAMILIAR FEATURES OF THE ROADSIDE._ By F. SCHUYLER MATHEWS, author of
      “Familiar Flowers of Field and Garden,” “Familiar Trees and their
      Leaves,” etc. With 130 Illustrations by the Author. 12mo. Cloth,
      $1.75.

“Which one of us, whether afoot, awheel, on horseback, or in comfortable
carriage, has not whiled away the time by glancing about? How many of
us, however, have taken in the details of what charms us? We see the
flowering fields and budding woods, listen to the notes of birds and
frogs, the hum of some big bumblebee, but how much do we know of what we
sense? These questions, these doubts have occurred to all of us, and it
is to answer them that Mr. Mathews sets forth. It is to his credit that
he succeeds so well. He puts before us in chronological order the
flowers, birds, and beasts we meet on our highway and byway travels,
tells us how to recognize them, what they are really like, and gives us
at once charming drawings in words and lines, for Mr. Mathews is his own
illustrator.”—_Boston Journal._

  _FAMILIAR TREES AND THEIR LEAVES._ By F. SCHUYLER MATHEWS, author of
      “Familiar Flowers of Field and Garden,” “The Beautiful Flower
      Garden,” etc. Illustrated with over 200 Drawings from Nature by
      the Author, and giving the botanical names and habitat of each
      tree and recording the precise character and coloring of its
      leafage. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

“It is not often that we find a book which deserves such unreserved
commendation. It is commendable for several reasons: it is a book that
has been needed for a long time, it is written in a popular and
attractive style, it is accurately and profusely illustrated, and it is
by an authority on the subject of which it treats.”—_Public Opinion._

  _FAMILIAR FLOWERS OF FIELD AND GARDEN._ By F. SCHUYLER MATHEWS.
      Illustrated with 200 Drawings by the Author. 12mo. Library
      Edition, cloth, $1.75; Pocket Edition, flexible morocco, $2.25.

“A book of much value and interest, admirably arranged for the student
and the lover of flowers.... The text is full of compact information,
well selected and interestingly presented.... It seems to us to be a
most attractive handbook of its kind.”—_New York Sun._

  _THE ART OF TAXIDERMY._ By JOHN ROWLEY, Chief of the Department of
      Taxidermy in the American Museum of Natural History. Illustrated.
      12mo. Cloth, $2.00.

Mr. Rowley has introduced new features into the art which have not been
described in print before, and his book represents the latest advances
in taxidermy as an art and as a science. He takes a hunting party to the
Canadian woods in his opening chapter, and gives a series of vivid
pictures of actual field work. This is followed by a series of careful
explanations of the proper treatment of animals, large and small, of
birds, and heads. The many lovers of outdoor sport who are interested as
amateurs in the various phases of taxidermy will find their requirements
fully met, while to professional taxidermists this important and
comprehensive work will be indispensable. It is elaborately illustrated.

  _INSECT LIFE._ By JOHN HENRY COMSTOCK, Professor of Entomology in
      Cornell University. With Illustrations by Anna Botsford Comstock,
      member of the Society of American Wood Engravers. 12mo. Library
      Edition, cloth, $2.50; Teachers’ and Students’ Edition, $1.50.

“Any one who will go through the work with fidelity will be rewarded by
a knowledge of insect life which will be of pleasure and benefit to him
at all seasons, and will give an increased charm to the days or weeks
spent each summer outside of the great cities. It is the best book of
its class which has yet appeared.”—_New York Mail and Express._

“The arrangement of the lessons and experiments and the advice on
collection and manipulation are only some of the very admirable features
of a work that must take first place in the class to which it
belongs.”—_Philadelphia Press._

“The volume is admirably written, and the simple and lucid style is a
constant delight.... It is sure to serve an excellent purpose in the
direction of popular culture, and the love of natural science which it
will develop in youthful minds can hardly fail to bear rich
fruit.”—_Boston Beacon._

  _OUTLINES OF THE EARTH’S HISTORY._ By Prof. N. S. SHALER, of Harvard
      University. Illustrated. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.

“Any one who reads the preliminary chapters will not stop until he has
read the entire book. The subject is certainly one of supreme interest,
and it would be hard to find any one more competent to write about it
than Professor Shaler.”—_New York Herald._

“Professor Shaler fortunately possesses a popular style, and what he
writes on a scientific topic is entertaining as well as instructive.
This book is illustrated with a number of splendid full-page cuts, which
admirably illuminate the work.”—_Boston Globe._

“Professor Shaler, of Harvard, in the well-worded text and the handsome
illustrations, presents an interesting and instructive volume to the
students of physiography. It is a simple study of the earth’s history,
revealing Nature’s processes and its continuous and increasing,
unceasing energies. It is well calculated to arouse an interest in
geological study, as it furnishes the key to unlock some of the great
mysteries the student meets in this broad field of science.... He
explains many curious phenomena. The work is very free from
technicalities, and is so plainly told as to be easily understood by
every intellectual reader.”—_Chicago Inter-Ocean._




                      APPLETONS’ HOME-READING BOOKS.


 Edited by W. T. HARRIS, A. M., LL. D., U. S. Commissioner of Education.


                  CLASSED IN FOUR DIVISIONS, AS FOLLOWS:

THE FIRST comprises natural history, including popular treatises on
plants and animals, and also descriptions of geographical localities,
all of which pertain to the study of geography in the common schools.
Descriptive astronomy, and anything that relates to organic Nature,
comes under this head.

THE SECOND includes whatever relates to natural philosophy, statics,
dynamics, properties of matter, and chemistry, organic and inorganic.

THE THIRD covers history, biography, ethnology, ethics, civics, and all
that relates to the lives of individuals or of nations.

THE FOURTH, works of general literature that portray human nature in the
form of feelings, emotions, and the various expressions of art and
music.

                                                                  _Net._

 The Story of the Birds. J. N. BASKETT                             $0.65
 The Story of the Fishes. J. N. BASKETT                              .75
 The Plant World. FRANK VINCENT                                      .60
 The Animal World. FRANK VINCENT                                     .60
 The Insect World. C. M. WEED                                        .60
 The Story of Oliver Twist. ELLA B. KIRK                             .60
 The Story of Rob Roy. EDITH T. HARRIS                               .60
 In Brook and Bayou. CLARA KERN BAYLISS                              .60
 Curious Homes and their Tenants. JAMES CARTER BEARD                 .65
 Crusoe’s Island. F. A. OBER                                         .65
 Uncle Sam’s Secrets. O. P. AUSTIN                                   .75
 The Hall of Shells. Mrs. A. S. HARDY                                .60

 Nature Study Readers. J. W. TROEGER.
   Harold’s First Discoveries. Book I                                .25
   Harold’s Rambles. Book II                                         .40
   Harold’s Quests. Book III                                         .50
   Harold’s Explorations. Book IV
   Harold’s Discussions. Book V

 Uncle Robert’s Geography. FRANCIS W. PARKER and NELLIE L. HELM.
     Playtime and Seedtime. Book I                                   .32
   On the Farm. Book II                                              .42
   Uncle Robert’s Visit. Book III                                    .50
   Rivers and Winds. Book IV
   Mountain, Plain, and Desert. Book V
   Our Own Continent. Book VI

 News from the Birds. LEANDER S. KEYSER                              .60
 Historic Boston and its Neighborhood. EDWARD EVERETT HALE           .50
 The Earth and Sky. EDWARD S. HOLDEN                                 .28
 The Family of the Sun. EDWARD S. HOLDEN                             .50
 Stories of the Great Astronomers. EDWARD S. HOLDEN                  .75
 About the Weather. MARK W. HARRINGTON                               .65
 Stories from the Arabian Nights. ADAM SINGLETON                     .65
 Our Country’s Flag and the Flags of Foreign Countries. EDWARD S.
   HOLDEN                                                            .80
 Our Navy in Time of War. FRANKLIN MATTHEWS                          .75
 The Chronicles of Sir John Froissart. ADAM SINGLETON                .65
 The Storied West Indies. F. A. OBER                                 .75
 Uncle Sam’s Soldiers. O. P. AUSTIN                                  .75
                        _Others in preparation._




                     THE LIBRARY OF USEFUL STORIES.

             Illustrated. 16mo. Cloth, 40 cents per volume.


                              _NOW READY._

 =The Story of the Alphabet.= By EDWARD CLODD.
 =The Story of Eclipses.= By G. F. CHAMBERS.
 =The Story of the Living Machine.= By H. W. CONN.
 =The Story of the British Race.= By JOHN MUNRO, C. E.
 =The Story of Geographical Discovery.= By JOSEPH JACOBS.
 =The Story of the Cotton Plant.= By F. WILKINSON, F.G.S.
 =The Story of the Mind.= By Prof. J. MARK BALDWIN.
 =The Story of Photography.= By ALFRED T. STORY.
 =The Story of Life in the Seas.= By SIDNEY J. HICKSON.
 =The Story of Germ Life.= By Prof. H. W. CONN.
 =The Story of the Earth’s Atmosphere.= By DOUGLAS ARCHIBALD.
 =The Story of Extinct Civilizations of the East.= By ROBERT ANDERSON, M.
    A., F. A. S.
 =The Story of Electricity.= By JOHN MUNRO, C. E.
 =The Story of a Piece of Coal.= By E. A. MARTIN, F.G.S.
 =The Story of the Solar System.= By C. F. CHAMBERS, F. R. A. S.
 =The Story of the Earth.= By H. G. SEELEY, F.R.S.
 =The Story of the Plants.= By GRANT ALLEN.
 =The Story of “Primitive” Man.= By EDWARD CLODD.
 =The Story of the Stars.= By G. F. CHAMBERS, F. R. A. S.

                         OTHERS IN PREPARATION.




                     THE CONCISE KNOWLEDGE LIBRARY


                 Each, small 8vo, half leather, $2.00.


    =The History of the World=,

From the Earliest Historical Time to the Year 1898. By EDGAR SANDERSON,
M. A., author of “A History of the British Empire,” etc.


    =The Historical Reference-Book.=

Comprising a Chronological Table of Universal History, a Chronological
Dictionary of Universal History, and a Biographical Dictionary. With
Geographical Notes. For the use of Students, Teachers, and Readers. By
LOUIS HEILPRIN. Fifth edition, revised to 1898.


    =Natural History.=

By R. LYDEKKER, B. A.; W. F. KIRBY, F. L. S.; B. B. WOODWARD, F. L. S.;
R. KIRKPATRICK; R. I. POCOCK; R. BOWDLER SHARPE, LL. D.; W. GARSTANG, M.
A.; F. A. BATHER, M. A., and H. M. BERNARD, M. A. Nearly 800 pages, and
500 Illustrations drawn especially for this work.


    =Astronomy.=

Fully illustrated. By AGNES M. CLERKE, A. FOWLER, F. R. A. S.,
Demonstrator of Astronomical Physics of the Royal College of Science,
and J. ELLARD GORE, F. R. A. S.




                        ALASKA AND THE KLONDIKE.


                          BY ANGELO HEILPRIN.

_A Journey to the New Eldorado._ With Hints to the Traveler and
Observations on the Physical History and Geology of the Gold Regions,
the Condition of and Methods of Working the Klondike Placers, and the
Laws Governing and Regulating Mining in the Northwest Territory of
Canada. By ANGELO HEILPRIN, Professor of Geology at the Academy of
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Fellow of the Royal Geographical
Society of London, Past-President of the Geographical Society of
Philadelphia, etc. Fully illustrated from Photographs and with a new Map
of the Gold Regions. 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.


  “Will take and retain immediate rank as a contribution of essential
  value not only to the literature of travel, but to that of American
  commercial and political development.... Should be in the hands of
  every person interested either in fact or in prospect in Alaska and
  the Klondike.”—_Brooklyn Standard-Union._

  “For the first time the new gold fields of the North have been dealt
  with by a scientific man capable of weighing evidence.”—_Chicago
  Evening Post._

  “Presents for the first time a plain, straightforward story of what he
  saw, how he saw it, the men and things he met, what the hardships were
  and how he overcame them. The book is fully illustrated. It is replete
  with valuable hints and instruction, and students of the gold problem
  in Alaska ought to appreciate it. The entire subject has been
  developed with extreme care and great thoroughness.”—_Boston Globe._

  “It is among the practical books, everywhere bearing evidence of its
  reliability. The story of the journey is told with enough of personal
  incidents and accidents of travel to make every page interesting to
  the general reader, and it will be found of practical value to those
  intending to make the hard journey.”—_Chicago Inter-Ocean._

  “Mr. Heilprin observed Dawson with the eyes of a student of great
  scientific attainments, who had little in common with the crowd of
  elemental and uncouth men gathered there, or with their life; and he
  noted many things which they themselves probably accepted as matters
  of course, besides writing an important scientific treatise.”—_Boston
  Herald._

  “It is noticeably fair-minded in its presentation of facts—the work of
  a clear-minded and well-trained observer.”—_New York Outlook._

  “The first adequate presentation of the Klondike gold problem made by
  a geologist.”—_New York Mail and Express._


                   D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold or blackletter font in =equals=.
 ● The caret (^) serves as a superscript indicator, applicable to
     individual characters (like 2^d) and even entire phrases (like
     1^{st}).





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD STUDIES WITH A CAMERA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


