The Project Gutenberg eBook of Edaville Railroad
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Edaville Railroad
        The Cranberry Belt

Author: Linwood W. Moody

Photographer: Ellis D. Atwood
        Cyrus Hosmer

Release date: February 14, 2025 [eBook #75376]

Language: English

Original publication: South Carver, Massachusetts: Ellis D. Atwood, 1947

Credits: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDAVILLE RAILROAD ***


Transcriber’s Note:

 ● Italics in the original are noted by _underscores_.
 ● Small capitals in the original are converted to ALL CAPS.
 ● Ditto marks (“) in tables or lists with train details have been
   replaced with the text they represent.
 ● Obvious typos have been corrected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                EDAVILLE
                                RAILROAD


                          by Linwood W. Moody




                           EDAVILLE RAILROAD

                           The Cranberry Belt

                                   by

                            Linwood W. Moody


      (_The photographs illustrating this book were taken by Cyrus
      Hosmer 3D, 34 Chester Road, Belmont 78, Massachusetts;
      Linwood W. Moody, Union, Maine; and Ellis D. Atwood, South
      Carver, Massachusetts, and are credited accordingly._)


                              Published by

                            Ellis D. Atwood

                      South Carver, Massachusetts

                                  1947

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: MAP OF THE EDAVILLE R.R. SO. CARVER, MASS.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                FOREWORD


_Edaville Railroad_ isn’t a complete story of Ellis D. Atwood’s midget
cranberry line. It isn’t an all-time history of the odd and colorful
little roads that preceded it and of which the _Cranberry Belt_ is the
last and final survivor.

A while ago Mr. Atwood suggested writing-up his Lilliputian carrier for
the benefit of his host of visitors who aren’t as familiar as we are
with such abbreviated railroad sizes. Something concise yet generally
explanatory, answering most of the questions that might pop into your
mind. Something to give you a fairly good idea of what the Edaville
Railroad is and what its forebears have been. Something complete enough
to cover the subject in a cursory way and still be printed to sell for
the price of a ticket at Edaville, if he was selling tickets here.

No book has ever been written telling completely, in words or pictures,
the all-time story of these diminutive lines. Maybe sometime one will
be, and your reception to this booklet could be a deciding factor.

However, _Edaville Railroad_ will be a helpful guide-book for your visit
here and your ride on the Tom Thumb train. Or, if you aren’t already
down here, it will show you what you’re missing!

                                                        LINWOOD W. MOODY

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              INTRODUCTION


I don’t like this--prefatory pages in books. Why can’t we speak our
piece in the main text without expecting a feller to wade through
Forewords, Prefaces, and Prologues? We can, if our gray-matter is agile
enough.

But--my _Introduction_!

The world’s railroads aren’t all the same, you know. Width of track, or
_gauge_, varies. Standard gauge, as ’most everyone knows, is four-feet,
eight-and-one-half inches between the rails and there are plenty of
hypotheses about how it got that way.

A few roads are wider than standard--five-feet, and five-and-a-half.
Years ago you could even go all the way from New York to Chicago on
tracks six feet wide. England once made merry on some _seven_ foot
gauge.

Narrower gauge was much more common. Three feet and three-and-a-half
once claimed thousands of miles. Why! In Grandpa’s day there were no
less than thirty-seven different gauges of track in our fair land, and
Lord only knows how many the foreign countries had, with their
millimeters and other measuring sticks. Today, in North America, the
four-feet, eight-and-a-half-inchers have pretty well switched the
non-standard lines off the railroad map.

Of our own 227,000 miles of line 99-1/2 per cent is standard gauge, a
scant 932 being something else--724 of it the Colorado three-footers. On
only 380 miles is there a semblance of passenger service! Of Canada’s
42,000 miles, 90 is narrow gauge--the three-foot White Pass & Yukon
Route. Mexico, however, hangs onto her slim gauge a little better and
2,400 of her total 12,600 miles of road is three-feet wide. The 809 mile
Newfoundland Railway, three-and-a-half feet narrow, is likewise
prosperously content with its non-conformity.

Of the whole world’s railway mileage, 788,000--but let’s not get too
involved here. Anyway, foreign lands still consider economical
transportation more important than the distance between the rails, and
many miles of narrow tracks still thread hill and dale beyond the seas.

The very narrowest of them all, excepting some industrial tramway or
miniature freak, was the vaunted two-footer. Sixty-centimeter, they call
’em over there, which is just another way of saying twenty-three and
five-eighths inches. England had a few, and France has her famous
“decaville” railways. The far East, Africa, and Australia still run
generous two-foot mileage, and Latin America is pretty fond of the
little cusses.

Up here in our country, half a century ago, they blossomed like roses at
sunrise, bloomed lustily through the morning, but wilted ere there’d
been time for the winds of Fate to blow their pollen around in good
shape.

The top-puff midgets were the stout little virtuosi up in Maine. Their
bantam chests jingled merrily with medals they’d won. A few scattered
hybrids did some anemic bush-pushing elsewhere--one in Pennsylvania, one
in New Mexico, and a third in Colorado’s icy mountains. They weren’t
_real_ railroads, though. Either industrial outfits or kind of
street-carrish affairs. That’s why I skipped ’em here. Had to draw the
line somewhere.

The ten two-footers in Maine boasted about 212 miles of line. They were
built and run like the big railroads. Had freight, and passenger trains.
Were governed by the same laws and regulations. And were immensely vital
to the loves and lives of the neighborhood. Their smoky smells were just
as alluring and they could holler just as loud. I always thought they
were a bit more democratic and hail-fellow-well-met than the more
decorous grownups. Colorful, and kind of dramatic, too!

They passed, not because folks wanted all railroads alike. Not because
they didn’t measure up. Worse than that. They limped into the sunset
because people didn’t use them any more. Their _gauge_ made no
difference. Plenty of standard gauges puffed into the limbo too. Neither
could run without money. The two-footers stood it longer than their more
expensive relatives of wider size. No. Their narrow gauge wasn’t the
reason although the standardization tycoons beefed about non-conformity
and the cost of transferring freight.

The decade of the 1930’s saw them go. For a while longer the Bridgton
line and the little Monson were tolerated by some and cherished by a
few, but when clouds of Peace darkened the war-red sky they were
gone--the last two-footer had whistled off leaving only memory-trains to
scoot through the mid-regions of the past.

That’s why the Edaville Railroad stands out. Why it’s a splendid
anti-climax to an era of colorful midget railroading. Not so much
because it’s the last survivor, as I persist in calling it, as a
resurrection--an ideal risen from the ashes of Yesterday.

Here it is: not a synthetical reproduction but those very same engines
and cars that made railroad history for three generations, alive and
puffing again on Ellis Atwood’s eighteen-hundred acres. A seed from
history that now blooms with the cranberries, sprouting in that same
sand that perennializes faded shrubs from the Holy Commonwealth,
Plymouth Colony, America in the making.

That’s why I had to have an _Introduction_. All right?

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           EDAVILLE RAILROAD

                           THE CRANBERRY BELT


Well, well, well; just look at this--

The Edaville Railroad. Eighteen hundred acres long and only two feet
wide!

Let’s look it over. There’s nothing like it anywhere. As if Plymouth
County and the town of Carver weren’t famous enough already, not to
mention Ellis Atwood’s model cranberry plantation, this little narrow
gauge railroad now vies with cranberry crops and _Mayflower_ packets in
spectacular “firsts”.

Plymouth, you know, is famous far and wide for being the stern and
rockbound coast where the Pilgrims debarked three hundred and
twenty-seven years ago. That’s Fourth Grade stuff. Also pretty well
known, this historical region is first in world cranberry growing. Yes.
Grows more little red berries on its pleasant, frugiferous acres than
the rest of the world combined. To top this off Carver boasts first
place among the cranberry towns, its 2,800 acres of bog harvesting
100,000 barrels a year--fifteen per cent of the whole world’s crop! No
argument about our list of “firsts” so far, is there?

While we’re firsting: ages ago, when Carver was the first iron producing
corner of the New World, the very first iron teakettle made in America
is said to have been cast here--from Carver iron, Carver smelter, and
moulded in Carver sand.

But, back to that corner of the town that’s Ellis Atwood’s own, private
first--eighteen hundred acre Edaville.

Edaville, 210 acres of actual bog, is the biggest privately owned
cranberry business in the world. Nearly 10,000 barrels of the sour
little things grow here every year.

All this, with ultra-attractive buildings and equipment, is enough to
set Mr. Atwood and his Thanksgiving sauce up as high as a block-signal.
But wait: his Edaville Railroad!

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  One of the first Edaville freight trains, with railroad fan John Holt
    at the throttle of Monson engine No. 4.
]

The Edaville Railroad is maybe the most spectacular of all these
interesting “firsts”. It’s even more so because it’s the last--but we’ll
come to this _last_ part later. Let’s consider the _first_, first.

The first of all these famous Massachusetts cranberry lands to have a
real, he-man, tobacco-chewing railroad, complete to the last fishplate,
resplendent to the last parlor-car, and unbelievably efficient with its
excellent big-railed track, stout little engines, and wonderland cars.
Its importance as a plantation utility and, finally, the holiday fun it
gives you thousands of visitors who’re making it a Sunday spa and a
railroad fans’ Mecca.

That’s the Edaville Railroad, the Cranberry Belt: first of its kind, you
see.

It’s the last one, too.

A cloud of nostalgia dims the brilliance of Edaville lights when we
think of this side of the story. _Last of the two-foot gauges._ Final
survivor of the colorful midgets that once puffed around our
heterogeneous land.

Want to look it over? I thought so; Mr. Atwood is busy right now, and
why wouldn’t he be with the biggest one-man cranberry plantation on
earth, plus a little million civic and philanthropic affairs to see to?
I’ll show you around. Come on!

Here we are--the screenhouse. Cranberry bogs have screenhouses the same
as railroads have trains. These screenhouses, where berries are cleaned
and graded and prepared for market, may be anything from a rough shed to
this super structure here. This is the first one of its kind, too: a
big, yet compact, brick show-place housing not only the berry equipment
and the car shops, the company offices including Mr. Atwood’s own
private sanctum (most admired spot in Edaville!), but brimming with
storage space as well.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Hosmer Photo_)
  Mr. Atwood’s model screenhouse, the finest in the world, built in 1940
    at a cost of--well, that doesn’t matter.
]

The railroad really begins here. Maybe that’s because the first rails
were laid into it for car repairing. There, clustering around like
chicks with Mama Hen, is the railroad station and most of the yards.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  No dieselization on the Edaville. Here passenger extra No. 7 sails
    past work train on sandpit spur.
]

What a sight! Cranberry architecture and railroad artistry all mixed
together under the green pine trees. See the vivid contrast--yellow sand
and the bright blue sky. The red freight cars, and green passenger
coaches sporting their goldleaf name of _Edaville_ along the sides.

Eh? Those other names? Oh; Mr. Atwood restored these cars to their
original appearance and part of his pristine program was to letter
several of them as they were in the beginning. The parlor-car is _Sandy
River & Rangeley Lakes_, one ancient coach is _Bridgton & Saco River_,
and that other one once rolled over the old _Wiscasset & Quebec_ rails.
The idea makes a hit, too.

See--there are some trains scurrying about their cranberry work, while
that string of shiny passenger cars at the station, headed by the
impatient little homuncular engine, is waiting to take you for a ride.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  No. 7 hauls Mr. Atwood’s passenger train, loaded with a hundred of his
    guests.
]

We’ll walk over. (No; that dog won’t bite.) Some station, isn’t it? Just
built this Spring. Thousands of people visit Edaville every week; I
guess lots of them hurry right by Plymouth Rock to come over here.
That’s why Mr. Atwood decided he needed a passenger station.

Yes, it’s quite a place; besides the usual station fixtures it has a
real Fred Harveyish kind of restaurant, a museum, waiting-room, and
social hall besides. That’s where they get together for club meetings,
speeches when some speechster is here, yarn-swapping, and to look at all
the interesting railroad relics and pictures on display there. There’ll
be some barracks upstairs someday, where visitors may bed down for a
night or two.

End of the line? No, not exactly. The tracks go right by the station.
That’s because it’s on a little loop encircling Mr. Atwood’s model
Edaville village--screenhouse, railroad, and all those cozy cottages
where his employees live--and joins the main line again half a mile
away. We’ll see the switch when we go out. Trains can go out of this
station three different ways. You’ll see.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Mr. and Mrs. Atwood smile beside of their de luxe coach “Elthea”,
    named in her honor.
]

No. 7’s hauling the excursion train today. Want to see her? A trim
little pot, don’t you think? Baldwin built her thirty-four years ago and
she was the biggest two-foot gauge engine ever built then. Thirty-five
tons wrapped up there. Doesn’t look it, does she? Her outside frames
enclose four thirty-five inch drivers that can really roll. Hundred and
eighty pounds of steam, twelve-by-sixteen inch cylinders. You won’t see
it today but she can bat ’em off at a sixty mile clip!

Like most of this equipment No. 7 came from the Bridgton & Saco River,
up in Maine.

This tricky little car hooked to her tail was the B. & S. R.’s Railway
Post Office, Express, and Baggage car. Yes, they used to have a regular
mail contract, postal clerks and all. That was before the other war.

This coach, too, was a Bridgton car, the old _Pondicherry_. Laconia Car
Works built her and a mate, the _Mount Pleasant_, when the road was new,
sixty-four years ago. Of course, Mr. Atwood has refinished and renovated
them all. When we go out on the train please notice those coaches down
in the yard: the one with double windows and stained glass was a fine
idea of two-foot de luxe coach accommodations. She’s the _Elthea_, named
for Elthea Atwood, Mr. Atwood’s wife. A proper tribute, too, because she
works right with him in everything--cranberry business, railroad, and
all.

Now: this smooth little wagon on the rear here, _that’s_ the parlor car.

Ever hear of the old Sandy River parlor car? You must have! It’s been in
print ever since Jackson & Sharpe built it, ’way back when. In 1901, to
be exact.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Old Coach “Mount Pleasant”, identical to the “Pondicherry”, both built
    in 1882 by Laconia Car Co.
]

Want to walk through it? We’ve got time. Here’s the smoking end: two
leather seats and a couple of chairs. And in here is the lavatory in one
corner and the car heater in the other--hot water. This spacious cubical
to your left is the toilet; no shoe-horn needed there, eh? Plenty of
room for the old bustles and hoop skirts to swish around.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Interior of parlor car “Rangeley”.
]

Now we’re in the parlor car proper: just see those swivel chairs with
their lush, green upholstery; the deep, filigreed carpet covering the
floor. Fit for the millionaires who used to ride in her, eh?

Each seat has a number, up over the window. Time was, years ago, when
you coughed up an extra simoleon to ride in this buggy. A colored
porter, who’d left New York the night before, stepped from his big
Pullman into this baby-carriage to brush off your dandruff on the
forty-seven mile run through Franklin County’s hills to Rangeley--a
swanky resort in those days.

_Rangeley_ was the car’s name, too: _Rangeley No. 9_.

When the Sandy River was abandoned in 1935 the little _Rangeley_, none
the worse for her generation of scooting through sunny valleys and
boreal storms, was bought by a doctor in Strong, Maine for two hundred
dollars. His big house was right beside the old main line and they left
the parlor car in his own dooryard, sitting on four sticks of
sixty-pound rail she’d rolled over so many times.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  With all the decorum of her wide gauge sisters the little “Rangeley”
    trails the passenger train along the twisting dikes.
]

He died. Then a connoisseur of antiquity who just couldn’t see her sold
for a hen-house or a camp, bought her. Later on Mr. Atwood got her from
him. Came down here on a big trailer one twenty-below-zero morning.
Imagine a parlor car breezing along the highway!

Well, looks like we’re ready to go. Let’s stay here on the rear
platform. Good place to view the sights.

Starts smoothly? Sure: could be the _Federal_ leaving Grand Central.
These little trains ride all right. When track’s kept up you can’t tell
’em from standard gauge.

The enginehouse will be over there. Six stalls: four for the engines and
two for some of the motor cars. Motor cars? Oh yes, there are motor
cars. You’ll see some before we get back.

Look up there at the screenhouse: those big doors are the car shop
tracks. Holds six or eight cars in there. These are the main yards we’re
going through now; storage, mostly. See that track on the higher level
over there? Goes to the screenhouse door where berries are unloaded in
harvesting time. Screen and grade ’em in there. Stiff climb up that
bank, too. Makes the little engines grunt.

This is quite a yard. Confusing, too, until you get it fixed in your
mind. It’s like this: the track we’re on now is the original main line
out of Edaville--down through these yards and out onto the bogs. Now,
since the railroad was completed, it’s kind of an alternative cutoff,
I’d say.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Hosmer Photo_)
  In the shade of Mr. Atwood’s beautiful pine grove the baby cars enjoy
    a Cape Cod siesta.
]

When Mr. Atwood surveyed the station loop (oh, he does all his own
surveying!) he branched it off this line about half a mile down from
here. That’s the switch I told you we’d see when we went out. A train
coming in off the bogs can go around the loop into the station, then
keep on going just as we’re going now, over this track, and back onto
the bogs again.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  A midget freight train puffs up the heavy grade back of Edaville
    village.
]

Running to the upper end of the Atwood property the line swings east; to
our right, it’ll be. Circles down the shore of big Number Two reservoir
and, instead of re-entering the main stem again it comes into these
yards from a totally different direction--on that track to your left,
across the canal. A train coming in that way would head into the station
just the opposite to our direction. But she could proceed around the
little loop and come into the switch below us here and head onto the
bogs the same way we’re going.

Another way: if we’d left the station just now and thrown a switch at
the other end of this yard, we’d have branched across the canal onto
that track over there, and proceeded around the line just the other way
from our present direction. Confusing, yes; but you’ll get it
straightened out when we’ve been around. Western slants or eastern
perspectives, it’s still the last two-foot gauge we’re riding on!

We’re in the grove now. Pretty, isn’t it? Before the big wind of three
or four years ago this was a forest of beautiful pines. That gale played
havoc here as well as down on the coast; blew down over half of Mr.
Atwood’s pet pine trees. He felt pretty sorry at the time but now agrees
that maybe railroad yards are more pleasing than the whispering conifers
were!

How do you like the sound of No. 7’s whistle? Euphonious as any
wide-gauge tooter, eh? He’s blowing for Barboza’s Crossing. We’re
leaving the yards. See that cottage there--Mr. Barboza used to have a
big, ugly rooster; that hellion would attack trains and humans alike. My
shins used to be all gory where he’d clumb me and I strongly suspect
that under his bristling feathers there were black-and-blue spots, too!
No; the train didn’t mash him. We hoped it would, but he was too smart.
Barboza had to chop his head off three times before the tartar went down
for the count.

There: here’s your first cranberry bog, Number Six. Pretty, too;
especially when it’s in bloom. Looks like some strange kind of landscape
gardening. This embankment under us is all “turf work”. Ever hear of
“turfing”? Neither had I, until I came down here. It’s all right, too:
instead of expensive retaining walls or rip-rap they just cut a lot of
square sods and lay them in a just-so way; and there’s a strong,
dependable vertical wall. Looks neat, I think.

Right ahead now is the switch where the loop swings off to the station.
Right here--see! Pretty piece of track, isn’t it? Winding up through
those woods with sunlight and shadows playing across the rails. Over
here--see all those timbers? They’re old ties the New Haven took out of
their Cape lines. All creosoted and mostly hard wood. The New Haven and
the Boston & Maine have been pretty good about helping the Edaville, and
Mr. Atwood bought those ties for less money than the Maine cedar’s cost.
He saws ’em in two and gets a couple of four foot, three inch ties from
each one. Makes wonderful track for these mites to run on.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  A track crew, under the supervision of Foreman Hatch (third from
    left), keeps the section clean.
]

We’re skirting the little Number One reservoir now. Cranberry bogs must
have plenty of water. Mr. Atwood has a system of ditches and canals,
controlled by floodgate-thingamajigs, that supply quick water to any or
all his bogs. This flooding may be for pest control or, in the late
fall, to cover berries as a frost protection. Remember how we often hear
radio reports in late September or October, telling what temperatures
can be expected on the cranberry bogs tonight? Run some water in ’em and
old Jack Frost is frustrated! More gates drain it off quickly when the
danger’s past.

This country is flat. All the water must be pumped into these reservoirs
from some pond or river. His pumping-station is up beyond the Ball Park;
two or three big electric pumps. I forget how many million gallons these
reservoirs hold. Enough to get you all wet, anyway.

Pretty along here; brown sand and blue water and green woods. We think
the narrow gauge railroad adds a lot to the charm, too. We’re blowing
for Plantation Center now. Will stop there probably. Want to get off a
minute?

The Atwoods are strong for landscaping; keep all their grounds so neat
and attractive.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Big Lorain-40 shovel ready to load sand.
]

There: this is the western side of the big, eighteen hundred acre loop;
track runs a couple of miles along the west bounds of Mr. Atwood’s
property and past several of the sand-piles and bogs. Bogs must be
sprinkled with an inch of sand every winter to keep their bed in proper
trim and to combat weeds and bugs. Sand also radiates heat to prevent
the vines from freezing in our cold New England winters. While vines may
freeze into the ice without harming ’em they mustn’t be chilled by the
cold wind, if you can figure that one out. Mr. Atwood spreads nearly ten
thousand yards of sand each year. He’s got a lot of grit, wouldn’t you
say?

This big bog--that’s Fourteen Acre; a record breaker. Shells out nearly
eighty barrels to the acre!

Where did that pile of sand come from? A mile up the line is his
sand-pit. A power shovel loads it onto flatcars and the train hauls it
to these different sand piles; there’s seven or eight thousand yards in
that pile there. When sanding time comes--but you aren’t interested in
all this; you want to see this pocket-edition railroad.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Berry-pickers swarm over 14-Acre Bog, scooping its 80 barrels per
    acre.
]

Look ’way across the big reservoir there: that’s the railroad coming
down the east side. Remember I showed you where it entered the yards
just below the station? The smudge of smoke is a work train. We’ll meet
’em either at the Ball Park or the sand pit.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Loading a train at 14-Acre Bog. Here’s a season when freight trains
    come before the passenger specials.
]

Ball Park? Yes; or more correctly, the _Atwood Athletic Field_. He built
a baseball ground, picnic spot, and a few buildings there. Plenty active
all summer, too. We’ll be up there shortly now.

Incidentally, it’s when we leave the Ball Park that the track swings
east and south again to go down the opposite side of this reservoir,
where the work train is now. It passes Sunset Vista, winds along the
lower end of the reservoir, and finally enters Edaville yard where I
pointed it out to you.

I guess we’re off again. Can you make it?

Isn’t Fourteen Acre a neat looking bog? Not all growers keep their bogs
as neat and trim as Mr. Atwood does. Sure, it costs. There’s something
satisfying in owning the finest cranberry plantation in the world. When
the railroad’s completed and there’s some time to spare he intends to
erect signs around the bogs and at different points of interest,
explaining about cranberry culture, history, production, and how bogs
are built and cared for. Like a self-conducted tour your ride’ll be
then.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  A passenger train smokes across the dike and along the shores of the
    big 300-acre reservoir. 60-pound rail from a White Mountain logging
    road, supported by ex-New Haven ties, makes a wonderful track.
]

We’re crossing a corner of undeveloped swamp now: just plain mud and
bushes. Potential bog land, though. Clear that jungle off, dig out some
of the mud and dump in clean sand, set out the cranberry vines--as you’d
plant strawberries or rosebushes--and presto! A new bog.

New bogs cost close to three thousand dollars an acre. You must wait
four years before the berries come, too. In the end, though, it pays
off: a well built, properly kept bog, like these around here, should be
good for pretty nearly five hundred dollars an acre every year. Yes,
there’s gold in them swamps, but you and me needn’t conjure up dreams of
owning any. It’s a complicated and expensive proposition. Takes years to
learn. More men have gone broke in the swamps than ever got rich out of
’em.

What do you say: want to walk up through the train and see who’s riding?

Yes, this parlor car sure is cute. Mr. Atwood’s pet, too. (Look out!
don’t fall over that woman’s feet; she’s spread out there like a
pumpkin-vine.) He had painters and repairmen working half the winter
restoring this car to her school girl complexion. Most of her’s solid
mahogany. She would cost a queen’s dowry to build now: all those inlaid
woods, the filigree designs on her ceiling, the brass lamps, expensive
upholstery, plate glass windows--the splendor of the legendary Nineties.
Can’t buy those things for a song now. Notice how contagious it is--that
traditional humor of those old days. Seems to have infected our carload
of passengers today--even the old girl with her feet clear across the
aisle!

Careful now: watch your step when we cross from the _Rangeley_ over to
this coach ahead, the _Pondicherry_. These little puppies can nip off
your leg as quickly as the wide gaugers can.

Quite a car, the _Pondicherry_, isn’t she? That was the name she had
when she was new in 1883, up on the Bridgton & Saco River. Pondicherry
was the original name of the town up there; changed it to Bridgton
later. I don’t know what it means but somehow I seem to think of it
along with County Down, Galway, or Connemara. Could be Swedish or an
Indian name, though.

Thirty people can sit in these little one-butt seats. Notice the carved
wood and old fashioned windows. Mr. Atwood’s renovating job was about
perfect, wasn’t it? She was some little hack in 1883; still is, too.
Look into that nut-shell toilet--that’s where you need the shoe-horn!

These cars don’t sway much, do they? Steady and serene as a Shore Line
job. Edaville track is just as good, too, comparatively speaking. This
big rail--mostly fifty-six pounds to the yard--is heavier in proportion
than the New Haven’s big hundred and thirty pound steel.

How fast are we going? Oh, about twenty-five, I guess. Sometimes when
he’s feeling extra kipper the engineer inches her out a bit and No. 7’s
two-bit drivers will really roll. Mr. Atwood doesn’t approve of that,
with a train load of his guests aboard.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Little Monson No. 3, en route from the junkyard to Mr. Atwood’s
    railway empire, will soon be repaired and scooting around the bogs.
]

Well, let’s go up into the baggage car now; watch your step again!

Cute little rig, isn’t she? See the mail-racks; and the slots in the
doors where you could mail a letter once upon a time. Some of these
philatelist fellers think it would be a super idea for Mr. Atwood to
arrange with the Postal Department for a one-day Railway Post Office on
the Edaville; mail clerks cancelling letters _Edaville & Cranberry Bogs
R.P.O._ or something like that. Gosh! We’d pay off the national debt
with stamps that day. You know how wild stamp collectors get about such
things?

Up here from the head platform, or blind end, as it used to be called,
you can get a closeup of No. 7 batting off the rail-joints. See how
she--Oh! here we are at the sand pit. He’s stopping. Let’s drop off and
see where all that sand comes from.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Here’s how the flatcars were trucked down from Maine; loaded
    three-deep on a C. E. Hall & Sons diesel trailer.
]

Wonder why everyone else is jumping off? I see: that work train’s got
in; they’re loading sand to grade the Sunset Vista picnic ground, a flag
stop down the east side. Their engine, little No. 3, came from another
of those Maine roads, the Monson. They had two just alike, No. 3 and No.
4. Mr. Atwood bought them from a concern in Rochester, New York, where
they’d been taken when the Monson road was scrapped in 1945. Yes, she’s
lots smaller than No. 7. Weighs only eighteen tons. She has inside
frames, like wide gauge engines do. No. 7 and No. 8’s frames are
_outside_ the wheels, you know.

The Monson engines were built by the Vulcan Iron Works down in Wilkes
Barre, one in 1912 and the other in 1918. Their cylinders are much
smaller, too; only ten by fourteen inches. Carry a hundred and sixty
pounds of steam. The inside frames, which make a narrower support for
their balance, makes ’em ride different from the big engines. Slop
around more. They’ll scare you, too, until you get used to them.
Actually these inside framers are as safe as the others; it’s just that
their equilibrium is kind of emotional. Nearly all the early two-foot
locomotives had inside frames and they’re the ones that hung up most of
the slim gauge speed records.

See: the big Lorain shovel over there is loading sand onto the flatcars;
ten cubic yards to a car, about fifteen tons. There’s usually a work
train out, doing routine plantation work along with construction and
maintenance duties. That’s what she’s doing: building the station
grounds at Sunset Vista.

Wish you could have seen those flatcars when they first landed here.
Ready to fall apart. Sills rotten, flooring gone, and not a brake
working. Mr. Atwood hired Roland Badger, a millwright up to Walter
Baker’s; Badger is quite a railroad fan himself, has built lots of
little scale models for 0-gauge outfits. He was planning on buying a
pasture somewhere and making himself some quarter-scale iron colts to
run in it. However, the Edaville fits into his dreams pretty well. He’s
repaired or rebuilt about every car here: new sills and floors, and got
the brakes to working.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  A work train at Sunset Vista. The tricky caboose, built by the Maine
    Central many years ago, adds a realistic touch to Mr. Atwood’s
    pint-sized railroad.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Passenger train in the deep cut at the Ball Field. The elegant coach
    “Pondicherry” brings up in the rear.
]

They’re going out ahead of us! See how easily little No. 3 snakes her
train out of the pit. That tricky little caboose they’re hauling came
from the Sandy River, like the parlor car. When the Maine Central owned
the Sandy River, thirty years ago, they built a number of those cabooses
in their Waterville shops. About as perfect a molecular reproduction of
a wide gauge buggy as anything could be, eh? I like that cupola. It’s
quite a treat to ride up there surveying Mr. Atwood’s eighteen hundred
acres from such a vantage point. We’ll see the work train again at
Sunset Vista. Let’s go on to the Ball Park now.

Are you especially interested in railroads? This may not mean much to
you, but if a standard gauge car was built to these same proportions it
would be nearly twenty feet wide and twenty-two feet high! Actually
they’re only ten feet wide and around twelve or thirteen feet high.
Shows you how large, in proportion, these two-footers are. An overhang
on either side that’s greater than the gauge of track! Still, they don’t
feel like you’re riding a tight rope, do they? Personally, I think what
this country needs is more two-foot gauges!

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  As fine a consist as any “Empire Builder” or “Minute Man”, if you only
    have eyes to see it!
]

The Ball Park! We’re two and a half miles from the screenhouse now.
Pretty well to the farther end of Mr. Atwood’s cranberry empire.

They’re having a ball game up here today; South Carver Sunday School
playing the West Wareham Firemen--seems to be an appropriate analogy
there, don’t you think? Sunday Schools usually do oppose people who’re
heading for the Fire! Two hundred people watching that game; came up on
a special train right after dinner. Those people ’way over at the edge
of the woods, they’re Plymouth Kiwanians having their annual clambake.
They’re great for clam bakes down here; say it makes ’em tough.

Oh: you wanted to see one of the motor cars. Here’re two of them. This
Model T touring car I like best; Sandy River built her in their Phillips
shop. Master Mechanic Lee Stinchfield designed them all. He ought to be
with Electro-Motive; he’d design diesel locomotives better’n they have
now! They’re the neatest little rail cars I’ve ever seen. Mr. Atwood has
two of these T Models; this touring, and a canopy body truck. They have
a wholly different rear-end arrangement: kind of a “take-off” idea; put
a little lever in forward gear and they’ll scoot away in high. Put it in
back position and you fly backwards in high! This touring car was
Superintendent Vose’s private car; he thought nothing of dropping down
from Redington in twenty minutes; sixteen crooked, hilly miles. In
winter he’s often pushed snow ahead of her radiator. They saved the
Sandy River lots of money when otherwise a steam train would have gone
out with fire-fighters or a repair crew. They save Mr. Atwood a lot.
Quicker and cheaper than a pickup for cranberry men to run around in.

This other one here, the G4, is quite a wagon: something like the big
gas-electrics on wide gauge roads. She seats fifteen people and used to
haul a four-wheel trailer for mail and express. In summertime the Sandy
River ran two of these rail-buses in place of steam passenger trains.
Mr. Atwood occasionally uses this one to carry some visitors over the
road but it’s mostly a sort of de luxe work car for his own crews.

Well, there goes No. 7’s bell: must be we’re leaving again. Want to ride
the engine down to Sunset Vista? Mr. Atwood won’t like this if he sees
us as it’s strictly against the rules; insurance company, or something.
All settled? Keep off that steam pipe or you’ll be settled in Doc Nye’s
office down to Wareham.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Hosmer Photo_)
  Cold nor snow can stop the midget Edaville trains from scooting like a
    field-mouse among the bogs.
]

Here we go. You can see lots of bog from here. Nearly half the whole
plantation’s in sight. There’s the big reservoir, Number Two, three
hundred acres. Holds millions of gallons. Water is all pumped in from
the river over back of the Ball Park. Fish come in through the pump,
too, believe it or not!

These are new bogs he’s building; started ’em last year. Aren’t the
pitch-pines pretty along the shore there? This ride down the east side
is better scenery than we got coming up. Nights this whole shoreline is
twinkling with little bug-lights where people are fishing for bass; come
from miles around.

Sunset Vista’s about a mile down here. They called it Ridge Hill before
the railroad came. Mr. and Mrs. Atwood used to come out here and sit in
their Packard to watch the sunset. They enjoyed it. Said it was so
restful and quiet. Must have been kind of a sacrifice, too, when they
gave it up so others could enjoy it. Certainly is nothing restful nor
quiet around here now, since everyone and their inlaws took it over for
sunset picnics. Trains drop ’em off late in the afternoon and pick them
up again along in the evening. There’s even talk of band concerts. It’s
here that the Atwoods will probably have their big Christmas pageant
this year--but maybe I’m letting the tabby out of the bag. Well, we’re
almost there. He’ll stop, because that work train is out ahead of us.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The Edaville has everything the B. & A. has got: speeding passenger
    trains, grade crossings, and camera-minded girls who take pictures
    of it!
]

How did No. 7 ride? Like it? Ever on a midget engine before?

You said awhile ago that you wanted to take some pictures. Movie camera?
Good! Here’s what we can do: one of Mr. Atwood’s pickup trucks is here
at Sunset Vista. We can take it and run ahead of the train to Edaville,
about a mile. Want to? The railroad and Mr. Atwood’s auto road are side
by side along the foot of the reservoir. All right: you climb in back of
the pickup and get your Hell & Bowell flicker-box ready for action. I’ll
keep just far enough ahead so you can shoot the whole train. Ready?

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Hosmer Photo_)
  In the quiet shade of the pine grove No. 7 backs sleepily onto her
    train, ready for the daily grind again.
]

Hang on! This tipcart doesn’t ride like _Rangeley No. 9_. She should
make a dandy picture back there--smoke rolling up over the pitch-pines
and the three varnished cars glittering in the sun. See ’em swing
through that reverse curve!

See this big iron along here? Seventy-five pound steel, biggest ever
laid in two-foot track. Proportionately it’s equivalent to about
two-hundred pound rail in wide gauge track: heavier than anything made
yet.

Getting some good shots? I hope the reflections in the water show up
clear; reservoir’s like a mirror.

Take a quick peek over ’cross there: that’s Plantation Center station,
on the line we just went up over. Remember? The two lines are hardly a
hundred yards apart right here. Sometime Mr. Atwood may lay a connecting
track across this dike. Only a stone’s throw. Notice this big fill here:
all new grade across the corner of the swamp. Kind of sags in the
middle; will be filled and raised sometime. See No. 7 puffing up out of
there!

Look: we’re beside the canal now. There’s the grove and yard ahead.
We’re coming in on that line I told you about--from across the canal.

There’s the work train’s smoke. She came in ahead of us and it looks to
me like No. 4 engine is out there too. Where could she have been when we
left town?

Take it easy: I’m trying to stop this jalopy. We’re back in the yards
again. Quite an array of power, eh? No. 7; the work train; No. 4 engine;
the railbus which beat us down from the Ball Park; and there’s even
little Plymouth No. 14 with a string of bog dumpcars. You couldn’t get
so much action short of North Station.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Look out--stand back! Here comes a freight train, cuffing the wind up
    Mt. Urann with the little red kiboose lurching and swaying behind.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Hosmer Photo_)
  The switch by the little reservoir, where trains may go left through
    the grove, or around the curve through the woods to Edaville. No. 7
    is about to swing through the switch for the climb up the hill.
]

All set? Then take a look at this Plymouth: all right, isn’t she? Mr.
Atwood bought her up to Quincy a year or so ago. Alec MacLellan, a
railroad fan, told him about her. You should have seen her then: about
the sorriest little mill you could imagine. No cab, no bell, no nothing.
Mr. Atwood’s crew took over and, patterning their dream-engine after
those big he-Plymouths, they built her into this trim little
cock-sparrow!

For real economy she puffs black all over the ledger. Will haul two or
three cars like nobody’s business; will do shifting and light work as
well as a steam engine. One man can run her without continually getting
down to tend his fire. Has her limit, of course; but she weighs only
four tons.

There: the work train’s going out; the passenger is hauling up to the
depot to swap passengers for her next trip; I think that No. 4 is going
out around the Edaville loop into the station that way. Why don’t we
ride in on her?

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  John Holt and Charlie Smith have invaded the sacred precincts of
    pullman cars by bringing the sooty freight train right into Edaville
    station--and see the crowd stare!
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  But those passengers hadn’t long to wait; the passenger train came in,
    and see ’em pile aboard the open excursion cars for their ride
    through Mr. Atwood’s blooming lands. It isn’t unusual for 3,500
    people to ride in a single day; sometimes 600 to a single train!
]

LOOK OUT! Oh, heavenly days; _look_ at your shirt!

Well, people just have to learn that an engine full of water will spew
that black slush all over you. Gosh! What a mess. Married?

Jump on: and be careful not to spatter your shirtful all over me.

Sit up there on the fireman’s shelf. There; how does this engine ride? A
little more jerky than No. 7 but still no worse than lots of wide gauge
pots I’ve been on. She’s got steam brakes. No. 7’s and 8’s are vacuum.
Those two-footers used all kinds of things for brakes, from modern air
to such childish devices as brakemen dragging their feet. They always
managed to stop, though. And now they’ve stopped for good--all excepting
the Edaville.

There’s the parlor car, for instance: got air and vacuum both on her.
She used to run over the Sandy River and the Phillips & Rangeley, so
when they built her she had the kind of brakes used by each road--vacuum
and Westinghouse. No. 4 can pile you through the front window, with
those steam stoppers of hers!

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The excursion train is ready to leave.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The new station at Edaville is swarming with expectant people; No. 7
    puffs across No. 2 Bog to disgorge her crowd and take a new load on.
    Often 600 automobiles are parked here at one time.
]

Yes, these little pigs did a lot of work up there in northern Maine. You
should have seen them settle down to dragging a train of slate up the
hill. That Monson road always used link-and-pin couplers, too; never
changed over to automatic. I don’t know how they sidestepped the
Government laws, but they did. Common carrier, at that. Link-and-pin
couplers, stub switches, and hand brakes; just about as modern as a
ramrod rifle. Far as I know it was the last road left that hadn’t turned
the century.

Here’s that switch again: he’s throwing it for the loop. In a minute
we’ll be backing up through the woods and into the station. Two tracks
there; we’ll clear the passenger.

Quite a trip, wasn’t it? Have a good time? Everyone does; even old
timers who’ve railroaded for years. Mr. Atwood’s Edaville Railroad’s got
something they never saw before!

We’re back. See the crowd on the platform! Soon’s the train is unloaded
there’s a fresh batch to take out. It’s like that all the time now. Lots
of folks keep getting back on again, riding all day. Mr. Atwood doesn’t
mind as long as there’s room for the new-comers. Wouldn’t some big
railroads enjoy a passenger trade like this? It sure costs plenty for
the Atwoods to give everyone these rides, but they’re like that: never
satisfied unless they’re doing things to make other people happy--kind
of sharing their good fortune with the world at large, you might say.
It’s not lost, though: all adds up to good cranberry advertising, and
cranberries is what makes Edaville the top-pucker plantation in the
world, and this manikin railroad a lucky survivor of a less lucky kind
of railroad design. Let’s go into the station.

Why! Good afternoon, Mrs. Atwood; where’s the boss--Oh; I see him.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  The Plymouth Locomotive leaving the screenhouse with a supply of berry
    boxes and a carful of pickers. Harvesting season, during the fall,
    is a busy time on Mr. Atwood’s estate.
]

There’s Mr. Atwood sitting up to the lunch counter with the boys, eating
steamed clams. Wonder that man doesn’t turn into a steamed clam.
Personally, I’d just as soon have baked chicken. Here: we’ll sit over by
the fireplace with those yarnsters, until the clams are gone. I’m tired,
anyway. Notice those things more after forty.

Is it supper time? In half an hour the _Sunset Special_ will pull out
for her curfew run. That’s a pretty train. Sunset seems to show up
better out there where there’s plenty of room. We’ll stick right here
so’s not to miss it.

See that headlight up on the wall? Big’s a boxcar. Came off one of the
old Bridgton engines when they changed to electric glims. This one’s
oil. Mr. Atwood has lots of relics in here. You’ve no idea what a show
he’s got! Only difference between he and Phin Barnum is that Atwood
isn’t trying to kid anybody. His is the real McCoy.

Yes: ten little railroads all switched into one: the Edaville. Did you
ever stop to think why he named it that--_Edaville_? Can’t you guess?
Sure, that’s it: his own initials, E.D.A. Pretty cute, eh?

Wait ’til I light my pipe ...

Those old two-footers were some roads. Many of my happiest recollections
are of rides I had on the Wiscasset road and the Sandy River. Never saw
so much of the Bridgton line until the last year it ran. The Kennebec
Central checked out before I checked in, although I used to see their
tiny trains when I was a kid. I knew the little Monson--_the Two by Six_
they called it, two feet wide and six miles long--but only after it got
kind of dilapidated. I’ve seen ’em all. And here’s the last one: using
the very same engines and cars that I used to ride on years ago. Seems
funny, too: to come down here and find ’em resurrected again. Those
little pikes tried so hard to climb up to the sun, and a bumping-post in
the sunset was the best they could do. The sunset of pint-size
railroads.

Funny: here’s this last one, here in eastern Massachusetts; and seventy
some years ago the _first_ one got its christening within a few miles of
this very spot. Up in Billerica, where the B. & M.’s big shops are now.
Someone must have swung the bottle too hard and konked the little cuss
on its pituitary gland. Anyway, besides being a baptismal ceremony it
was a death blow too.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  A baby boxcar is gingerly loaded onto a Hall trailer at Bridgton
    Junction, Maine, for its 200-mile jaunt down the Pike to South
    Carver. Forty cars and engines made the trip this way--without
    mishap.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Bridgton Yard was a sorry looking mess in 1945. A marked contrast to
    their condition in Edaville today. Roland Badger’s therapy soon
    restored them to their original splendor, eh?
]

It was this way: a feller named George Mansfield from up Lowell way had
taken a trip over to Wales (coal-passing, most likely) and was pretty
well sold on the two-foot Festiniog Railway there. The Festiniog was the
very first of these flea gauges, and had been built fifty years before
George went back. He couldn’t see why they wouldn’t be just as
successful over here; kind of miscalculated on his grand-children’s
idiosyncrasies, though. George returned to the New World as full of
ideas as a New Dealer. You might say he’d got narrow minded--two-feet
wide. He bla-blaad to everyone who’d listen and when they stopped
listening he hired a hall and gave away a new Ford on the lucky ticket.
He talked two-feet gauge. He may have even drawn chalk pictures. He
built a sample railroad in his back yard with two-by-four for rails.
Named it the Sumner Heights & Somethingwood Valley. Luckily he didn’t
have an eighteen hundred acre lot or the Edaville would be just another
backyard railroad today.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  A heterogeneous passenger train--conventional coaches, open-side cars,
    and the rubberneck-wagons on the rear; all loaded with folks having
    the ride-of-their-life.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Engineer’s-eye-view of the narrow track as the passenger train rattles
    through the woods toward the Ball Field.
]

The right people were impressed, apparently, because the folks of
Bedford and Billerica fell in with his tight ideas: and the first
genuine two-footer in the Western Hemisphere made the headlines.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  The Edaville R. R. has no bridges, but there are plenty of these
    concrete pipes to cross during your ride. This “bridge” is being
    installed near No. 1 reservoir.
]

That was in 1877. They built the Billerica & Bedford Railroad, two feet
wide and eight miles too long.

Its vicissitudes don’t mean much now excepting because it was the first
of these bobtailed scooters to puff into our history, and because that
christening wallop was so robust the little pike turned up its brogans
the very next year. Therein it suffered the doubtful honor of being not
only the first fly-speck choo-choo in North America, but also the first
one to ask official permission to abandon its entire line!

George, though, hadn’t been idle. Instead of staying home minding his
baby he’d been rusticating in the wilds of Maine talking convincingly to
the railroad minded folks up there. In fact, the spacious old Jim Hill
sold ’em not only the idea, but the moribund Billerica & Bedford
Railroad as well!

Yes: as a result of his glib missionary work the Sandy River Railroad
made a three point landing in Farmington, Maine, complete with the B. &
B.’s two forney locomotives, and handful of cars, and eight miles of
rail. That was the real beginning of down to earth two-footing. The
bantam railroad clicked up there, and it made good, too. Quicker than
you can spit they’d laid eighteen miles of track up through Strong to
Phillips, a good part of it on the seventy-four trestles that boosted it
over gullies and ravines, and forthwith began doing more business than a
beer-joint in Plymouth.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Rainy weather doesn’t dampen enthusiasm at Edaville, and plenty of
    soggy folks enjoy (or seem to) their ride just the same.
]

Folks were wild about it. The two-footer got kind of wild, too, because
it made a record by operating on fifty-five per cent of its gross
earnings. Darned few wide gauge roads ever did that! Today--well, if a
road breaks even everyone walks around the table shaking hands and
passing out seegars.

Oh I could gab for hours about it: how those towns raised money to build
it on the express condition that trains be polluting the virgin air of
Phillips by November 20, 1879 or not one blankity-blanked penny would
they pay. And how, the night before, track still lacked half a mile of
the town line--but maybe all this moldy lore of sixty-eight years ago
doesn’t interest you as much as the Edaville of today--the _last_
two-footer.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Hosmer Photo_)
  The de luxe coach “Elthea”. They even come in perambulators to ride
    Mr. Atwood’s train!
]

Eh? Did they make it before the fatal hour? You bet they did! Why, the
gang hove to that night with axes and oxen and the way they scattered
railroad track up that last half mile would make Mr. Atwood’s
track-layers look like sit-down strikers. More B. T. U.’s sparked off
that night than in the whole city of Boston. The little Hinckley engine,
twelve tons of brass and headlight, tottered behind the galloping track
gang and, just as the clock in the steeple dumped its jackpot, the last
rail clattered down; and Hinckley No. 1 fumed defiantly into Phillips.
The town’s check was good!

(No thank you, Mr. Atwood; I can’t eat clam sandwiches and talk at the
same time. You eat it.)

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Ted Goodreau throws the switch, backing a work train into the gravel
    pit. She’ll emerge from the spur with some 20 yards of sand for
    ballasting purposes.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  This tiny Brooksville locomotive with 13 1-yard dumpcars was Mr.
    Atwood’s construction train last year.
]

As I was saying, almost before that first train got turned around there
was an avalanche of business. Exponents of the railroad were slapping
each other on the back and thumbing their beaks at the sour-puss
skeptics. A year or so later and all Franklin County was lathered up:
everyone wanted a railroad.

Kingfield was first to get it. Somehow the Boston egg-men, A. & O. W.
Mead, got snarled in it. They began their Franklin & Megantic Railroad,
Strong to Kingfield, fourteen and a half miles, in 1884. It was a pretty
road. Full of curves as a chorus girl and lush with wild, bucolic
scenery. You could see Mount Abram looming up five thousand feet, and
Mount Bigelow was still higher. At Mount Abram Junction you could almost
spit on ’em, they were so close.

This little pike didn’t swell with the financial pregnancy that busted
the more copious Sandy River shirt. The F. & M. was always broke. A
cussed feeling, too; take it from me. Several reorganizations and the
final exodus of the Mead boys made no difference. While they managed to
relay the original twenty-five pound rail with bigger thirty-five pound
stuff they did little grade improving or curve relocation. Track went up
and around with the whims of Mother Nature, and the old harridan whimmed
plenty in that rugged country.

The snow they had! You should see some of the old pictures of
snow-fighting (Maybe Mr. Atwood has some here); it was nothing to see a
man’s head sticking out, and then learn that he was standing on top of a
boxcar.

In the early ’90’s, under the paper name of Kingfield & Dead River, the
F. & M. built fifteen and a half miles of road from Kingfield up through
Carrabasset to Bigelow, a booming lumber town. Today Bigelow _ain’t_.
You just drive up through there and wonder where the place was. This
thirty mile line rivaled even the P. & R. in wild, rustic beauty. If
only those wintry hills could have been cranberry country!

About this same time some other Massachusetts business men (See: the Bay
Staters were always the power behind these midget gauges!) dumped their
pennies into the twenty-nine mile Phillips & Rangeley Railroad, from
Phillips up over Redington Mountain to Rangeley. You should have seen
it. What a railroad. One reverse curve after another; three and four per
cent grades with Sluice Hill and the Devil’s Elbow going over five per
cent. Grand country, too: wooded hills spouting white-water
streams--where trout frolic in the rapids and thumb their little noses
at you.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Nancy Merritt sells Mr. Atwood’s souvenir tickets, and maybe her big
    smile is why a thousand are often sold in a single day! You may ride
    on the Edaville free, but the 5c souvenir tickets seem to be in
    popular demand.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The cranberry train hauls up at a bog crossing, and a few boxes of
    berries are loaded aboard. Mr. Atwood is more than pleased with his
    little railroad’s utility value.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Big business today at 14-Acre Bog. About 30 truck-miles are reduced to
    4-boxcar miles when berries are hauled by train. The slogan
    “Ship-and-Travel-by-Rail” is in full effect on the Edaville road.
]

The P. & R., like the Sandy River, had kind of a Midas touch. Millions
of cords of pulpwood and millions more feet of timber and logs rolled
down the tortuous grades; sawmills were everywhere; boom towns, such as
Sanders. Old photos show Sanders, ten miles up on the P. & R., with
steam mills, stores, railroad buildings, boarding-houses and barns.
Frontier prosperity. But today: well, if you pushed along the old grade
you might find hidden ruins--a moss-covered foundation or a scrap of
rusty boiler plate. Not a building left.

Purposive branch lines wandered through the woods, like stray cats. I
don’t know who used all the lumber but quantities of it rolled out over
the narrow gauge during the next thirty years.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Something novel in railroad tricks: a Grill Car. Rebuilt from a
    standard boxcar this Grill dispenses with hamburgers, ice-cream, and
    Pepsi-Cola, not only to the throng of Edaville guests but to Mr.
    Atwood’s hungry employees as well.
]

Once they had seventeen engines working, and few went out again at
night. Thirty-three men labored at the Farmington transfer loading
freight from little cars into big ones. Two and sometimes three baby
cars made one wide gauge load.

I suspect that the same money was pretty much behind all these Franklin
County roads. In 1908 the big Consolidation came off: the F. & M., P. &
R., the Madrid, and the old Sandy River merged into the new Sandy River
& Rangeley Lakes. Three years later the Eustis Railroad joined up too,
giving the new S. R. & R. L. a total of 120 miles of line--logging
branches and all. Seventeen locomotives and nearly four hundred cars,
including Franklin County’s pride, the _Rangeley_.

In 1911 the Maine Central scratched its chin reflectively, and bought
the outfit, lock, stock, and ramrod.

In some ways this was a good thing. The big road made some money, and
they did a lot of improving such as heavier rail, new engines and cars,
as well as kind of guiding the baby to complete maturity. That caboose
you just saw on the work train was one of the cars they built.

This parentage lasted eleven years. For some reason, in 1922, the Maine
Central sold the jack-rabbit to a pair of local tycoons. These boys, a
Kingfield lumber king and a Gardiner banker, owned it right through to
the end, in 1935--June 29, to be exact.

Maybe I fumbled by telling you about the Sandy River first. She was the
grand climax to the others. A modern railroad, abbreviated down to
brownie size. Regular engines with eight-wheel tenders. Parlor cars.
Telegraph. Air brakes. And a super machine shop where engines could be
completely taken down. Most impressive of all, perhaps, crews who talked
railroad, lived railroad, and could defy any others to out-railroad
them!

The other roads weren’t; not so much, anyway. They used vacuum brakes or
simply stuck a hickory in the brake-wheel and laid back on it. Their
operation was more short-line, jerkwaterish, and patchy. The Bridgton &
Saco River (and if you don’t mind, that’s pronounced SAW’ko) was nearest
to the Sandy River in this kind of excellence. Maybe due somewhat to
Maine Central influence, too. While the Wiscasset road was the only one
to have a separate-tender engine like the Sandy River’s it wasn’t nearly
as up to date and spic and span as the Bridgton line.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Back home. Little No. 4 engine ready to leave Monson for her morning
    trip to the Junction, before wars and depressions laid her low.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  End of the trail. Wiscasset, Waterville & Farmington No. 8 never
    turned a wheel again, after this wreck at Whitefield Iron Bridge in
    far-off 1933.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  The New Year’s Special puffs through the frosty Cape Cod air, telling
    the cockeyed world that miser gauges can run in the snow.
]

The B. & S. R. was built in 1882. The first train into town was on
January 21 the following year, “packed with exultant citizens and
numerous representatives of the rising generation”, so writes William
McLin in his interesting history _The Twenty-four Inch Gauge Railroad at
Bridgton, Maine_. The Edaville gets demonstrations of that “rising
generation” idea, too!

This sixteen mile line ran from the Maine Central at Hiram up through
some pretty wild country to Bridgton, and fifteen years later another
six miles to Harrison was added--along the shores of Long Lake. They ran
lots of trains, too. See that old time card over here on the wall: looks
like a lineup of Braintree Locals.

They made money. Probably that’s why the Maine Central bought it in
1912. Like the Sandy River’s case, they made lots of improvements
although the little tike was in pretty good shape anyway. The machine
shop was in Bridgton but it wasn’t on a par with the Sandy River’s
Phillips shop; most of the heavy work went to Thompson’s Point for the
Maine Central to do. Mr. Atwood has that machine shop here in Edaville
now.

Well, by this time people must have decided that George Mansfield was a
second Moses and that his slim gauge railways puffed right into Heaven.
Infection had spread like chicken-pox. The Monson Railroad, ’way up
Moosehead Lake way, had been built in 1883, six miles long with a couple
of miles in slate quarry spurs.

Monson slate went all over the world. Still does. Bathtubs, shingles,
switchboards, and gravestones. Kind of a womb-to-tomb business, you
might say. Far as I know the Monson never aspired beyond the horizon,
whereas its contemporaries planned to go clear to hellangone, although
none of ’em ever got there.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  W. W. & F. No. 4 and 11-car train (including the last Railway Post
    Office on 24-inch gauge track) leaves Wiscasset for her 44-mile run
    to Albion, in 1932.
]

In a way, though, I suppose they _all_ got there. The bubble busted
twenty-five years ago and the Golden Age was on skids. Hard to say
whether competition, cussedness, or just plain luck was the reason.
Whatever it was, their teeth fell out, ribs showed through, joints
ached, and Dr. Quack shook his head hopelessly.

Calamity number one came in 1929. The smallest of the lot--baby of the
family, so to speak--took the colic and pegged out. The five mile
Kennebec Central.

The K. C., built in the early 90’s, was used chiefly to haul things from
Kennebec steamers at Gardiner to the Soldiers’ Home at Togus, coal being
the biggest item. A competing trolley line from Augusta hadn’t helped
their lucrative passenger business and when the benevolent Government
awarded the coal haul to some trucks it didn’t leave the Kennebec
Central much to live for. So, she went in her sleep. Second of the
two-footers to go. The old B. & B. was first.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  What would Plymouth County think of snow like this? At Monson
    Junction, however, 5-feet deep is an open winter. Little Monson
    engines could buck the drifts as well as their B. & A. cousins, too!
]

While I think of it: someone was asking about the little engine over to
Putnam, Connecticut. William Monypeny up to Cambridge owns it; bought
her from the W. W. & F. which had recently got it from the defunct
Kennebec Central. His mile of twenty-five pound rail also came up from
the K. C. (No: you can’t buy it. He wants it as much as you do!)

That was the push-off.

Four years later--at 7:23 in the morning of June 15, to keep these dates
straight--the forty-four mile Wiscasset road bit the dust.

In a way the Wiscasset, Waterville & Farmington Railway was the first
two-footer. It was chartered ’way back in 1854. Actually, though, the
narrow width wasn’t decided upon until just before construction began,
in 1894.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Bridgton No. 6 had been scrapped long ere Mr. Atwood thought of buying
    the narrow gauge.
]

In general interest, if not in physical excellence, I think this road
rated next to the Sandy River. Maybe its long haul influenced that.
Started as the Wiscasset & Quebec Railroad its history is a long
complaint of frustrations and tantrums. I won’t go into it because the
_Sunset Special_ is nearly ready to go. You mustn’t miss it. Anyway, the
W. & Q. was going to do big things: lay rails clear to Quebec Province,
have de luxe trains with diners, sleepers, and parlor cars to make the
_Rangeley_ look like a trapper’s camp. They were going to swipe the
million dollar grain haul away from the Grand Trunk--just like that.
Wiscasset has a fine harbor and is a little nearer Liverpool than
Portland, which was the basis for their stock-selling argument.

While crews were laying steel up the Sheepscot valley other men were
building some old-histing great wharves at Wiscasset for the steamboat
line to New York. They never splashed a paddle but to hear stock
salesmen gab you’d have thought another Fall River Line was in the
making.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Boxcar 13--and she’s in luck to be at Edaville instead of rotting away
    at Bridgton Junction. The Atwood line also has a boxcar numbered 1,
    which is unusual.
]

Its first hop was to Burnham, fifty-five miles up. Old Frustration set a
derail here: the Maine Central were opposed to a crossing of their
Belfast branch; so submissively and sulkily the little pike backtracked
to Week’s Mills (twenty-eight miles above Wiscasset) and began a line
from there to Waterville and Farmington, hoping to make the Quebec trip
with the help of Sandy River rails to Rangeley. However, the Maine
Central again boxed the W. & Q.’s flapping ears by refusing to let ’em
cross Maine Central tracks at Farmington to connect with the Sandy
River.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Steel to the West! Tracklaying on the Edaville last Spring. It was
    near this point that the golden spike was driven.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  The Golden Spike. When the rails met, near the Ball Field, appropriate
    ceremonies were held, including Mrs. Atwood taking a whack at the
    golden spike (a whole lot of them, in fact) as construction men,
    visitors, and the pitch-pine trees witness the event.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  These are the men who’ll guide your journey on Atwood soil; Assistant
    Conductor Higgins, Conductor O’Neil, and Superintendent-Agent
    Dunham, the last two from the New Haven railroad.
]

By now the Wiscasset dwarf was a confirmed neurotic. It just threw a
fit, abandoned its grand ideas and miles of nearly completed line, and
testily began to operate over such track as it could be sure
of--Wiscasset to Waterville (actually to Winslow, on this side of the
river), and Week’s Mills to Albion. Shortly thereafter they discarded
even the Winslow line, and from then until 1933 the forty-four miles
from Albion down to Wiscasset was all that was left of the grandiose W.
& Q. Even this imposing name faded out to the jaw-breaking misnomer
Wiscasset, Waterville & Farmington which folks sometimes called _Weak,
Weary & Feeble_; just as they dubbed the B. & S. R. _Busted & Still
Running_. Awful, wasn’t it?

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Dave Eldredge, Mrs. Atwood’s nephew, dishes hot dawgs and pop-sickles
    over the Grill Car’s counter.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  This is what I call posing ’em! Mr. Atwood smiles between his brand
    new Oldsmobile and his baby No. 4.
]

The W. W. & F. was the only one of these little roads to keep the
Railway Post Office route. All the others--the Farmington & Rangeley,
and the Bridgton’s mailcar--were taken away during the other war. This
one, though, stayed to the last run.

There were--let’s see: one, two, three ... there were ten stations on
the line, some being rail points for stages from other post-offices,
too. Must have been twenty or more offices served by this R. P. O.

Its worst mess of all came in 1931 when a mortgage-monger who controlled
some timberlands up in Palermo got hold of the road. That’s a good
story, too, but we’ll have to skip it now except to say that the road
didn’t improve any under his ownership, and track got so rough there was
no fun riding on it. Coming down that morning, June 15, they’d just left
Whitefield station when _Crash!_--a broken rail. The tiny Portland
engine switched ends and dove down the bank toward the river. A flatcar
tail-feathered up behind her. The cream-car careened. The last Railway
Post Office wobbled feebly, jolted to its last stop, and settled into
the ballast for a good, long rest.

That was the Weak, Weary & Feeble’s last trip. Wreck was never picked
up. Mr. Atwood may have some pictures of that, too.

She was the second one of the Maine two-footers to go.

In 1935 the Sandy River, with its excellent line, trim engines and cars,
and business possibilities dunked its fire and went home. That left two:
the Bridgton line and the little Monson.

Wish I had time to tell you about the Bridgton’s last sickness. What a
time they had! The town owned it, you know. Most of the folks wanted to
junk it while a few enterprising souls hung on. In cahoots with some
railroad fans its president, Lester Ames, put up a lively scrap to save
the little line. Lasted a couple of years, that wrangling. First, the
railroad champions would be on top, and then their dark-complexioned
adversaries were eye-gouging or had a knee in the railroad’s bowels. It
looked bad. Hard telling how long it might have lasted but the _coup de
grace_ came suddenly when someone slipped through a deal with an
uninnocent junkman. Spikes flew. So did Mr. Atwood.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The moribund Bridgton line in 1941, when fan excursions and passionate
    junkmen were running wild. Here No. 8 is ready to haul a crowd of
    railroad-fans down the line.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  An Edaville work train climbs Mt. Urann past the probable site of the
    Ball Field station. See Mr. Atwood’s snowplow hibernating at the far
    end of the siding.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The Edaville Railroad will never be completed. New spurs and siding
    beckon from isolated bogs. Here a crew is ballasting a new spur to
    31 Bog.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Engineer Knight and Fireman Young bat a freight train across the bog,
    and will shortly return loaded with red, sour bog-nuggets
    (cranberries, to you).
]

He’d been keeping tabs on it anyway and when this junk-shark (_he_ came
from Massachusetts, too!) began wrecking things Mr. Atwood A-carded up
there, plum full of adrenaline, and managed to buy quite a lot of
equipment. No. 7 engine, some cars, and the turntable. Paid through the
nose for it, too. Worse still, after paying the money and assuming
ownership, this junk-expert would turn around and cut it up for scrap,
claiming he didn’t know that Mr. Atwood wanted it! Biggest wonder in the
world he didn’t put the torch to No. 7 engine.

This was all in 1941. That fall the track was gone and the cars stored
at Bridgton Junction. The connoisseur who’d previously bought the parlor
car, Eric Sexton of Rockport, Maine, also bought some of these B. & S.
R. cars for the same reason--to preserve ’em for posterity. Another fan,
Edgar Mead, bought two or three. John Holt and Van Walsh, who’d fallen
in love with No. 8 engine, bought her. That greasy junkman sure cleaned
up on those fellers. In the end, however, Mr. Atwood owned it all and
got a corner on two-foot gauge railroads!

Year ago last fall he arranged with the Somerville movers, C. E. Hall &
Sons, to bring the things down here. He’d talked with the railroad
people but there were car shortages then, and besides the Maine Central
had dismantled their siding there at the Junction. He’d have had to done
the loading, to I. C. C. specifications, whereas the Hall crews did it
if he shipped by truck. So, the last of the two-foot gauges came home to
Massachusetts--by truck!

Quite a sight seeing a railroad whizzing down the Boston road.

Newspapers and magazines played it up plenty. Still do, in fact. Mr.
Atwood’s name is in the news more than any railroad man since Peter
Cooper or Jim Hill. The idea of his little Edaville Railroad seems to
click.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Atwood Photo_)
  Not all Edaville business is out on the bog. Here Mr. and Mrs. Atwood
    confer in the seclusion of their private office in the palatial
    screenhouse.
]

That’s about the story. The Edaville’s quite a railroad in its own
right, let alone because it’s the last of the two-foot gauges. It isn’t
completed yet, either. Doubt if it ever will be: there’ll always be a
new spur to build or a bog-siding somewhere to install. Maybe some new
equipment, too--such as a nice, new Plymouth diesel for the cranberry
freights.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  No. 4 heads a freight train into clear to allow the passenger job to
    gallop by.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  No. 7 crosses some undeveloped bog. Maybe next year cranberry vines
    will bloom over there in the brush.
]

Eh? Sure: why not? What’s wrong with diesels? You fellers always get
emotional when someone says diesel. Want to see the Edaville go in the
red? This railroad (although you’d never guess it) isn’t a plaything;
it’s a plantation utility, designed to facilitate Mr. Atwood’s cranberry
business. The passenger train and the parlor car, and Sunset Vista, are
gestures he and Mrs. Atwood make from their own pockets to give people
some fun down here--and to have a little themselves. But he can’t run
his freight trains at a loss just to see coal smoke smudging all over
those nice red cranberries. Red’s a pretty color, but not on the ledger!

Probably if the other two-footers had bought some Plymouth diesels
they’d all be running today. Lots of difference between coal at ten
bucks a ton and oil at ten cents a gallon. Personally I’m for it--a ten
ton, eight-wheel diesel Plymouth. Besides, that’ll save the steam
engines for Sunday and holiday passenger trains!

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  No. 7 when she was a girl at home. Here she waits at Bridgton Junction
    for men to load mail and express into the baggage-car; then she’ll
    breeze up the hills to Bridgton, 16 miles, in an even 40 minutes!
]

Gosh! Here it is Six-thirty; they’re backing the _Sunset Special_ in.
Maybe Mr. Atwood would like to show you those pictures of old
two-footers in the few minutes that are left. I see he’s finished his
steamed clams now.

Guess I’ll mosey onto the platform and see who’s in the crowd. Always
hoped Kilroy might be here sometime!

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The first 2-foot gauge enginette in America, Bedford & Billerica
    “Ariel” No. 1. You see her here as Sandy River No. 1 less a
    monstrous smokestack and goldleaf filigree.
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                Appendix


You’d think I’d written a five-foot shelf of books instead of a small
travel-guide pamphlet, if Forewords, Introductions, and Appendixes are
any criteria. This is how it seems to stew out though, so it’s how
you’ll have to take it. Keep cool!

Lots of you won’t be interested in this Appendix. It’s designed for the
fellers who’re more or less railroad minded and thirst for technical
details. It’s a brief critique about the gears and rods that made the
wheels go round, during those hectic, vortical years. A cursory account
of engines and cars and mileage that made up the Edaville’s immediate
predecessors.

Here again we’ll have to condense the facts in favor of space. To
include a really comprehensive _expose_ of these historical
lines--locomotive rosters and dimensions, car measurements and
classifications, capitalizations, earnings and expenses, and
blow-by-blow reports of the septuagenary rise and fall, as well as
scale-drawings for model fans--would be a book in itself, and a
family-Bible size at that. No one but the most serious students of
railroad lore would read beyond the title page. Let’s try to jam a lot
into a few pages here.


                           EDAVILLE RAILROAD

Just when the Edaville was conceived is a risky guess. Maybe in 1941
when the moribund B. & S. R. prodded Mr. Atwood’s imagination. Maybe
forty years ago when, as a lanky young feller, he mused on the pleasure
of owning something better than rickety sections of portable track and
tiny one-yard dumpcars.

He did something about it in 1941, anyway. They were busting up the
Bridgton road. He bought the biggest part of it. Wars came. You couldn’t
call your soul your own unless it was kept out of sight. Without an
AA-12-PDQ-RSVP-1/2 priority there was no such thing as moving things by
freight, and these coveted ratings weren’t being handed out to move
narrow gauge railroads from Maine to South Carver. Unless they moved
into the Community Scrap Drive, and I never understood how this one
escaped those zealous patriots.

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Important in pygmy power development were the little Moguls. The Sandy
    River had engines with separate tenders as well as those like Mr.
    Atwood’s--built all in one piece.
]

It did have a tight squeak. Mr. Atwood was notified that his railroad
equipment might be seized anytime for Government use and for him to
leave it strictly alone. Engines and cars needed for self-defense--don’t
touch!

Funny how it came out: A few weeks later he was advised he might protect
his ownership by moving everything to Carver at once. Mr. Atwood tartly
replied that such extravagant use of transportation facilities and
scarce gasoline, when our country was fighting for its life, wasn’t
becoming a patriotic gentleman. Mightn’t he wait until the wars were
done? An answer sizzled back! Henceforth he might not only do as he
pleased, but the government had oodles of railroad equipment they’d like
_to sell him_, war or no war. Would he buy?

He wouldn’t; then.

The wars petered out. We were allowed to use the gasoline again. Big
trucks and little ones headed north in the fall of 1945, and rumbled
back with loads of little cars. The City of New Bedford owned a private
railroad that once hauled coal to their Water Works pumping station, and
they agreed to sell. Two and a half miles of fifty-six pound steel.
Three miles more came down from the mountain grades of Parker-Young
Company’s logging road in New Hampshire. Ties from Maine and more from
the New Haven. Crews assembled.

Some desultory track-laying began in 1946 but it wasn’t until late that
fall that a former New Haven track man lined up his gang, and work began
in earnest. In the car shops repairs were progressing, for the day when
trains would begin to run.

Mr. Atwood did the engineering. He scooches to a transit as easily as
Farmer Jones milks a cow. He personally supervised everything else, too;
nothing was too small to escape his attention, no detail too mean for
his august decision. Mostly his own crews did the work. When cranberry
work could spare them they turned-to and became railroad men. Except for
the track boss no former railroad men were hired, although Badger might
as well have been an ex-Master Car Builder: he knew enough to be.

The locomotive crews are Mr. Atwood’s own cranberry men, instructed in
their exotic duties and performing them with remarkable efficiency.

Friends, visitors, and well-wishers have joined in offering suggestions
and criticisms to help the enterprise along. Mostly, though, it’s been a
series of inspirations plus years of secret planning from Mr. Atwood
himself.

Today the physical properties of his railroad are:

Miles of road:

  Main line 5.5 miles
  Grove Cutoff 0.6 miles
  Yards 1.0 mile
  Total 7.1 miles

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  This was biggest of them all, Sandy River No. 23. My pet grief is that
    Mr. Atwood didn’t go into the railroad business ten years sooner,
    and catch some of these tricky little pigs when the S. R. & R. L.
    went broke in 1935.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Gasoline rail-buses on the Sandy River. The further one, with the
    trailer attached, is now on the Edaville.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The freight train waits while pickers scoop another box of berries.
    I’ll bet their backs’ll ache before night!
]

Engines:

               No. 12 1-ton Bog Engine, Model T Ford
                   13 1-ton Bog Engine, Model A Ford
                   14 5-ton Plymouth
                    3 0-4-4T Vulcan ex-Monson R. R. No. 3
                    4 0-4-4T Vulcan ex-Monson R. R. No. 4
                    7 2-4-4T Baldwin, ex-B. & S. R. 7
                    8 2-4-4T Baldwin, ex-B. & S. R. 8

Cars, Passenger:

               No. G1 Model T Trackauto ex-S. R. & R. L.
                   G2 Model T Trackauto ex-S. R. & R. L.
                   G4 Reo Railbus
          Baggage No. 31 ex-B. & S. R. 31
                Coach 15 ex-B. & S. R. _Pondicherry_
                      17 ex-B. & S. R. 17 (now named _Elthea_)
                      18 ex-B. & S. R. _Mount Pleasant_
                      3 W. W. & F. 3
               Parlor 9 S. R. & R. L. _Rangeley_

Freight:

  Box: 15 cars
  Flat: 14 cars
  Excursion: 4 cars
  Tank: 2 cars
  Caboose 557 ex-S. R. & R. L. 557
     101 B. & S. R. 101
  Snowplow 2 B. & S. R. 2
  Flanger 1 B. & S. R.
  4-wheel dump: 32 cars
  Total number of cars, 80

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  The berries go aboard. Boxcar 13 already has a load, and presently the
    little train will meander down to Edaville screenhouse and the
    graders will take over.
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Here is little engine No. 3 before she came to the Atwood family. Lots
    of snow in Monson, eh?
]

[Illustration:

                                                          (_Moody Photo_)
  Transferring sand from a “wide gauge” car to the narrow gauge, at
    Monson Junction years ago. See the link-and-pin coupling on the
    Monson flat.
]


                      BRIDGTON & SACO RIVER R. R.

Chartered in 1881, built in 1882, opened in 1883. Extended to Harrison
1898. Maine Central purchased it 1912, sold it 1927. Reorganized it as
Bridgton & Harrison Ry. and new company assumed control in 1930.
Harrison line abandoned 1930. Entire line abandoned 1941. Cost to build
and equip approximately $200,000. Peak year of earnings 1921 when
revenue was $112,000.

[Illustration:

  First train order issued on the Edaville; members of the National
    Railway Historical Society made this trip, August 31, 1937.
]

[Illustration: Edaville Sign]

Miles of road:

  Hiram to Bridgton, 16 miles
  Bridgton to Harrison 5 miles

Engines:

        No. 1 0-4-4T Hinckley 1882
            2 0-4-4T Hinckley 1882  Became W. W. & F. No. 5
            3 0-4-4T Portland 1892  Became K. C. 3: W. W. & F. 8
            4 0-4-4T Porter   1901
            5 2-4-4T Portland 1906
            6 2-4-4T Baldwin  1907
            7 2-4-4T Baldwin  1913  Became Edaville 7
            8 2-4-4T Baldwin  1924  Became Edaville 8

Cars:

  2 Baggage, 1 Combination, 4 Coaches
  1 Caboose, 69 Box and Flat, 2 Tank, 1 Plow, 1 Flanger


                       BILLERICA & BEDFORD R. R.

Chartered in 1876; built 1877. Abandoned Jan. 1878. Sold in entirety to
Sandy River R. R.

Miles, 8.6.

2 Locomotives,

            _Ariel_ 0-4-4T Hinckley 1877, became S. R. No. 1
             _Puck_ 0-4-4T Hinckley 1877, became S. R. No. 2

Coaches, 1; Excursion, 2; Combination, 1; Box, 1; Flat, 6.


                   SANDY RIVER & RANGELEY LAKES R. R.

Sandy River R. R. chartered 1879, built 1879. 18 miles.

Franklin & Megantic R. R. chartered 1884, built 1884. 15 miles.

Kingfield & Dead River, chartered 1893, built 1894. 16 miles.

Phillips & Rangeley R. R., chartered 1889, built 1890-91. 29 miles.

Madrid R. R. chartered 1903, built 1903. 11 miles.

Eustis R. R. chartered 1903, built 1903. 19 miles.

The 1908 Consolidation of these roads formed the S. R. & R. L. system,
and including logging branches it gave the new company approximately one
hundred and twenty miles of line, of which the forty-seven mile
Farmington-Rangeley road, the thirty mile Strong-Bigelow line, and the
ten mile Eustis Branch had scheduled passenger trains.

The S. R. & R. L.--or just plain _Sandy River_ as it always stayed in
the hearts of Franklin County--deserves a book in itself. Its history
and pictorial display would fill a big one. But here are the scantiest
of facts: With the Consolidation this new company inherited a galaxy of
equipment; whether or not all these units were renumbered into the new
S. R. & R. L. roster, or if some older ones were scrapped, is (and ever
will be, probably) a moot subject among railroad fans. I’ve spent
hours--yes, months, trying to track it down and willingly admit that I’m
bewildered and as uncertain as before. I admit, too, for the benefit of
serious fans who believe they’ve identified these old engines and cars,
that some logical and chronological sequences look pretty convincing;
and that’s all. There’s no proof, no positive evidence. I’m not
extending my neck. Here’s an all-time roster of motive power as complete
as I can find indisputable records to substantiate it.

Locomotives:

  Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 are open to question. Probably F. & M. 1 and 2; S.
R. 1; and P. & R. 4 _Bo-peep_ were the culprits; but which were which no
one knows.

             No. 5 0-4-4T Portland Co. 1890? ex-S. R. 4
                 6 0-4-4T Portland Co. 1891  ex-S. R. 5
                 7 0-4-4T Portland Co. 1891  ex-P. & R. 1
                 8 2-4-4T Baldwin      1907  ex-S. R. 16
                 9 2-4-4T Baldwin      1909
                10 2-4-4T Baldwin      1916
                15 2-6-2  Baldwin      1891  ex-P. & R. 3
                16 2-6-2  Baldwin      1892  ex-S. R. 2nd 3
                17 0-4-4T Baldwin      1893  ex-P. & R. 2
                18 2-6-2  Baldwin      1893  ex-S. R. 2nd 2
                19 2-6-2  Baldwin      1904  ex-S. R. 8
                20 0-4-4T Baldwin      1903  ex-Eustis 7
                21 0-4-4T Baldwin      1904  ex-Eustis 8
                22 0-4-4T Baldwin      1904  ex-Eustis 9
                23 2-6-2  Baldwin      1913
                24 2-6-2  Baldwin      1919

Sandy River 1st 3 was an O-4-4T Porter, sold to the W. & Q. in 1894. No.
6 was sold to the Kennebec Central about 1922 as their No. 4, and was
acquired by the W. W. & F. in 1933.

Cars: Another blank wall. The company’s _schedule of property_, typed in
1935 for prospective scrap buyers, says they had 73 boxcars, 58 flats,
and 136 “other freight train cars”. My own observations around there
would place the number of boxcars at nearly twice 73. Several official
reports had given the total number of freight cars as 350 whereas this
_schedule_ amounts to only 267. Just another of those vicissitudes the
historian must bang his head against!

As for those “other freight train cars” they were probably the swarms of
flats fitted with rack sides, for hauling pulpwood. Some may have been
the truant boxcars. Ho-hum.

As for passenger cars, this august _schedule_ says “12 coaches, 3
combination, and 2 baggage”. The 3 combinations and 2 baggage comes out
all right, but I’m nostalgicly moved to wonder where they hid all those
twelve coaches all the years I used to be over there. I was familiar
with five. To be sure, there were a couple of old, abandoned coaches and
one retired combination boarded up, and used as camps. But still, no
twelve.

The _schedule_ lists six cabooses and four gasoline railcars. I’ve seen
eight cabooses, and ridden in five railcars. There were five snowplows
in service, and seven flangers. There were big turntables at Farmington,
Strong, Phillips, Madrid Station, Rangeley, and Kingfield. Three-stall
wooden enginehouses at Rangeley and at Kingfield, and another at Bigelow
before that Carrabasset-Bigelow section was abandoned about twenty years
ago. The big ten-stall brick house at Phillips is still there, used for
a woodworking mill.


                            MONSON RAILROAD

Chartered in 1882; built in 1883. 6 miles. Abandoned 1945.

Engines:

            Nos. 1 and 2, O-4-4T Hinckley 1882
                        3 O-4-4T Vulcan 1912 now Edaville 3
                        4 O-4-4T Vulcan 1918 now Edaville 4

Cars: 1 Combination; 28 flat and boxcars. 1 snowplow, 1 spreader.


                         KENNEBEC CENTRAL R. R.

Chartered 1889; built 1890. 5 miles. Had no physical connection with any
other railroad, as its western terminus, Randolph, is separated from the
Maine Central’s “Lower Road” at Gardiner by the Kennebec River. Barges
unloaded Togus coal at the railroad coal docks, on the Randolph side.
The K. C. was also unique in having no ballast supply on their line. All
gravel was carted in to them, the same as coal would be.

Engines:

             No. 1 0-4-4T Baldwin  1890 _Volunteer_
                 2 0-4-4T Portland 1891
                 3 0-4-4T Portland 1892 ex-B. & S. R. 3
                 4 0-4-4T Portland 1891 ex-S. R. & R. L. 6

Coaches, 2; Combinations, 2. Box, flat, and dropside gondolas, 13. Also
a freakish kind of snowplow-flanger rig.

So, we’ll call this an introduction to a two-foot gauge history. Maybe
our more accomplished brethren will call it less complimentary names. If
the printer will correct the misspelled words, and I have any luck at
South Carver next week taking pictures, maybe _Edaville Railroad_ won’t
be so bad, after all.

(I guess this is all.)





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDAVILLE RAILROAD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


